
                              501 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Mail Tribune (Medford, Oregon)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            August 5, 2015 Wednesday

Walden stumps for forest bill making wildfires 'disasters'

BYLINE: Mark Freeman, Mail Tribune, Medford, Ore.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 709 words


Aug. 05--Treating wildfires like other natural disasters and streamlining
federal processes to expedite thinning and salvage logging will help Southern
Oregon better deal with forest health and wildfires on federal lands "ripe for
explosion," U.S. Rep. Greg Walden said today.

With the smoky morning haze as a backdrop at the Forest Service tanker base in
Medford, Walden arrived today to stump for a bill that he said would more
effectively put federal funds toward helping forests withstand wildfire and
expand coffers to pay for them when they do burn.

Among many things, the so-called Resilient Federal Forests Act of 2015 also
would allow the Federal Emergency Management Agency to help fund wildfire
expenses so the Forest Service doesn't have to cannibalize other portions of its
own budget to douse flames.

Current law allows FEMA responses for hurricanes and floods but not wildfire
suppression.

"Why is a fire created by nature, by lightning, not an equal emergency to a
tornado or a flood?" Walden said. "It is."

County commissioners from Jackson and Josephine counties and others joined
Walden today at a press conference at the Medford airport's federal tanker base
to urge the Senate to pass the bill, known as HR 2647, when the Senate
reconvenes this fall.

Most of them chided a slow-to-react federal bureaucracy hampered by suits from
conservation groups as contributing to wildfire woes that progressively get
worse and see the government spend four times the money on wildfire suppression
as it does on thinning projects.

Jackson County Commissioner Doug Breidenthal said the "status-quo of inaction
has exacerbated catastrophic wildfire conditions" that create "our new normal"
of summers mired by wildfire smoke that the Forest Service estimates harms lungs
with the carcinogenic equivalent of a two-pack-a-day cigarette habit.

"Our community, our loved ones pay the price for this mismanagement and politics
going on now," Breidenthal said.

The bill would require anyone who files suit in federal court challenging
logging or other projects planned under the bill to post bonds covering the
Forest Service's defense costs should the government prevail. Not doing so,
Walden said, helps lead to frivolous suits at taxpayer expense, and
litigious-minded environmental groups "should also have some skin in the game."

It also would restrict legal challenges to projects and restrict legal costs the
government would have to pay challengers who win suits against the government.

The bill also includes a provision that would streamline smaller salvage-logging
projects to help pay for a required reforestation rate of 75 percent on Forest
Service lands burned by fire. Current Forest Service estimates are that 3
percent of its lands burned by wildfire get replanted.

Some of the bill's opponents have taken issue with Walden and the bill's
supporters for linking wildfire suppression to new policies they say will harm
forest health.

K-S Wild Executive Director Joseph Vaile said the FEMA angle for funding
firefighting costs is "long overdue," but calling for logging without careful
consideration of the science of post-fire restoration "will make matters worse."

"Protecting homes and communities while thinning overly stocked forests with
good science and community input is the way to go," Vaile said.

While the drought and record-breaking heat that have contributed to wildfire
seasons are a reality, "it is unfortunate that Walden has voted against battling
climate change at nearly every turn, and consistently votes in favor of more
fossil fuel development," Vaile said. "Climate change models show that we will
be seeing more fires in our region in the coming decades."

Walden and other congressmen have pushed similar bills in recent years that have
come out of the House only to die in the Senate.

Walden acknowledged that "it's not my first rodeo on forestry," but he thinks
this bill has a better chance in the Senate in part because it's a smaller
version of past efforts.

Reach reporter Mark Freeman at 541-776-4470 or mfreeman@mailtribune.com Follow
him at www.twitter.com/MTwriterFreeman.

___ (c)2015 the Mail Tribune (Medford, Ore.) Visit the Mail Tribune (Medford,
Ore.) at www.mailtribune.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150805-ME-Walden-stumps-for-forest-bill-making-wildfires
-disasters-0805-20150805

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ME


                          Copyright 2015 Mail Tribune


                              502 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                   Inland Valley Daily Bulletin (Ontario, CA)

                            December 29, 2008 Monday

Thinning California's forests reduces wildfire disasters

BYLINE: Thomas M. Bonnicksen

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 758 words


The impact of California's wildfires on climate and forests is one of the most
important issues of our time. This is a new era with a new federal
administration, a new Congress, a new political and economic landscape, and new
opportunities.

The fact is that the wildfire crisis is becoming more serious each year.

Fires are getting bigger, more destructive, and more expensive. In 2001,
California wildfires burned one-half million acres. Over 1 million acres burned
in 2007 and again in 2008, the worst fire year in the state's history. Next year
could be even worse.

From 2001 to 2007, fires burned a total of more than 4 million acres and
released an estimated 277 million tons of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere
from combustion and the post-fire decay of dead trees. That is an average of 68
tons per acre.

These wildfires kill wildlife, pollute the air and water, and the greenhouse
gases they emit are wiping out much of what is being achieved to reduce
emissions from fossil fuels to battle global warming.

These emissions are equivalent to adding an estimated 50 million more cars onto
California's highways for one year, each spewing tons of greenhouse gases.
Stated another way, this means all 14 million cars in California would have to
be locked in a garage for 3 1/&2 years to make up for the global warming impact
of these wildfires.

The catastrophic and unnatural forest fires that ravage California each year do
not resemble historic fires. Frequent lightning and Indian-set fires that burned
along the ground, igniting only scattered small groups of trees, kept forests
open and healthy, and resistant to catastrophic fires.

Even chaparral fires in the vast brushlands of Southern California were limited
in extent in past centuries. Frequent fires sustained a mosaic in which old
flammable chaparral was isolated between patches of less flammable young
chaparral, which kept wildfires from spreading across the landscape, regardless
of strong winds.

An industrialized and modern world cannot live with the annual recurrence of
unnatural catastrophic wildfires. That is not realistic or acceptable. The only
solution is to protect our communities, forests, and climate by reducing the
threat of wildfires. That means not just fighting fires but taking action to
reduce fuels to prevent fires.

There is no question that thinning large and small trees is effective in helping
prevent crown fires, as documented in two California wildfires - the Cone Fire
in 2002 and the Bell Fire in 2005 - when they dropped to the ground and became
easily suppressed surface fires after entering thinned forests.

Unfortunately, hundreds of millions of dollars are spent fighting wildfires each
year and very little is spent on fuel reduction. It is no wonder that wildfires
are getting bigger and more destructive since forests keep growing thicker and
fuel piles up.

Some California forests have more than 1,000 trees per acre when 40 to 60 trees
per acre would be natural. These dense forests contain small trees that can
carry fire into the canopy, and heavy concentrations of woody debris on the
ground that intensify the flames. This combination of too many large trees
intermixed with small trees and surface debris are responsible for the size and
severity of forest fires.

This is only part of the wildfire tragedy. Wildfires are causing California's
forests to dwindle and the greenhouse gases they emit will stay in the
atmosphere for centuries. This means that the estimated 134 million tons of
carbon dioxide (CO2) released by fires and the decay of dead trees from forests
that were permanently converted to brush will continue to worsen global warming.

Harvesting dead trees, storing the carbon they contain in wood products, and
planting a young forest that absorbs CO2 through photosynthesis is the only way
to recover this greenhouse gas from deforested areas. The immensity of
greenhouse gas emissions from California's wildfires and the permanent loss of
huge areas of forest are a warning.

If we take these steps, we can restore the natural health and diversity of our
forests, help the fight to reduce harmful emissions, and leave a legacy of which
we can be proud.

Thomas Bonnicksen is professor meritus of forestry at Texas A&M University,
visiting scholar with The Forest Foundation, research scholar in residence at
Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, and author of "America's Ancient Forests." This piece
is based on an upcoming report, "Impacts of California Wildfires on Climate and
Forests: A Study of Seven Years of Wildfires: 2001-2007."

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              503 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                              European Union News

                            February 23, 2018 Friday

Help combat threat of wildfires

LENGTH: 386 words



London: Northern Ireland Executive, UK Government has issued the following news
release:
In 2017 Northern Ireland Fire & Rescue Service (NIFRS) attended 2,231 gorse
fires. In the majority of cases these fires were started deliberately.


Launching the consultation 'Reducing Wildfires in the Countryside(external link
opens in a new window / tab)' Chief Executive of the Northern Ireland
Environment Agency (NIEA) David Small said: "Wildfires put the safety of
firefighters, the public and property at risk. They also have a devastating
impact on local wildlife. Several important nature conservation sites, including
Areas of Special Scientific Interest (ASSI), were impacted by the 2017 wildfires
, with significant damage occurring to habitats and species. In addition
fighting wildfires is resource intensive and could potentially impact upon the
ability of the fire service to respond to other serious incidents.
"The NI Wildfire Stakeholders Group, which consists of representatives from
government agencies, environmental Non-Government Organisations (ENGOs) and
landowners, considers that the best way forward to tackle the issue of wildfires
in NI is to have an agreed and co-ordinated strategic approach which we can all
jointly work towards. This will help to identify and prioritise key initiatives
to help reduce the number of wildfires in the countryside and to reduce the
impacts on the environment and communities when such incidents occur.
"This public engagement is a vital exercise as it will raise awareness and help
inform the development of this strategic approach, and I would encourage people
to respond so that we can reduce this threat together."
Anthony Harbinson, Director of Safer Communities at the Department of Justice
said: "Anyone involved in illegally setting wildfires in the countryside is
breaking the law. They risk not only their own safety, but that of others. They
also present a very real risk to property and threaten wildlife.
"I commend those involved in the work of Project 'Strategically Addressing
Wildfire Arson' (SAWA) and I would encourage everyone with a genuine interest in
protecting our environment to engage with this consultation. Working together we
can make a positive difference."
'Reducing Wildfires in the Countryside' is currently open for responses un

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              504 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                               May 1, 2015 Friday

FLORIDA:Commissioner Putnam Invites Citizens to Participate in National Wildfire
Community Preparedness Day Events

LENGTH: 322  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, The state of Florida has issued
the following news release:

Florida Commissioner of Agriculture Adam H. Putnam and the Florida Forest
Service are encouraging citizens to participate in the second annual National
Wildfire Community Preparedness Day this Saturday by attending a local event and
educating themselves and others on wildfire preparedness.

"Last year, the Florida Forest Service battled 2,044 wildfires that burned more
than 80,000 acres across the state. Floridians can take steps now to help
prevent wildfires and protect their families in the event of one," said
Commissioner of Agriculture Adam H. Putnam.

To participate in a local Wildfire Community Preparedness Day event, visit the
Florida Forest Service events calendar or contact a local Florida Forest Service
field office. A full list of project ideas is available from the National Fire
Protection Agency.

"Floridians must take a proactive approach to reduce flammable vegetation and
debris from around structures, especially among communities near undeveloped,
high wildfire risk areas," said Jim Karels, State Forester.

Wildfire Community Preparedness Day projects could include:

Organizing a neighborhood yard debris clean-up or chipping day.
    Collecting downed tree limbs or broken branches and taking them to a
disposal site.
    Conducting a wildfire risk assessment [Adobe PDF Document 150.14 KB] for
your home or neighborhood.
    Developing a family wildfire evacuation plan and disaster kit with supplies.

The Florida Forest Service, a division of the Florida Department of Agriculture
and Consumer Services, manages 37 state forests on more than 1 million acres of
public forest land while protecting 26 million acres of homes, forestland and
natural resources from the devastating effects of wildfire.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:
editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              505 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                              July 8, 2016 Friday
                                 Early Edition

Insured wildfire damage sets record; Total cost pegged at $3.58 billion

BYLINE: Vincent Mcdermott, Edmonton Journal

SECTION: CITY &; REGION; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 250 words


The Fort McMurray wildfire that destroyed 2,400 buildings and displaced 80,000
people in May is - at $3.58 billion - the most expensive disaster for insurers
in Canadian history.

The estimated cost to insurers is expected to reach $3.58 billion, says a report
Thursday from the Insurance Bureau of Canada.

Bill Adams, vice-president of the Insurance Bureau of Canada, called the
wildfire one of the "most horrific and damaging natural disasters in Canadian
history." Adams said insurance companies will cover the majority of costs
associated with the fire.

BY THE NUMBERS

7 The bureau said seven out of 10 of the most expensive natural disasters in
Canada have taken place in Alberta.

27,000 Personal property claims related to the wildfire, averaging $81,000 each.

12,000 Auto insurance claims, averaging $15,000 each.

5,000 Commercial claims, averaging more than $250,000 each.

$1.9 Billion Cost to insurers (in 2014 dollars) for the 1998 ice storm in
southern Quebec, eastern Ontario and Nova Scotia, which was the most expensive
disaster in Canadian history until the Fort McMurray wildfire.

$1.7 Billion Cost to insurers of the 2013 floods in southern Alberta, the
second-costliest disaster in Canadian history before the Fort McMurray wildfire
occurred.

$750 Million Cost to insurers of the 2011 Slave Lake wildfire, which destroyed
400 homes and was formerly the most expensive fire-related disaster in Canadian
history.

vmcdermott@postmedia.com !@COPYRIGHT=© 2016 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Larry Wong; Insurers have received 12,000 claims for automobiles
related to the Fort McMurray wildfire at an average cost of $15,000. Bill Adams,
vice-president of the Insurance Bureau of Canada, called the wildfire one of the
"most horrific and damaging natural disasters in Canadian history.";

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Edmonton Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              506 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Burns Lake Lakes District News

                            July 19, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Human-caused wildfires

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 475 words


Although the majority of wildfires are ignited by lightning, an average of 40
per cent of wildfires in British Columbia are human-caused each year, according
to the provincial government.

However, in 2011, human-caused wildfires accounted for a staggering 68 per cent
of the province's wildfires while last year it was 54 per cent. The Globe and
Mail published a story last week pointing out that almost half of wildfires
reported in B.C. this year have been caused by humans.

Increased fines for a variety of wildfire-related violation tickets came into
force last year, but they are obviously still not enough.

Since 2016, anyone caught contravening specified open burning and campfire
regulations faces fines more than three times higher than the previous years'
penalties - from $345 to $1150. Failing to extinguish a cigarette will cost an
offender $575.

In addition to the fines, people found to have started a wildfire could face one
year in jail and could also be forced to pay for the cost of firefighting.

But maybe stiffer fines are just part of the equation. Maybe the province needs
to take a more comprehensive approach to this issue and include an education
component.

As of Monday, 37,000 people had been evacuated from their homes and many others
were on evacuation alerts. When you take into account the amount of resources
deployed to battle these wildfires, the damage to properties and the risk to
people's lives, the fact that half of our wildfires are started by humans should
be unacceptable.

There are numerous ways human activity can start wildfires, either accidentally
or intentionally. Activities include open burning, the use of engines or
vehicles, dropping burning substances such as cigarettes, or any number of other
activities that can create a spark or a heat source sufficient to ignite a
wildfire.

John Innes, Dean of the Faculty of Forestry at the University of British
Columbia, told The Globe and Mail that a significant number of fires are simply
the result of carelessness.

"Fires are started by campfires being left unattended or not properly
extinguished, cigarettes being thrown away without being put out (especially
from cars)," he said.

Besides an education component, which could include education in schools and a
broader campaign, the province should also consider banning open burning earlier
in the season or not waiting until conditions are extremely dangerous to
implement these bans.

In the Northwest Fire Centre, for example, an open burning ban was implemented
on Monday July 10 even though the province had already declared a state of
public emergency on Friday July 7 and the fire danger rating in the Northwest
Fire Centre had been "high" for days.

Although humans have an ability to get accustomed to unpleasant situations,
British Columbians should not be so complacent when it comes to wildfire risk.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              507 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 18, 2015 Saturday

Minnesota: DNR firefighters need cooperation from drone operators

LENGTH: 332  words

DATELINE: Saint Paul


Department of Natural Resources, Minnesota has issued the following news
release:

The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources requests that operators of
unmanned aircraft (drones) stay at least 5 miles away from wildfires to create a
safe environment for firefighting aircraft and crew.

The DNR uses helicopters and airplanes to detect wildfires and to deliver water,
retardant, firefighters and cargo. These aircraft face a demanding environment
with hazards such as power lines, trees, towers, smoke and wind.

"Conditions for our pilots are tough enough," said Bill Schuster, DNR wildfire
aviation supervisor. "We don't want to worry about when and where a drone could
pop up into their flight path."

Aircraft and crew are strategically located around Minnesota to quickly respond
to wildfires. One or more aircraft may be dispatched to any wildfire in the
state within minutes of its start, depending on what is threatened by the fire.

Over 99 percent of wildfires that occur in Minnesota are small, quick-moving and
wind-driven, and these do most of their damage within the first few hours after
igniting. With the increasing overlap between wild lands and urban areas in
Minnesota, firefighters need to be aggressive and safe when putting out
wildfires.

"While crews were fighting a wildfire near Ostego last week, a drone was flying
nearby at the same time firefighting aircraft were conducting operations," said
Shuster. "Voluntary cooperation to not operate drones within 5 miles of
wildfires would allow firefighters to do their job safely, efficiently and
effectively."

Visit the wildfire update page for Minnesota updates.

The Federal Aviation Administration has partnered with several industry
associations to promote "Know Before You Fly," a campaign to educate the public
about using unmanned aircraft safely and responsibly. Go online to learn more
about this program.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              508 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 16, 2015 Thursday

Minnesota: DNR firefighters need cooperation from drone operators

LENGTH: 332  words

DATELINE: Saint Paul


Department of Natural Resources, Minnesota has issued the following news
release:

The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources requests that operators of
unmanned aircraft (drones) stay at least 5 miles away from wildfires to create a
safe environment for firefighting aircraft and crew.

The DNR uses helicopters and airplanes to detect wildfires and to deliver water,
retardant, firefighters and cargo. These aircraft face a demanding environment
with hazards such as power lines, trees, towers, smoke and wind.

"Conditions for our pilots are tough enough," said Bill Schuster, DNR wildfire
aviation supervisor. "We don't want to worry about when and where a drone could
pop up into their flight path."

Aircraft and crew are strategically located around Minnesota to quickly respond
to wildfires. One or more aircraft may be dispatched to any wildfire in the
state within minutes of its start, depending on what is threatened by the fire.

Over 99 percent of wildfires that occur in Minnesota are small, quick-moving and
wind-driven, and these do most of their damage within the first few hours after
igniting. With the increasing overlap between wild lands and urban areas in
Minnesota, firefighters need to be aggressive and safe when putting out
wildfires.

"While crews were fighting a wildfire near Ostego last week, a drone was flying
nearby at the same time firefighting aircraft were conducting operations," said
Shuster. "Voluntary cooperation to not operate drones within 5 miles of
wildfires would allow firefighters to do their job safely, efficiently and
effectively."

Visit the wildfire update page for Minnesota updates.

The Federal Aviation Administration has partnered with several industry
associations to promote "Know Before You Fly," a campaign to educate the public
about using unmanned aircraft safely and responsibly. Go online to learn more
about this program.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              509 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 15, 2015 Wednesday

Minnesota: DNR firefighters need cooperation from drone operators

LENGTH: 332  words

DATELINE: Saint Paul


Department of Natural Resources, Minnesota has issued the following news
release:

The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources requests that operators of
unmanned aircraft (drones) stay at least 5 miles away from wildfires to create a
safe environment for firefighting aircraft and crew.

The DNR uses helicopters and airplanes to detect wildfires and to deliver water,
retardant, firefighters and cargo. These aircraft face a demanding environment
with hazards such as power lines, trees, towers, smoke and wind.

"Conditions for our pilots are tough enough," said Bill Schuster, DNR wildfire
aviation supervisor. "We don't want to worry about when and where a drone could
pop up into their flight path."

Aircraft and crew are strategically located around Minnesota to quickly respond
to wildfires. One or more aircraft may be dispatched to any wildfire in the
state within minutes of its start, depending on what is threatened by the fire.

Over 99 percent of wildfires that occur in Minnesota are small, quick-moving and
wind-driven, and these do most of their damage within the first few hours after
igniting. With the increasing overlap between wild lands and urban areas in
Minnesota, firefighters need to be aggressive and safe when putting out
wildfires.

"While crews were fighting a wildfire near Ostego last week, a drone was flying
nearby at the same time firefighting aircraft were conducting operations," said
Shuster. "Voluntary cooperation to not operate drones within 5 miles of
wildfires would allow firefighters to do their job safely, efficiently and
effectively."

Visit the wildfire update page for Minnesota updates.

The Federal Aviation Administration has partnered with several industry
associations to promote "Know Before You Fly," a campaign to educate the public
about using unmanned aircraft safely and responsibly. Go online to learn more
about this program.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              510 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 14, 2015 Tuesday

Minnesota: DNR firefighters need cooperation from drone operators

LENGTH: 332  words

DATELINE: Saint Paul


Department of Natural Resources, Minnesota has issued the following news
release:

The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources requests that operators of
unmanned aircraft (drones) stay at least 5 miles away from wildfires to create a
safe environment for firefighting aircraft and crew.

The DNR uses helicopters and airplanes to detect wildfires and to deliver water,
retardant, firefighters and cargo. These aircraft face a demanding environment
with hazards such as power lines, trees, towers, smoke and wind.

"Conditions for our pilots are tough enough," said Bill Schuster, DNR wildfire
aviation supervisor. "We don't want to worry about when and where a drone could
pop up into their flight path."

Aircraft and crew are strategically located around Minnesota to quickly respond
to wildfires. One or more aircraft may be dispatched to any wildfire in the
state within minutes of its start, depending on what is threatened by the fire.

Over 99 percent of wildfires that occur in Minnesota are small, quick-moving and
wind-driven, and these do most of their damage within the first few hours after
igniting. With the increasing overlap between wild lands and urban areas in
Minnesota, firefighters need to be aggressive and safe when putting out
wildfires.

"While crews were fighting a wildfire near Ostego last week, a drone was flying
nearby at the same time firefighting aircraft were conducting operations," said
Shuster. "Voluntary cooperation to not operate drones within 5 miles of
wildfires would allow firefighters to do their job safely, efficiently and
effectively."

Visit the wildfire update page for Minnesota updates.

The Federal Aviation Administration has partnered with several industry
associations to promote "Know Before You Fly," a campaign to educate the public
about using unmanned aircraft safely and responsibly. Go online to learn more
about this program.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              511 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                            April 5, 2006 Wednesday
                    Flagler/palm Coast News-tribune Edition

Hurricane debris increases wildfire danger

BYLINE: STAFF REPORT

SECTION: NEWCOMERS' GUIDE; Pg. 49D

LENGTH: 509  words

DATELINE: PALM COAST


PALM COAST Hurricanes and wildfires don't seem to go together but the aftermath
of recent tropical storms has forestry officials concerned.

After all the storms and rain . . . most Floridians might think the threat of
wildfires has been reduced but in fact, the opposite is true," said Timber
Weller, a wildfire mitigation specialist with the Florida Division of Forestry
in Bunnell. "One of the legacies of the hurricanes may be an elevated wildfire
risk lasting several years." Unlike populated areas, where hurricane debris was
quickly cleaned up and hauled away, debris from the storms in wooded areas is
extra fuel, making it more likely for wildfires to start and more difficult to
put them out.

Remember what your neighborhood looked like right after the storm, leaves and
twigs blanketed the ground, trees stripped and branches, large and small,
everywhere," Weller said. "Visualize the huge piles of plant debris produced by
a single neighborhood and multiply that by the hundreds of thousands of acres of
forests throughout Florida." While May and June are the peak months for
wildfires, Weller said the reality is that Florida has a year-round burn season.

If we get rain frequently enough, we don't have a problem," he said. "If we
don't get rain, we do have a problem and it doesn't matter what month is on the
calendar." Weller said in addition to the larger amount of potential fuel for
fires, large logs and other debris make it harder for forestry crews to operate
equipment in the woods.

There's more fuel available and it's going to be more difficult to operate," he
said. "It's going to be tougher." But there are things homeowners can do to
prepare for wildfire season, said Bill Butler, Palm Coast landscape architect.

The first thing I would say is, if homeowners have any debris on their site, get
(it) out to the street so the refuse company can pick it up," Butler said. "The
important thing is the area around the house. That's the area homeowners need to
focus on." Here are some precautions homeowners can take to limit the chances of
damage from wildfires:*Remove leaves, pine straw and debris from roof and rain
gutters.* Create "defensible" space by removing or reducing flammable material
near buildings and provide at least 30 feet of buffer space between house and
potential wildfire fuels.*Landscape with nonflammable mulch and choose plants
that have high moisture content. Healthy, well-irrigated plants are more
resistant to burning.

When it comes down to it, there is just a brief period when a home is exposed to
wildfire," Weller said. "If the home can defend itself, it will survive and the
wildfire will move on." Weller said efforts by the Division of Forestry to
reduce wildfire risks have paid off in recent years.

We've seen a reduction in the number of fires over the last couple of years," he
said, But the risks are still there And that is why homeowners need to take
positive measures to protect themselves.

We know we're going to have more fires," he said. "We don't know if we have to
have more catastrophes."

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Caption: Members of the Wildland Fire Leadership Council gather for a
demonstration of a specialized fuel management machine, the Gyrotrac, which
removes undergrowth often blamed for fueling forest fires. File photo

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2006 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2006 News-Journal Corporation


                              512 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 27, 2017 Friday

Washington: Wyden: Congress Must Pass Wildfire Funding Fix in Disaster Aid

LENGTH: 580 words



Washington: Office of the Senator Ron Wyden has issued the following news
release:

As fires continue to burn during the most expensive wildfire season on record,
U.S. Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., tonight urged Senate leadership to include a
wildfire funding fix in any future disaster aid legislation.


In a speech tonight on the Senate floor, Wyden urged Congress to pass
legislation he introduced with a bipartisan coalition of western senators that
would end "fire borrowing," which forces agencies to rob funds from fire
prevention funding to put out fires. The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would
stop fire borrowing by allowing the Forest Service to pay to fight wildfires
similar to other natural disasters.
"Congress should not sit back while lives and property face wildfire threats,
accepting a dangerous status quo of these fires only getting larger and costing
more," Wyden said. "The way the federal government budgets for these fires is
broken, it literally adds fuel to the fires, and Congress has an obligation to
fix it.
"There's more work to be done this year with respect to disaster relief, and I'm
going to work with my colleagues and do everything I can to see this through."

Under the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act, once agencies exceed their appropriated
fire suppression budgets, they would be able to use disaster funding to pay to
put out the remaining fires. Removing additional suppression costs from the
regular budgets of federal agencies stops the agencies from fire borrowing from
other forest work accounts, protecting that money for beneficial prevention and
management activities. The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would also raise the
budget cap for the disaster funding so wildfires wouldn't siphon money away from
recovery efforts or require other natural disasters to "compete" with wildfires
for funding.
The Senate passed a bipartisan funding bill this week to help with the cost of
fighting the wildfires in western states as part of a larger disaster funding
bill. However, the funding included in the bill does not fix the long-term
problem of consistently underfunding fire suppression, which currently forces
federal agencies to steal from fire prevention to fight fires, so-called "fire
borrowing."
In September, Wyden and several of his colleagues sent a letter to Senate
leadership, urging them to pass the Wildfire Funding Disaster Act as part of
disaster legislation. The letter's signers included Sens. Mike Crapo, included
Jim Risch, R-Idaho, Martin Heinrich, D-N.M., Jeff Merkley, D-Ore., Maria
Cantwell, D-Wash., Michael Bennet, D-Colo., Kamala Harris, D-Calif., Jon Tester,
D-Mont., Patty Murray, D-Wash., Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, and Tom Udall, D-N.M. Many
of the same senators joined Wyden in speeches on the Senate floor this week to
reiterate their support for passage.
Wildfires have burned almost nine million acres of land across the West this
year, according to the National Interagency Fire Center. Dozens of lives have
been lost, thousands of residents have been forced to evacuate from their homes,
and the U.S. Forest Service spent $2.41 billion in fiscal year 2017 to put out
fires. The agency had to borrow $576.5 million to cover the costs of fire
suppression through the end of the year, and yet fires continue to burn into
fiscal year 2018.
Wyden and Crapo first introduced bipartisan legislation to fix the way the
federal government funds the fight against wildfires, the Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act, in 2013.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              513 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                             July 21, 2015 Tuesday

Tri-Valley youth sports results

BYLINE: Bay Area News Group

SECTION: MY TOWN; Alameda; Contra Costa; News; Local

LENGTH: 2048 words


Soccer

West Coast Wildfire U16

Davis College Showcase

The West Coast Wildfire U16 girls team went 2-1-2 to reach the semifinal round
at the Davis Legacy College Showcase. The Wildfire battled Woodland Arsenal to a
scoreless first and second half, but fell short in penalty kicks after
regulation ended in a scoreless draw.

In the quarterfinal round, the Wildfire faced a newcomer in Pacific FC and
dominated the game 2-0 behind precision passes, strong communication and
teamwork.

In bracket play, the Wildfire first locked horns against a strong West Coast
Footbal Club from Los Angeles. After a scoreless first half, WCFC found the net
with a deep shot, but ten minutes later Paola Samaniego scored the equalizer and
the match ended in a 1-1 draw. The Wildfire overpowered the San Leandro
Northstars with a 5-0 victory in the second match of bracket play. In their
final game of bracket play, the Wildfire met up with their longtime rival the
Mustang Blast. Neither team could sink a goal despite numerous shots by the
Wildfire and the match ended in a 0-0 draw, which gave the Wildfire enough
points to take first in the bracket and secure a spot in the quarterfinals.
Goalie Callie Cain was outstanding throughout the tournament and was assisted by
a strong defensive line that allowed just one goal in 350 minutes of play.

The West Coast Wildfire will next play in San Diego's prestigious Surf Cup.

Softball

Pleasanton Phantom Girls 14B

Capital Sports Assoc. Junior Olympics Tournament

The Pleasanton Phantom 14U girls team won its fourth tournament of the summer,
doing so in Truckee at the Capital Sports Association's ASA Junior Olympics
tournament. The Phantom defeated the Santa Rosa Hackers 13-2 in the championship
game to finish with a perfect 5-0 record throughout the tournament. Corey Bryan
earned the win with a complete game on the mound. He also contributed a home run
at the plate, while teammate Halle Uhl chipped in with a two-run double after
sparking a five-run rally with a run-scoring single. Hannah Schott also had an
RBI single, while Kate Inman drove in two runs.

The Phantom notched a 10-3 semifinal win over the Santa Cruz Trouble. Pitcher
Aynslee Roberts earned the win, while Hannah Schott led the offense and capped a
five-run rally with a timely double.

In pool play, the Phantom opened with a 9-2 win over Trouble. Aynslee Roberts
led the team with stellar pitching while Sarah Layer, Kate Inman, Vanessa
Gonzalez and Nicole Thornton contributed key hits. Pleasanton's closest game was
a 2-1 victory over the Pleasant Hill Panthers "C" team. Bridgett Aguilar pitched
well and Aynslee Roberts closed out the game to earn the save. Halle Uhl, Nicole
Thornton and Aguilar led the offense. In the final game of pool play, the
Phantom continued their undefeated run with a 5-2 win over Pleasant Hill "B"
team. Vanessa Gonzalez, Nicole Thornton and Sarah Layer paced the offense while
pitcher Corey Bryan earned the win.

Swimming

Pleasanton Seahawks

At Summer Long Course Junior Olympics

The Pleasanton Seahawks competitive USA swim club had an outstanding performance
this past weekend at the Summer Long Course Junior Olympics held at Gunderson
High School in San Jose. The team as a whole took home 95 medals from the meet
(the top 8 in each individual and relay events received medals.) Swimming to six
first place finishes out of seven events was Lleyton Plattel (boys 11-12). He
won the 100, 200 and 400 freestyle, as well as the 100 backstroke, and the 100
and 200 butterfly. He also had a third-place finish in the 200 IM. Also earning
seven medals in the same division was Alex Ren who took second in the 100 and
200 freestyle, 100 backstroke, 200 butterfly and 200 IM. Ren also took third in
the 100 butterfly and fourth in the 50 freestyle. Alex Smedley took third in the
800 freestyle and the boys 400 freestyle "A" relay team took second with
Plattel, Ren, Smedley and Andrew Wang. In the 200 freestyle relay the "A" team
of Ren, Madhav Vats, Smedley and Plattel managed to take home first place, while
Calvin Chui led the boys 13-14 group with seven medals. Chui took first in the
400, 1500 freestyle and the 200 butterfly. He also placed second in the 800
freestyle, fourth in the 100 butterfly, fifth in the 200 freestyle and seventh
in 200 IM. Mattias Blanco took home four medals, with a third-place finish in
the both the 400 IM and 200 backstroke, and fifth in both the 800 freestyle and
the 100 backstroke. Robert Mitu placed third in the 1500 freestyle, seventh in
the 800 freestyle, while Robert Torres took home sixth in the 1500 freestyle.
Justin Tsai finished eighth in the 200 backstroke and the boys 13-14 200
freestyle relay team of Chui, Tsai, Blanco and Calvin David took third. The 200
medley relay team of Blanco, Nicholas Wonosaputra, Chui and David too home third
place, and in the 400 freestyle relay the "A" team of Chui, David, Tsai, and
Mitu placed fifth.

Top swims were seen in the girls 10U division as well. Both Aven Lee and
Christina Tsai took home five medals each. Lee finished third in the 100
butterfly as well as the 50 and 100 backstroke, fourth in the 50 butterfly and
eighth in the 100 freestyle. Tsai placed first in the 400 freestyle, third in
the 50 breaststroke, fourth in the 100 breaststroke, sixth in the 200 IM and
seventh in the 200 freestyle. They were also both part of the second place 200
medley "A" relay team along with teammates Sophia Pedersoli and Paige Bennett.
That same group broke the Pleasanton Seahawk team relay record in a time of
2:32.15 (previous record 2:33.42). Lee and Tsai were again part of the third
place 200 freestyle relay team with the same teammates again breaking the
Seahawk 10U team record with a time of 2:14.17 (previous record 2:15.05).
Pedersoli also placed fifth in the 50 backstroke, eighth in the 100 backstroke
while Bennett took home a fourth place medal in the 200 freestyle. The "B"
medley relay team of Zoe Chu, Angie Ma, Mica Wang and Jasmine Phan took seventh
place. The same relay group also finished eighth in the 200 freestyle relay.

In the boys 10U division the 200 freestyle "A" relay team of Ethan Wang, Kevin
Yuan, Alexander Suen and Dominick Wonosaputra took home seventh with a time of
2:20.54.

The 11-12 girls took home nine medals as a group. Five medals were won
individually by Gwyneth Wong (third in the 100 backstroke, 50 butterfly and 200
IM. Wong also took fifth in the 50 backstroke and sixth in the 100 butterfly.
Sydney Lu finished sixth in the 100 breaststroke. The 400 freestyle "A" relay
team of Wong, Lu, Olivia Kim and Emily Chen finished fourth. The 200 freestyle
"A" relay team of Chen, Emily Harris, Lauren Jhong and Jocelyn Martin finished
seventh, while the 200 medley "B" relay team of Emily Tsai, Kim, Jhong and
Martin took eighth.

The 13-14 girls took home six relay medals, and finished fourth in the 200
freestyle relay (Caroline Eckel, Hannah Franzwa, Elisabeth Balicanta, Emily
Claridge). The "B" Relay team of Stepahnie Shao, Marissa Lawrence, Kaela Lee,
and Paulina Umansky took eighth and the 400 freestyle "A" relay team of Eckel,
Franzwa, Balicanta, Shao placed fifth, while the "B" relay team of Claridge,
Lee, Lawrence, and Isabella Hernandez finished eighth. The 200 medley "A" relay
team of Eckel, Umansky, Shao, Franzwa took fourth place and the "B" relay team
of Emma Valentine, Claridge, Nja Zuniga, Balicanta placed seventh. Individual
Medals were won by Franzwa (3rd. 200 freestyle, 4th. 400 IM, 5th. 200 IM, 6th.
400 freestyle), Eckel (2nd. 100 backstroke, 7th. 50 freestyle), Umansky (5th.
200 breaststroke, 8th. 400 IM), and Shao placed fifth in the 200 butterfly.

Mandy Helle had great swims for the 15-18 girls, placing first in the 800
freestyle, second in the 400 freestyle, and seventh in both the 100 and 200
freestyle. Sofia Moufarrej took second in the 1500 freestyle, while teammates
Alexandra Hernandez and Amber Fornoles both took home fourth place finishes.

The boys 15-18 division saw Michael Martin win two medals (3rd. 1500 freestyle,
8th. 200 backstroke) and Alex Suehiro also earned two medals (4th. 200
breaststroke, 8th. 200 freestyle). Taking one individual medal was Jeffrey Tang
(8th. 800 freestyle), Preston Tsang (8th. 100 breaststroke) and Nathanial Sproul
(7th. 100 butterfly). The 200 medley "A" relay team of Martin, Tsang, N. Sproul,
and Ben Sproul placed sixth.

The next big meet for the Seahawks is Far Westerns coming up at the end of July.

Tri Valley Swim League

Recreational Division

Del Prado Stingrays 611, Briarhill Barracudas 353: Top Swimmers for Briarhill
include Gianna Tudor (6), Kendal Fong (6), Jake Hamilton (6), Jessie Gadd (6),
Ainsley Lyon (7), Micah Davis (8), Zoe Esquival (9), Gabe Tapia (10), Audrey Lim
(10), Kimberly Shum (13), Adam Schroeder (14), and Meghan Butler (17). Del Prado
was led by Tyson Jetter (6), Annalise Demange (8), Syndey Pruss (10), Caden
Drain (10), Lauren Graham (12), Joseph Nazareno (12), Lacey Hicks (14), Meghan
Hogue (15) and Tommy Juarez (15).

Pleasanton Meadows Sharks 546, Briarhill Barracudas 399: Led by Player-Coach
Meghan Butler the Barracudas secured victories in butterfly, IM, and backstroke,
Notable swimmers for Briarhill included:

Gianna Tudor (6) freestyle, breaststroke, Gabe Rouse (9) breaststroke, Henry
Baalman (9) IM, Dimitri Zannis (10) butterfly, IM, Alyssa Burdusis (12)
breaststroke, Bella Dugorepec (12) freestyle, butterfly, Bella Townsend (15)
freestyle, breaststroke, Andrew Voit (15) freestyle, backstroke, and Corey
Dickson (18) IM. The Sharks were led by three triple winners which included
Madeline Coyne (8) who had victories in freestyle, butterfly and backstroke
Hannah Walder (10) who took home the blue ribbon in butterfly, breaststroke and
backstroke, and David Azuma (14) who recorded victories in freestyle, butterfly
and IM. Other Shark standouts were: Jonah Denny (6) freestyle, breaststroke,
Caitlin Craighead (6) butterfly, backstroke, Tyler Dishman (10) butterfly,
backstroke, Peyton Pozzi (12) IM, backstroke, and Laura Whiteland (13) freestyle
and backstroke.

Water polo

LARPD Lazers

The LARPD Lazers girls water polo teams traveled to Santa Cruz to compete in two
tournaments in the Santa Cruz Classic on July 11-12.

The U18 girls played with a skeleton crew of just enough players, but still
managed a 2-1 record at the West Valley College tournament. Emily McElroy and
Kelsey Mulhon led the way with keeper Caroline Danforth contributing strong
defense. The U18 LAZERS girls also took second place in the gold division where
once again Kaitlyn Johnson led the way offensively along with Emily Hawkins,
Alex Kerin, Elizabeth Bukus, and Hannah Borjon. Defensively the youngest player
on the U18 team, Natalie Hawkins, was stellar defensively as was Katie Johnson,
Fiona Weaver, Gianna Paden Alicja Gornicka, and Emily McElroy who took turns in
the goalie box.

The 18U and 16U boys LAZERS also played in the West Valley College tournaments,
winning all games. Standout player was Patrick Schwartz for the 16U team.

The Lazers 16U girls team took home second place after losing by one point in a
hard-fought championship game. Kaitlyn Johnson led the way with 11 goals while
teammates Emily Hawkins, Natalie Hawkins, Emily McElroy, Kayley Clark, Kelsey
Malhon and Gianna Paden also contributed goals. Goalie duties were shared by
Emily Mcelroy, Alicja Gornicka, Gianna Paden, Fiona Weaver and Emily Hawkins who
all did a great job in the cage.

In the following day, the 16U girls won all three of their games played at the
West Valley Tournament and also finished first in the round robin bracket.
Leading the way offensively was Kaitlyn Johnson, Emily Hawkins, Kayley Clark,
Gianna Paden and Natalie Hawkins. The Lazers stellar defense was led by Kristine
Danforth and Samantha Anderson, and goalie Jessica Hanscom.

The U14 coed team took home second place at the Santa Cruz Classic on July 18.
Scoring was led by Gabe Akins and Ethan Fovel, while goalies Steve Ragatz and
Britney Pettit recorded multiple acrobatic blocks. The coed team showed amazing
teamwork during the tournament, with everyone contributing.

This tournament ends the summer session for the 15+ age groups, who will now
begin their season at Livermore High and Granada High. The U14 teams will resume
practice in the fall, after Labor Day.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 Contra Costa Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              514 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                             July 21, 2015 Tuesday

Tri-Valley youth sports results

BYLINE: Bay Area News Group

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 2048 words


Soccer

West Coast Wildfire U16

Davis College Showcase

The West Coast Wildfire U16 girls team went 2-1-2 to reach the semifinal round
at the Davis Legacy College Showcase. The Wildfire battled Woodland Arsenal to a
scoreless first and second half, but fell short in penalty kicks after
regulation ended in a scoreless draw.

In the quarterfinal round, the Wildfire faced a newcomer in Pacific FC and
dominated the game 2-0 behind precision passes, strong communication and
teamwork.

In bracket play, the Wildfire first locked horns against a strong West Coast
Footbal Club from Los Angeles. After a scoreless first half, WCFC found the net
with a deep shot, but ten minutes later Paola Samaniego scored the equalizer and
the match ended in a 1-1 draw. The Wildfire overpowered the San Leandro
Northstars with a 5-0 victory in the second match of bracket play. In their
final game of bracket play, the Wildfire met up with their longtime rival the
Mustang Blast. Neither team could sink a goal despite numerous shots by the
Wildfire and the match ended in a 0-0 draw, which gave the Wildfire enough
points to take first in the bracket and secure a spot in the quarterfinals.
Goalie Callie Cain was outstanding throughout the tournament and was assisted by
a strong defensive line that allowed just one goal in 350 minutes of play.

The West Coast Wildfire will next play in San Diego's prestigious Surf Cup.

Softball

Pleasanton Phantom Girls 14B

Capital Sports Assoc. Junior Olympics Tournament

The Pleasanton Phantom 14U girls team won its fourth tournament of the summer,
doing so in Truckee at the Capital Sports Association's ASA Junior Olympics
tournament. The Phantom defeated the Santa Rosa Hackers 13-2 in the championship
game to finish with a perfect 5-0 record throughout the tournament. Corey Bryan
earned the win with a complete game on the mound. He also contributed a home run
at the plate, while teammate Halle Uhl chipped in with a two-run double after
sparking a five-run rally with a run-scoring single. Hannah Schott also had an
RBI single, while Kate Inman drove in two runs.

The Phantom notched a 10-3 semifinal win over the Santa Cruz Trouble. Pitcher
Aynslee Roberts earned the win, while Hannah Schott led the offense and capped a
five-run rally with a timely double.

In pool play, the Phantom opened with a 9-2 win over Trouble. Aynslee Roberts
led the team with stellar pitching while Sarah Layer, Kate Inman, Vanessa
Gonzalez and Nicole Thornton contributed key hits. Pleasanton's closest game was
a 2-1 victory over the Pleasant Hill Panthers "C" team. Bridgett Aguilar pitched
well and Aynslee Roberts closed out the game to earn the save. Halle Uhl, Nicole
Thornton and Aguilar led the offense. In the final game of pool play, the
Phantom continued their undefeated run with a 5-2 win over Pleasant Hill "B"
team. Vanessa Gonzalez, Nicole Thornton and Sarah Layer paced the offense while
pitcher Corey Bryan earned the win.

Swimming

Pleasanton Seahawks

At Summer Long Course Junior Olympics

The Pleasanton Seahawks competitive USA swim club had an outstanding performance
this past weekend at the Summer Long Course Junior Olympics held at Gunderson
High School in San Jose. The team as a whole took home 95 medals from the meet
(the top 8 in each individual and relay events received medals.) Swimming to six
first place finishes out of seven events was Lleyton Plattel (boys 11-12). He
won the 100, 200 and 400 freestyle, as well as the 100 backstroke, and the 100
and 200 butterfly. He also had a third-place finish in the 200 IM. Also earning
seven medals in the same division was Alex Ren who took second in the 100 and
200 freestyle, 100 backstroke, 200 butterfly and 200 IM. Ren also took third in
the 100 butterfly and fourth in the 50 freestyle. Alex Smedley took third in the
800 freestyle and the boys 400 freestyle "A" relay team took second with
Plattel, Ren, Smedley and Andrew Wang. In the 200 freestyle relay the "A" team
of Ren, Madhav Vats, Smedley and Plattel managed to take home first place, while
Calvin Chui led the boys 13-14 group with seven medals. Chui took first in the
400, 1500 freestyle and the 200 butterfly. He also placed second in the 800
freestyle, fourth in the 100 butterfly, fifth in the 200 freestyle and seventh
in 200 IM. Mattias Blanco took home four medals, with a third-place finish in
the both the 400 IM and 200 backstroke, and fifth in both the 800 freestyle and
the 100 backstroke. Robert Mitu placed third in the 1500 freestyle, seventh in
the 800 freestyle, while Robert Torres took home sixth in the 1500 freestyle.
Justin Tsai finished eighth in the 200 backstroke and the boys 13-14 200
freestyle relay team of Chui, Tsai, Blanco and Calvin David took third. The 200
medley relay team of Blanco, Nicholas Wonosaputra, Chui and David too home third
place, and in the 400 freestyle relay the "A" team of Chui, David, Tsai, and
Mitu placed fifth.

Top swims were seen in the girls 10U division as well. Both Aven Lee and
Christina Tsai took home five medals each. Lee finished third in the 100
butterfly as well as the 50 and 100 backstroke, fourth in the 50 butterfly and
eighth in the 100 freestyle. Tsai placed first in the 400 freestyle, third in
the 50 breaststroke, fourth in the 100 breaststroke, sixth in the 200 IM and
seventh in the 200 freestyle. They were also both part of the second place 200
medley "A" relay team along with teammates Sophia Pedersoli and Paige Bennett.
That same group broke the Pleasanton Seahawk team relay record in a time of
2:32.15 (previous record 2:33.42). Lee and Tsai were again part of the third
place 200 freestyle relay team with the same teammates again breaking the
Seahawk 10U team record with a time of 2:14.17 (previous record 2:15.05).
Pedersoli also placed fifth in the 50 backstroke, eighth in the 100 backstroke
while Bennett took home a fourth place medal in the 200 freestyle. The "B"
medley relay team of Zoe Chu, Angie Ma, Mica Wang and Jasmine Phan took seventh
place. The same relay group also finished eighth in the 200 freestyle relay.

In the boys 10U division the 200 freestyle "A" relay team of Ethan Wang, Kevin
Yuan, Alexander Suen and Dominick Wonosaputra took home seventh with a time of
2:20.54.

The 11-12 girls took home nine medals as a group. Five medals were won
individually by Gwyneth Wong (third in the 100 backstroke, 50 butterfly and 200
IM. Wong also took fifth in the 50 backstroke and sixth in the 100 butterfly.
Sydney Lu finished sixth in the 100 breaststroke. The 400 freestyle "A" relay
team of Wong, Lu, Olivia Kim and Emily Chen finished fourth. The 200 freestyle
"A" relay team of Chen, Emily Harris, Lauren Jhong and Jocelyn Martin finished
seventh, while the 200 medley "B" relay team of Emily Tsai, Kim, Jhong and
Martin took eighth.

The 13-14 girls took home six relay medals, and finished fourth in the 200
freestyle relay (Caroline Eckel, Hannah Franzwa, Elisabeth Balicanta, Emily
Claridge). The "B" Relay team of Stepahnie Shao, Marissa Lawrence, Kaela Lee,
and Paulina Umansky took eighth and the 400 freestyle "A" relay team of Eckel,
Franzwa, Balicanta, Shao placed fifth, while the "B" relay team of Claridge,
Lee, Lawrence, and Isabella Hernandez finished eighth. The 200 medley "A" relay
team of Eckel, Umansky, Shao, Franzwa took fourth place and the "B" relay team
of Emma Valentine, Claridge, Nja Zuniga, Balicanta placed seventh. Individual
Medals were won by Franzwa (3rd. 200 freestyle, 4th. 400 IM, 5th. 200 IM, 6th.
400 freestyle), Eckel (2nd. 100 backstroke, 7th. 50 freestyle), Umansky (5th.
200 breaststroke, 8th. 400 IM), and Shao placed fifth in the 200 butterfly.

Mandy Helle had great swims for the 15-18 girls, placing first in the 800
freestyle, second in the 400 freestyle, and seventh in both the 100 and 200
freestyle. Sofia Moufarrej took second in the 1500 freestyle, while teammates
Alexandra Hernandez and Amber Fornoles both took home fourth place finishes.

The boys 15-18 division saw Michael Martin win two medals (3rd. 1500 freestyle,
8th. 200 backstroke) and Alex Suehiro also earned two medals (4th. 200
breaststroke, 8th. 200 freestyle). Taking one individual medal was Jeffrey Tang
(8th. 800 freestyle), Preston Tsang (8th. 100 breaststroke) and Nathanial Sproul
(7th. 100 butterfly). The 200 medley "A" relay team of Martin, Tsang, N. Sproul,
and Ben Sproul placed sixth.

The next big meet for the Seahawks is Far Westerns coming up at the end of July.

Tri Valley Swim League

Recreational Division

Del Prado Stingrays 611, Briarhill Barracudas 353: Top Swimmers for Briarhill
include Gianna Tudor (6), Kendal Fong (6), Jake Hamilton (6), Jessie Gadd (6),
Ainsley Lyon (7), Micah Davis (8), Zoe Esquival (9), Gabe Tapia (10), Audrey Lim
(10), Kimberly Shum (13), Adam Schroeder (14), and Meghan Butler (17). Del Prado
was led by Tyson Jetter (6), Annalise Demange (8), Syndey Pruss (10), Caden
Drain (10), Lauren Graham (12), Joseph Nazareno (12), Lacey Hicks (14), Meghan
Hogue (15) and Tommy Juarez (15).

Pleasanton Meadows Sharks 546, Briarhill Barracudas 399: Led by Player-Coach
Meghan Butler the Barracudas secured victories in butterfly, IM, and backstroke,
Notable swimmers for Briarhill included:

Gianna Tudor (6) freestyle, breaststroke, Gabe Rouse (9) breaststroke, Henry
Baalman (9) IM, Dimitri Zannis (10) butterfly, IM, Alyssa Burdusis (12)
breaststroke, Bella Dugorepec (12) freestyle, butterfly, Bella Townsend (15)
freestyle, breaststroke, Andrew Voit (15) freestyle, backstroke, and Corey
Dickson (18) IM. The Sharks were led by three triple winners which included
Madeline Coyne (8) who had victories in freestyle, butterfly and backstroke
Hannah Walder (10) who took home the blue ribbon in butterfly, breaststroke and
backstroke, and David Azuma (14) who recorded victories in freestyle, butterfly
and IM. Other Shark standouts were: Jonah Denny (6) freestyle, breaststroke,
Caitlin Craighead (6) butterfly, backstroke, Tyler Dishman (10) butterfly,
backstroke, Peyton Pozzi (12) IM, backstroke, and Laura Whiteland (13) freestyle
and backstroke.

Water polo

LARPD Lazers

The LARPD Lazers girls water polo teams traveled to Santa Cruz to compete in two
tournaments in the Santa Cruz Classic on July 11-12.

The U18 girls played with a skeleton crew of just enough players, but still
managed a 2-1 record at the West Valley College tournament. Emily McElroy and
Kelsey Mulhon led the way with keeper Caroline Danforth contributing strong
defense. The U18 LAZERS girls also took second place in the gold division where
once again Kaitlyn Johnson led the way offensively along with Emily Hawkins,
Alex Kerin, Elizabeth Bukus, and Hannah Borjon. Defensively the youngest player
on the U18 team, Natalie Hawkins, was stellar defensively as was Katie Johnson,
Fiona Weaver, Gianna Paden Alicja Gornicka, and Emily McElroy who took turns in
the goalie box.

The 18U and 16U boys LAZERS also played in the West Valley College tournaments,
winning all games. Standout player was Patrick Schwartz for the 16U team.

The Lazers 16U girls team took home second place after losing by one point in a
hard-fought championship game. Kaitlyn Johnson led the way with 11 goals while
teammates Emily Hawkins, Natalie Hawkins, Emily McElroy, Kayley Clark, Kelsey
Malhon and Gianna Paden also contributed goals. Goalie duties were shared by
Emily Mcelroy, Alicja Gornicka, Gianna Paden, Fiona Weaver and Emily Hawkins who
all did a great job in the cage.

In the following day, the 16U girls won all three of their games played at the
West Valley Tournament and also finished first in the round robin bracket.
Leading the way offensively was Kaitlyn Johnson, Emily Hawkins, Kayley Clark,
Gianna Paden and Natalie Hawkins. The Lazers stellar defense was led by Kristine
Danforth and Samantha Anderson, and goalie Jessica Hanscom.

The U14 coed team took home second place at the Santa Cruz Classic on July 18.
Scoring was led by Gabe Akins and Ethan Fovel, while goalies Steve Ragatz and
Britney Pettit recorded multiple acrobatic blocks. The coed team showed amazing
teamwork during the tournament, with everyone contributing.

This tournament ends the summer session for the 15+ age groups, who will now
begin their season at Livermore High and Granada High. The U14 teams will resume
practice in the fall, after Labor Day.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              515 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 2, 2016 Tuesday

Protect Yourself from Wildfire Smoke

LENGTH: 674  words



 Atlanta:The Center for Disease Control and prevention has issued the following
press release:



 Dry conditions in parts of the United States increase the potential for
wildfires in or near wilderness areas. Stay alert for wildfire warnings and take
action to protect yourself and your family from wildfire smoke.





 When wildfires burn in your area, they produce smoke that may reach your
community. Smoke from wildfires is a mixture of gases and fine particles from
burning trees and other plant materials. Smoke can hurt your eyes, irritate your
respiratory system, and worsen chronic heart and lung diseases.

 Who is at greatest risk from wildfire smoke?



     People who have heart or lung diseases, like heart disease, chest pain,
lung disease, or asthma, are at higher risk from wildfire smoke. In general,
people with these conditions are at higher risk of having health problems than
healthy people.

     Older adults are more likely to be affected by smoke. This may be due to
their increased risk of heart and lung diseases.

     Children are more likely to be affected by health threats from smoke.
Children's airways are still developing and they breathe more air per pound of
body weight than adults. In addition, children often spend more time outdoors
engaged in activity and play.



 Sign that read danger wildfires



 Stay alert for wildfire warnings.

 House with fire in the background



 Take precautions to decrease risk from wildfire smoke.

 Take steps to decrease your risk from wildfire smoke.



     Check local air quality reports. Listen and watch for news or health
warnings about smoke. Find out if your community provides reports about the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency's Air Quality Index (AQI). In addition, pay
attention to public health messages about taking safety measures.

     Consult local visibility guides if they are available. Some communities
have monitors that measure the amount of particles that are in the air. In the
western part of the United States, some states and communities provide
guidelines to help people determine if there are high levels of particulates in
the air by how far they can see.

     Keep indoor air as clean as possible if you are advised to stay indoors.
Keep windows and doors closed. Run an air conditioner if you have one, but keep
the fresh-air intake closed and the filter clean to prevent outdoor smoke from
getting inside. If you do not have an air conditioner and it is too warm to stay
inside with the windows closed, seek shelter in a designated evacuation center
or away from the affected area.

     Avoid activities that increase indoor pollution. Burning candles,
fireplaces, or gas stoves can increase indoor pollution. Vacuuming stirs up
particles already inside your home, contributing to indoor pollution. Smoking
also puts even more pollution into the air.

     Prevent wildfires from starting. Prepare, build, maintain and extinguish
campfires safely. Comply with local regulations if you plan to burn trash or
debris. Check with your local fire department to be sure the weather is safe
enough for burning.

     Follow the advice of your doctor or other healthcare provider about
medicines and about your respiratory management plan if you have asthma or
another lung disease. Consider evacuating the area if you are having trouble
breathing. Call for further advice if your symptoms worsen.

     Do not rely on dust masks for protection. Paper "comfort" or "dust" masks
commonly found at hardware stores are designed to trap large particles, such as
sawdust. These masks will not protect your lungs from the small particles found
in wildfire smoke.

     Evacuate from the path of wildfires. Listen to the news to learn about
current evacuation orders. Follow the instructions of local officials about when
and where to evacuate. Take only essential items with you. Follow designated
evacuation routes, others may be blocked, and expect heavy traffic.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              516 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    The Record (Kitchener-Waterloo, Ontario)

                           January 24, 2007 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

MINOR SPORTS SCOREBOARD

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. E5

LENGTH: 4036  words


Team representatives are reminded that the names of goal scorers from both teams
are required in the results of games played between teams from within Waterloo
Region and The Record's coverage area.

BASKETBALL

GIRLS

MAJOR BANTAM

Results for the bronze-medal winning K-W Lightning at their home tournament,
Jan. 19-21.

K-W Lightning 32 Brantford Briers 13

K-W Lightning: Alex Palvetzian 7, Kate Dye 7, Kate Garbutt 6.

K-W Lightning 31 Oakville Basketball 19

K-W Lightning: Caroline Hood 8, Caitlyn Hingley 4.

K-W Lightning 36 Cambridge Centaurs 33

K-W Lightning: Silvana Jez 15, Katie Waters 4, Breann Lavigne 4.

Bronze-medal game

K-W Lightning 33 Cambridge Centaurs 25

K-W Lightning: Jez 18, Lavigne 6.

BOYS

NOVICE

Waterloo Wildhawks 46 Oakville Venom 37

Waterloo: Trevor Ranton 20, Sam Sutherland 9, James McBride 6, Ryan Clutton 6.

RINGETTE

NOVICE SINGLE-C

Results for the Waterloo Wildfire B1 at the Winterfest tournament.

Kitchener 4 Waterloo Wildfire B1 1

Scorers unavailable.

St. Thomas 10 Waterloo Wildfire B1 3

Waterloo: Alexa Corrado 2, Olivia Kupferschmidt. Assists: Allyson Bromberg.

Waterloo Wildfire B1 6 Richmond Hill 3

Waterloo: Kupferschmidt 3, Chloe Dawson 2, Corrado. Assists: Corrado 4, Claire
Swarbrick, Katie Sutter.

Hanover 9 Kitchener 5

Kitchener: Sam Bazely, Mikaila Beach, Lauren Sharpe, Jordan Smith, Anna
Lawrence. Assists: Sharpe, Danica McVeigh, Beach, Ryan Denison, Samantha
Bannister.

TWEEN A

Waterloo Wildfire 4 St. Marys 3

Waterloo: Alyssa Pasek, Danielle Duncan, Jennifer Petricevic, Katie Reid.
Assists, Reid, Sarah Dickie, Duncan, Katrina Corrado.

Waterloo Wildfire 6 Ajax 5

Waterloo: Katie Robison 2, Duncan, Pasek, Corrado, Petricevic. Assists:
Mackenzie Harrison, Corrado, Pasek, Reid, Nikki Fowlie.

BELLE A

Cambridge Turbos 9 Hamilton Heat 3

Cambridge: Shannon Corbett 3, Meghan Koehler 2, Stefanie Rideout, Michelle
Bedard, Christina Kavalinas, Kaitlin Butler. Assists: Kavalinas 3, Butler,
Koehler, Corbett Stockford.

Kitchener 7 Guelph 4

Kitchener: Lauren Lichty 2, Kelsey Weaver 2, Sam Trautman, Heidi Roeck, Jaimie
Wey. Assists: Becky Aitcheson 2, Jessica Gerrie, Alisha Hak, Trautman, Laura
Chapman.

Guelph: Brittany Mullin 2, Kristan Smith, Holly Broadhead. Assists: Smith 2,
Brianne Tapscott, Kyla Huck, Broadhead.

BUNNY

Guelph 7 Kitchener 6

Guelph: Christina Nadalin 5, Rachel Heywood, Melanie Stamp. Assists: Melanie
Cantin 2, Stamp, Madison Jarvis, Alyssa Osmond.

Kitchener: Isobel Payne 3, Nicole Sauve 2, Marlee Allen. Assists: Danielle
Roussin 3, Jessica Leclerc, Sauve, Jessie Burke.

Kitchener 2 Ayr 2

Kitchener: Roussin, Payne. Assists: Roussin, Sauve, Shayna Dramnitzke, Lauren
George.

Ayr: Keerah Clancy 2. Assists: Erika Downer, Jillian Page, Rachel Lund.

PETITE SINGLE-B

Kitchener 2 Owen Sound 1

Kitchener: Kim Anderson 2. Assists: Rachel Hunchak, Chanelle Patterson.

Results for silver-winning Kitchener at the Waterloo Winterfest tournament.

Kitchener 7 Waterloo Team One 0

Kitchener: Anderson 3, Hunchak, Brittany Struk, Nicole Howey 2. Assists:
Anderson 2, Howey, Jessica McDonald, Caitlin Krause, Chelsea Kuipers, Michelle
Thompson, Struk. Shutout: Tori Gibbons.

Kitchener 4 Waterloo Team Two 1

Kitchener: Anderson 3, Hunchak. Assists: Kristen Lawrence 2, Howey, McDonald,
Patterson, Alison Ropp.

Waterloo: Felicia Corrado. Assists: Randi Paul, Spencer Harrison.

Elora-Fergus 4 Kitchener 2

Elora-Fergus: Emily Cozens 2, Stacey Hughes, Natalie Lawton. Assists: Carissa
Habermehl, Taryn Collins, Courtney Becker, Courtney Coverdale, Cozens, Lawton.

Kitchener: Lawrence, Ropp. Assists: Howey, Thompson.

Elora-Fergus 3 Kitchener 2

Scorers unavailable.

Waterloo Wildfire B2 4 Waterloo Wildfire B1 3

Waterloo Wildfire B2: Spencer Harrison 2, Felicia Corrado 2. Assists: Stephanie
Yantz, Felicia Corrado.

Waterloo Wildfire B1: Cassia Deeering, Jodie-Lynn Drover, Nicole Kupferschmidt.
Assists: Brianna Ducharme-Felts, Riley Howitt, Amanda Murray, Jessica Pett.

Waterloo Wildfire B1 8 Elora/Fergus 0

Waterloo Wildfire B1: Ducharme-Felts 2, Alison Reichard 3, Drover,
Kupferschmidt, Howitt. Assists: Kupferschmidt 2, Emily Pyatt, Amanda Murray 2,
Kelsey Dawson, Howitt, Jessica Pett, Tracey Scanling, Michelle Crane, Katie
Seiling. Shutout: Kayla Widish.

Results for the Waterloo Wildfire B1 at the Waterloo Winterfest tournament.

Elora/Fergus 8 Waterloo Wildfire B1 1

Elora/Fergus: Courtney Coverdale 2, Natalie Lawton 4, Taryn Collins, Courtney
Becker. Assists: Natalie Lawton 2, Emily Cozens 2, Katie McKersie, Becker,
Stacey Hughes, Taryn Collins.

Waterloo Wildfire B1: Murray. Assists: Ducharme-Felts.

Waterloo Wildfire B1 7 Waterloo Wildfire B2 6

Waterloo Wildfire B1: Kupferschmidt 4, Drover 2, Ducharme-Felts. Assists: Kelsey
Dawson 2, Cassia Deering 2, Amanda Murray, Jade Antaya, Michelle Crane, Jessica
Pett, Katie Seiling.

Waterloo Wildfire B2: Hailey O'Driscoll 2, Corrado 2, Abby Breckles, Jill
Kirkland. Assists: Emily Moran 2, Nicole Cooper, Jill Kirkland, Stephanie Yantz,
Spencer Harrison, Hailey O'Driscoll, Chloe Norris, Randi Paul.

PETITE SINGLE-C

Kitchener 6 Elora-Fergus 3

Scorers unavailable.

JUNIOR

Kitchener 4 Elora 1

Kitchener: Sydney Schultz, Meagan Krause, Maxine Beck, Emily McDonald. Assists:
Rebecca Snyder, Angel Braun, Schultz.

Elora: Carly Ruhl. Assist: Natalie Church.

SKATING

Results for KWSC Skaters at the Dennis Silverthorne Memorial Invitational, Jan.
12-14, in Fort Erie.

WO Pre-Prelim A, 10 years, flight 2

5th: Nicole Kornelsen.

6th: Rachel Condon.

WO Pre-Prelim B, 9 years, flight 2

12th: Blanaid McNally.

WO Pre-Prelim B, 10 years, flight 2

4th: Julia Costa.

WO Pre-Prelim B, 11 & over, flight 1

6th: Rachel Millar.

WO Prelim B, 11 & over, flight 1

4th: Danielle Ayora.

WO Prelim B, 11 & over, flight 2

11th: Melissa Earl.

WO Prelim B, 11 & over, flight 3

5th: Victoria Maidment.

9th: Lyla Smerchinski.

WO Prelim B Men

3rd: Nicholas Alexander.

WO Jr. Bronze, 13 & over, flight 1

3rd: Kimberly Paisley.

13th: Emma Linton.

WO Jr. Bronze, 13 & over, flight 2

7th: Kaitlyn Wilson.

WO Jr. Bronze, 13 & over, flight 3

4th: Samantha McNair

Starskate Pre-Prelim Men

3rd: Peter Smerchinski

Starskate Pre-Prelim, flight 1

7th: Melodie Grafton

Starskate Pre-Prelim, flight 2

3rd: Shalena Rau

7th: Alisha Hagey

8th: Jackie Sayadeth

Starskate Pre-Prelim, flight 3

2nd: Emily Wright

3rd: Alexandra Burns

6th: Christine Au-Yeung

Starskate Pre-Prelim, flight 4

5th: Kyoko Oliver.

Starskate Pre-Prelim, flight 5

2nd: Amanda Adlys.

Starskate Prelim Men

1st: Harley Dahlstrom.

3rd: Aaron Alexander.

Starskate Prelim, flight 1

7th: Abby Joza.

9th: Tiffany Lenselink.

Starskate Prelim, flight 2

12th: Jocelyn Murphy.

Starskate Jr. Bronze, flight 1

5th: Maddie Germann.

11th: Jayden Rau.

Starskate Jr. Bronze, flight 4

11th: Nicole Tiffin.

12th: Jocelyn Guenther.

Starskate Jr. Bronze Men

4th: Benjamin Mulder.

Starskate Sr. Bronze, flight 1

12th: Francine Davis.

Starskate Sr. Bronze, flight 2

10th: Ashley Marquardt.

Starskate Sr. Bronze, flight 4

2nd: Nicole Turcot.

11th Alexandra Mior

Starskate Gold Dance Biathlon

1st: Lisa Erven and Paul Bauer.

Pre-Intro Interpretive, flight 2

5th: Melissa Earl.

Intro Interpretive, flight 2

2nd: Kimberly Paisley.

Intro Interpretive, flight 4

2nd: Samantha McNair.

Adult Bronze Interpretive

1st: Patricia Clarke.

Adult Silver Freeskate

2nd: Clarke.

Results for KWSC Skaters at the Lloyd Ogilvie Memorial Synchronized Skating
Competition, Jan. 6, in Dresden.

Festival Pre-Novice, 1st skate

14th: Diamonds on Ice.

Festival Pre-Novice, silver final

4th: Diamonds on Ice.

Results for the KWSC Skaters at Winterfest, Jan. 12-14, in Mississauga.

Festival Junior

13th: Royales on Ice.

Competitive Adult

2nd: Nexxice Adult.

Competitive Junior

3rd: Nexxice Junior.

Competitive Senior Short Program

3rd: Nexxice Senior.

Competitive Senior Free Program

3rd: Nexxice Senior.

Results for KWSC Skaters at the Canadian championships in Halifax, Jan. 15-21.

Junior Dance

6th: Anna Stanislavska and Michael Whitehead.

9th Brooklyn Vienneau and Jonathan Cluett.

Senior Women

10th: Erin Scherrer.

Senior Dance

3rd: Kaitlyn Weaver and Andrew Poje.

HOCKEY

GIRLS

The Waterloo Girls Minor Hockey Association is now accepting applications for
all representative teams for the 2007-08 season, from novice to intermediate
levels. Deadline for applications is Feb. 18. For more information go to
www.waterlooravens.com.

NOVICE SINGLE-A

Waterloo 0 Brampton 0

Waterloo shutout: Vicki Goodfellow.

NOVICE SINGLE-B

Kitchener Lady Rangers 2 Cambridge Roadrunners 2

Kitchener: Abby Renon 2. Assists: Megan Fergusson.

Cambridge: Raegan Subban, Kayla Bailey. Assists: Katie Harding, Karly Carnegie.

ATOM DOUBLE-A

Kitchener Lady Rangers 2 Stratford 0

Kitchener: Olivia Ellis, Rebecca Tsandelis. Assists: Angela MacDonald. Shutout:
Celeste Witzell.

Mississauga 4 Kitchener Lady Rangers 2

Kitchener: Angela MacDonald 2. Assists: Nicole Bingeman 2, Tailor Campbell,
Allie Hilts.

Kitchener Lady Rangers 3 Ottawa NCCP 0

Kitchener: Bingeman,Tsandelis, Ellis. Assists: Ellis 2, Christy Fleming.
Shutout: Witzell.

Kitchener Lady Rangers 4 Oakville 0

Kitchener: MacDonald 2, Mary Worndl, Ellis. Assists: Campbell,Taylor Fergusson,
Sara Martin. Shutout: Celeste Witzell.

BANTAM SINGLE-B

Woolwich 2 Kitchener Lady Rangers 1

Kitchener: Leanne Stortz. Assists: Nicole Kufske, Ashley McGraw.

MINOR ATOM SINGLE-B DOUBLE-B

Waterloo Ravens 0 Woodstock 0

Waterloo shutout: Kellee Snider.

Waterloo Ravens 1 Chatham Outlaws 1

Waterloo: Elan Grobe.

Waterloo Ravens 1 London Devilettes B 0

Waterloo: Delainy Rickert-Hall. Assists: Andrea Siegel, Annika Arnold.

MINOR ATOM SINGLE-B

Kitchener 1 Ancaster 1

Kitchener: Maddie Wang. Assists: Shyanne Langer, Briley Gregory. Shutout: Lauren
Lesage.

MINOR PEEWEE DOUBLE-B

Results for Kitchener at the Orangeville Tigers Sweetheart Tournament.

Kitchener 2 Orangeville 1

Kitchener: Kyra-Lynn McAleney, Lindsey Jones. Assists: Molly Walker, Ashley
Haman, Kelsi Carr.

Aurora 3 Kitchener 0

Whitby 3 Kitchener 0

BOYS HOCKEY

MINOR NOVICE MD

Kitchener 3 Waterloo 3

Kitchener: Carson Pearce, Matthew Colson, Sam Shaw. Assists: Pearce, Justin
Jelacic, Owen Lane, Luke Kozak, Andrew McIntyre.

Waterloo: Nicholas King 2, Sullivan Sparkes. Assists: Jack Edmeades.

Kitchener 3 Brantford 2

Kitchener: Colson, Noah Gedja. Assists: Owen Lane 2, Kozak, Justin Schneider.

Waterloo Mountain Wolves 9 Waterloo Ice Wolves 1

Mountain Wolves: Boris Katchouk 4, Brad VanderVleuten 2, Andrew Heibein, Jacob
Barbuto, Eric Kim. Assists: Bryce Bell, VanderVleuten, Katchouk.

Ice Wolves: Evan Aikens Armbruster. Assists: Samuel Cherry.

Waterloo Ice Wolves 4 Burlington Bulldogs 4

Waterloo: Sam Cherry 2, Logan Stanley, Jack Anderson. Assists: Dawson DeJeu,
Eric Grierson, Stanley, Joe Hemingway.

MINOR NOVICE SELECT

Waterloo 6 Cambridge 1

Waterloo: Kevin Tomka, Matthew Wyman, Matthew Farnham, Connor Runstedler, A.J.
Beke, Michael Murphy. Assists: Wyman 2, Tomka, Scanlan.

Waterloo 3 Guelph 3

Waterloo: Runstedler, Jack Davidson, Farnham. Assists: Farnham, Michael
McDonald, Scanlan, Gabriel Irwin.

Guelph: Keaton Bertrand 2, Lucas Campoli. Assists: Bertrand, Jonathon Murray,
Mark Mieczanec.

MINOR ATOM TRIPLE-A

KITCHENER JR. RANGERS 3 HAMILTON 1

Kitchener: Adam Zister 2, Tyler Harrison. Assists: John Nay 2, Evan Karst,
Braidon Kerbs, Francis Prevel.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 3 Waterloo 3

Kitchener: Josh Borys, Adam Zister, Harrison. Assists: Liam Feick, Liam
Buchenauer, Karst, Stephen Gibson, Zister,

Waterloo: Gary Mantz, Jaime Collins, Tyler Douse. Assists: Cody Handke, Nick
Bissonette, Jaime Collins.

Cambridge 3 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1

Cambridge: Matt Defrain, Nathan Bastian, Sean McFall. Assists: Kris Hopper,
Bastian.

Kitchener: Zister. Assists: Jake Tsetsekas.

Results for the Waterloo Wolves at the Preston International Tournament last
weekend.

Waterloo Wolves 4 Mississauga 1

Waterloo: Adam Ciuman 2, Kyle Soper, Gary Mantz. Assists: Jordan Hoekstra 2,
Noah Kienapple, Curtis Woodland, Tyler Douse, Cody Handke.

Peterborough Petes 3 Waterloo Wolves 2

Waterloo: Soper, Hoekstra. Assists: Matthew Harron, Ciuman.

Halton Hurricanes 4 Waterloo Wolves 1

Waterloo: Hoekstra. Assists: Mantz.

Results for Kitchener at the Preston International Tournament last weekend.

Huron Perth 2 Kitchener 1

Kitchener: Adam Zister. Assists: Loren Gabel, Liam Buchenauer.

Barrie 2 Kitchener 1

Kitchener: John Nay. Assists: Jeremy Kuehn, Stephen Gibson.

Kitchener 3 Guelph 2

Kitchener: Nay 3. Assists: Tyler Harrison 2, Josh Borys, Jake Tsetsekas, Kuehn.

Guelph: Tyler Dall Bello, Graham Evans. Assists: Cole Bradley, Ty Herrington.

MINOR ATOM SINGLE-A

Results for the Kitchener Jr. Rangers at the Preston International Tournament
last weekend.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1 West London 1

Kitchener: Nathan Laird. Assists: Sebastian Jelacic, Dallas Gutoskie.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1 Cambridge 0

Kitchener: Jacob Cascagnette. Shutout: Ryan Porter.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1 London Thunder 0

Kitchener: Austin Gaboury. Shutout: Jacob Schumann.

Semifinals

West London 2 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1

Kitchener: Cascagnette.

MINOR ATOM MD

Waterloo Ice Wolves 3 Sarnia 3

Waterloo: Ryan Taylor 2, Miles Purvis. Assists: Billy McLaren, Ian Buck, Purvis.

Waterloo Ice Wolves 5 St. Catharines 2

Waterloo: Taylor, Thomas Garvin, Scott Habel, Buck, Michael Lynch. Assists:
McLaren, Purvis.

Semifinal

SSE London Wild 3 Waterloo Ice Wolves 1

Waterloo: Lynch. Assists: Jacob Rawlinson.

Caledon 3 Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 1

Kitchener: Nick Damianakis. Assists: Curtis Black.

Waterloo Timberwolves 2 Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 1

Waterloo: Henry Marlow, Jake Heide. Assists: Jared Fleming, Tyler Husk, Nathan
Haehn, Benjamin Flood

Kitchener: Andrew Mitchell. Assists: Ryan Matchett, Owen Houle.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 10 Stratford 1

Kitchener: Robert Davis 3, Matthew D Arsie 2, Gavin Apperson 2, Joshua Zondevan,
Nicholas Hague, Jeffrey Hornsby. Assists: Hornsby 3, Davis 2, Apperson 2,
Maxwell McDonald 2, Ryan Scherbey, Andrew Ingalls, D Arsie, Cooper Griffin, Cory
Swan, Zondervan, Brenden Ziegler, Zachary Snider, Sean Tsandelis, Timothy
Valeriote, Hague.

Waterloo Timberwolves 8 Brantford 99ers 0

Waterloo: Brett Cambell 2, Spencer Owen 2, Cameron Cairney 2, Jack Beaton, Wyapp
Weppler. Assists: Beaton, Wepler, Keller Hurl-Loat, Black Ramsay, Justin
Strauss, Jon Kolb, Devin Martin. Shutout: Liam Aikens-Armbruster, Dane Arthur.

MINOR PEEWEE TRIPLE-A

Waterloo 6 Kitchener 1

Waterloo: Chris Eckert 3, Jacob Kozak 2, Ryosuke Kobayashi. Assists: Kozak 3.

Kitchener: Dustin Cordeiro. Assist: Matt Lindberg.

Brantford 1 Kitchener 1

Kitchener: Bill Young. Assists: Drake Smith, Cordeiro.

Elgin Middlesex 3 Kitchener 1

Kitchener: Andrew Ellis. Assists: Dustin Cordeiro.

Minor Peewee Single-A

Results for the Kitchener Jr. Rangers at the Newmarket Silver Stick Tournament.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 2 Newmarket Redmen 1

Kitchener: Keaton Jones 2. Assists: Austin George, Kevin Fitz-Henry, Riley
Flanagan, Matt Willcox.

Humber Valley Sharks 7 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1

Kitchener: Nick Gardner.

TNT Tornados 7 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 3

Kitchener: Johnathon Baker, Anthony Osterling, Flanagan. Assists: Gardner, Paul
Inglis, Chay Taylor, Isaac Hallman, Keaton Jones, Billy Zister.

MINOR PEEWEE MD

Kitchener Red 3 Waterloo Timber 1

Kitchener: Zach Zettel, Ryan Chambers, Aiden Kirby. Assists: Andrew Boer.

Waterloo: Matthew Lemay.

Kitchener Red 4 Stratford 1

Kitchener: Ryan Chambers 2, Daniel Schmidt, Drew Willcox. Assists: Zach Zettel
2, Aiden Kirby, Matt Leblanc, Ryan Wood.

Oakville Rangers 4 Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 1

Kitchener: Jared Borosch. Assists: Sam Boucher-Hatt, Lucas D'Arsie.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 4 Hespeler Shamrocks 0

Kitchener: Eric Wagenknecht 2, Tommy Kudoba 2. Assists: Connor McLeod 2, Alex
McKay 2, Borosch. Shutout: Jacob Coates.

Brantford Church Saints 7 Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 5

Kitchener: Boucher-Hatt 2, Kudoba, Oliver Sangster, Ben Flanagan. Assists: James
West 2, Sangster, Kudoba, Graham Mustard, Wagenknecht, McLeod, Steven Chambers.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 7 Waterloo Timberwolves 0

Kitchener: Kudoba 2, Sangster 2, McKay, D'Arsie, Dylan MacKinnon. Assists: McKay
3, Kudoba 2, Sangster, MacKinnon, West. Shutout: Andrew Masters.

Results for the gold-winning Waterloo Ice Wolves at the Motown Cup in Detroit
last weekend.

Waterloo Ice Wolves 7 Rochester Americans 3

Waterloo: Jordan Broberg 2, Owen Lownie 2, Joe Hennigar, Nick Palmer, Ryan
Scanlan. Assists: Wil Bulovas 2, James Ariss, Broberg, Jordan DaSilva-Roach,
Lownie, Palmer, Scanlan.

Waterloo Ice Wolves 6 Sylvania Sharptails 1

Waterloo: Lownie 3, Palmer 2, Keeley Hewton. Assists: Trent Jolly 2, Ariss 2,
Ryan Hebel, Joe Hennigar.

Waterloo Ice Wolves 3 Livonia Blues 2

Waterloo: Ryan Hebel, Hennigar, Scanlan. Assists: Lownie, Scanlan, Jack West.

Finals

Waterloo Ice Wolves 3 Livonia Blues 2 (OT)

Waterloo: Lownie, Hewton, Broberg. Assists: Jolly, West.

MINOR PEEWEE HOUSE LEAGUE

Results for Waterloo Alliance Roofing at the Ernie Clayton Memorial Tournament
in Welland.

Deli House Catering 3 Waterloo Alliance Roofing 2

Alliance Roofing: Grant Litt, Matthew Mitchell. Assists: Justin Cottrell, Andrew
Caruana, Luc Lauer.

Waterloo Alliance Roofing 15 Listowel Cyclones 0

Alliance Roofing: Ben Kingsley 5, Lauer 2, Litt 2, Jeremy Stirling 2, Daniel
Jones 2, Takuya Shibayama, Ryan Hamill. Assists: Jones 3, Shibayama 2, Jones 2,
Litt 2, Kingsley 2, Mitchell, Spencer Gough, Tyler Steers, Shawn Curik, Andrew
Caruana, Stirling, Lauer. Shutout: Devon Boehm.

Waterloo Alliance Roofing 11 Norwich Knighthawks 1

Alliance Roofing: Litt 3, Stirling 3, Jones, Kingsley 2, Lauer 2.

Assists: Shibayama 3, Devon Boehm, Hamill, Devon Boehm, Logan Rapp, Mitchell 2,
Kingsley, Andrew Caruana, Jones.

Quarter-final

Waterloo Alliance Roofing 6 Newmarket Optimists 5

Alliance Roofing: Kingsley 3, Litt 2, Lauer. Assists: Logan Rapp 2, Jones 2,
Litt, Caruana, Hamill, Tyler Steers, Kingsley.

Semifinal

Waterloo Alliance Roofing 5 Barrie Data Mirror Colts 2

Alliance Roofing: Shibayama 2, Litt 2, Lauer. Assists: Jones 2, Rapp 2, Kingsley
2, Lauer.

Final

Waterloo On-Site Group 9 Waterloo Alliance Roofing 1

On-Site Group: Brendan Butler 3, Michael Montag 2, Eric Vance 2, Conner Montag,
Darek Blackwell. Assists: Bryan Woods, Butler, Brendan Evans, Markus Lenizky,
Jason Kocher, Montag, Vance.

Alliance Roofing: Matthew Mitchell. Assists: Stirling, Justin Cottrell

MINOR BANTAM TRIPLE-A

Huron Perth 2 Kitchener 1

Kitchener: Mark Scheifele. Assists: Carlton Richard.

Kitchener 2 Hamilton 2

Kitchener: Max Reiber, Scheifele. Assists: Brett MacDonald, Alex Stoody, Brett
Clampitt, Phil Edgar.

Elgin Perth 4 Kitchener 1

Kitchener: Clampitt. Assists: Scheifele.

Kitchener 3 Cambridge 1

Kitchener: Edgar 2, Scheifele. Assists: Scheifele 2, Edgar, Josh Burlingham.

Cambridge: Brennon Pearce.

MINOR BANTAM MD

Waterloo Ice Wolves 3 Stratford 0

Waterloo: Eric Reikman, Jesse Anderson, Dustin Lake. Assist: Mark Jamieson 2,
Reikman, Stuart Bennette. Shutout: Alex Elliott.

MINOR BANTAM HOUSE LEAGUE

Kitchener Raiders 2 Kitchener Vipers 1

Raiders: Jeff Kent, David Remus. Assists: Quinn Hori, Michael Ingalls.

Vipers: Peter Lind. Assists: Simon Kienapple, Sean McNair.

Waterloo Sports Zone 5 Waterloo Gibson's TV 1

Sports Zone: Tyler Harper 2, Connor O'Kane, Martin Marchiori-Wong, Jesse Damsma.
Assists: Marchiori-Wong 2, Jamie Bauman.

Gibson's TV: Joshua Heppensrijdt. Assists: Kylar Rushton.

Zone Training 4 Dave FM 3

Zone Training: Matthew Cook 2, Patrick Reitzel, Christopher Morgan. Assists:
Justin Spreitzer, Corey McLaughlin, Patrick, Ian William Search.

Dave FM: Kyle Heibein, Stuart Burdett, Wil Pemberton. Assists: David McClanahan.

Kitchener Stingrays 4 Kitchener Vipers 2

Stingrays: Justin Whitelaw 2, Benji Travers, Jessie Lorbetski. Assists: Andrew
Zorgdrager, Zeff Carter-Allen, Kyle Flanagan.

Vipers: Ben Gelineau, Andrew DeAragon. Assists: Brandon Murch, Peter Lind.

Results for the Waterloo The Zone Training at the LMHA Thunder House League
Tournament.

Waterloo The Zone Training 6 LMHA Facca Fasteners 3

Waterloo: Colin Briscoe 2, Ian Search, Reitzel, Scott Rederer, Aaron Cressman.
Assists: Spreitzer 3, Morgan 2, Zackary Nodwell, Danny Freiburger, Cook.

Waterloo The Zone Training 6 Erindale PPG 4

Waterloo: Scott Rederer 4, Colin Briscoe, Patrick Reitzel. Assists: Chris Morgan
3, Justin Spreitzer, Ian Search.

Quarter-final

Waterloo The Zone Training 3 Port Credit Storm 0

Waterloo: Nodwell, Cook, Reitzel. Assists: Search, Spreitzer, Rederer, Morgan.

Semifinal

Lorne Park 3 Waterloo The Zone Training 0

MAJOR ATOM TRIPLE-A

Results for the Waterloo Wolves at the Peterborough Atom Liftlock Tournament.

Waterloo Wolves 3 Peterborough Petes 1

Waterloo: Steven Lorentz 2, Nick Ciulei. Assists: Nick Hehl, Kyle Harrington,
Lorentz.

Waterloo Wolves 5 Ottawa Valley Titans 0

Waterloo Goals: Lorentz 2, Ciulei, Matthew Lantz, Tanner Lamarche. Assists:
Brandon Lindberg, Hehl, Ciulei, Conner Kaminski, Harrington, Lantz. Shutout:
Ryan Hergott.

Waterloo Wolves 4 Quinte Red Devils 3

Waterloo: Lorentz 2, Lantz, Mark Lebold. Assists: Harrington, Lamarche, Kyle
Wood, Lindberg.

Final

Waterloo Wolves 3 Central Ontario Wolves 2

Waterloo: Lantz, Hehl, Sam Teidemann. Assists: Lorentz 2, Harrington, Ciulei.

Results for the Kitchener Jr. Rangers at the Preston Tournament.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 4 Mississauga 3

Kitchener: Ryan Maksymyk, Connor Cole, Evan Flanagan, Colin Schuringa. Assists:
Adam Kawalec, Schuringa, Eric Heffernan, Connor Cole.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 3 Richmond Hill 2

Kitchener: Kawalec, Benjamin Holowaty, Zachary Dybowski. Assists: Zachary
Dybowski, Schuringa, Flanagan.

Aurora 1 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 0

Huron Perth Lakers 3 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 2

Kitchener: Cole, Kawalec. Assists: Luke Gazzola, Brendan Valko.

MAJOR PEEWEE TRIPLE-A

Huron Perth Lakers 5 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 3

Kitchener: John Wilson, Tom Haley, Brock Campbell. Assists: Haley 2, Justin
Plant.

Brantford 99ers 4 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1

Kitchener: Jessie Diebold. Assists: Philip Moser, Haley.

Huron Perth Lakers 5 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 0

MAJOR PEEWEE MD

Kitchener Blue Rangers 9 Brantford Church St. 0

Kitchener: Nicholas Bischoff 3, Owen Rabethge, Syd Saunders, Ben Poort, Elgin
Fraser, Connor Stickle, Rueben Scott. Assists: Spencer Cave 5, Rabethge 4,
Stickle 2, Andre Auger 2, Thomas Aitkenhead, Bischoff, Poort, Adam Voll, Scott.
Shutout: Jeff Hagen.

Kitchener Blue Rangers 3 Waterloo Timber Wolves 3

Kitchener: Cave 2, Stickle. Assists: Bischoff 2, Saunders, Jordy Schneider,
Rueben Scott.

Waterloo: Scott Poetker, Holden Harris, Daniel Muter. Assists: Poetker, Mathew
Dietrich, Riley Askin.

Kitchener Blue Rangers 2 Cambridge Hawks 0

Kitchener: Schneider, Scott. Assists: Schneider. Shutout: Hagen.

MAJOR MIDGET TRIPLE-A

Waterloo Wolves 6 Elgin-Middlesex Chiefs 0

Waterloo: Eric Lekun, Phil Teri, Tye McGinn, Joe Anstett, Todd Scarrow, John
McIntyre. Assists: McGinn, Jordan Wolfe, Shawn Bechtloff, Todd Martin, Joe
Anstett, Mike Dunn, Craig England, Jordan Gartner. Shutout: Colin Breen.

Wolves 6 Brantford 99'rs 2

Waterloo: Scarrow 2, Kyle Wilhelm 2, Dunn, Lekun. Assists: Lekun 2, England 2,
Matt Horst, Tye McGinn, Shawn Bechtloff.

Results from the Kelowna, B.C., International Midget Hockey Tournament.

Waterloo Wolves 6 Peace River Royals 2

Waterloo: Jordan Gartner 3, Matt Horst, Tye McGinn, Todd Scarrow. Assists:
Scarrow, Jordan Wolfe, Brock Harper, Matt Horst, Joe Anstett, Eric Lekun,
McGinn, Shawn Bechtloff.

Waterloo 10 North East Alberta Panthers 4

Waterloo: Gartner 3, Anstett 2, Mike Dunn 2, Horst, Harper, Bechtloff. Assists:
Matt Volpini 4, Scarrow 3, Craig England 2, Gartner 2, Wolfe, Lekun, McGinn,
McIntyre, Dunn, Harper.

Waterloo 3 Kelowna Jr. Rockets 1

Waterloo: Gartner, Teri, Dunn. Assists: Bechtloff 2, Horst, Bauman, Gartner.

Waterloo 3 Westside B.C. Warriors 2 (SO)

Waterloo: Anstett 2, Lekun. Assists: McGinn 2, Harper, Lekun.

Waterloo 5 Notre Dame College 3

Waterloo: Lekun 2, Wolfe, Scarrow, England. Assists: McGinn 2, Gartner 2, Teri,
Dunn, Joe Anstett, Shawn Bechtloff, Mackenzie Bauman.

Semifinal

B.C. Juan de Fuca Grizzlies 6 Waterloo 1

Waterloo: Bechtloff. Assist: Mike Dunn.

Jordan Gartner of the Waterloo Wolves was named tournament MVP.

MINOR MIDGET DOUBLE-A

Cambridge Hawks 3 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1

Cambridge: Dylan Crawford, Shawn Little, Matt Doyle. Assists: Andy Swaniga 2,
Scott Thompson 2, Evan Clinansmith, Steven Filipovic.

Kitchener: Mike Fleming. Assists: Andrew Smith, Bobby Besant.

K-W SHUFFLEBOARD LEAGUE

GP W L PTS

Hardrocks 84 62 22 62

Zammies 91 59 32 59

AllStars 84 57 27 57

Brenda's Devils 84 54 30 54

Speedy's 84 53 31 53

Rural Route .08 84 53 31 53

Who Cares 84 41 43 41

Outbacks 91 41 50 41

Br 50 Rockers 77 34 43 34

412 Pucksters 77 29 48 29

Hackers 84 24 60 24

Wannabees 84 22 62 22

ANAF 77 17 60 17

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: NEWS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              517 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                           February 28, 2017 Tuesday

STUDY: PEOPLE START 84% OF U.S. WILDFIRES;
Climate change still a factor but humans lengthen fire season

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: ; Pg. Z3

LENGTH: 400 words


A building at the Westgate Smoky Mountain Resort goes up in flames during the
spate of wildfires that hit Gatlinburg, Tenn.

The horrific wildfire that scorched Gatlinburg, Tenn., in November, killing 14
people, was human-caused - and that's not unusual: Whether deliberate or
accidental, a whopping 84% of all wildfires in the U.S. are started by people,
says a new study.

The remaining 16% are started naturally, by lightning, according to the report,
one of the most comprehensive to date.

The study also found that humans have added almost three months to the national
fire season on average. "Thanks to people, the wildfire season is almost
year-round," said study lead author Jennifer Balch of the University of
Colorado. Humans also account for nearly half the acreage burned each year.

Balch and her study co-authors looked at 1.5 million wildfires from 1992 to 2012
and found that the human-ignited fire season was three times longer than the
lightning-ignited fire season and also added an average of 40,000 wildfires per
year.

"Fires are burning earlier in the spring in the Southeast and later in the fall
in the West," Balch said. Fighting wildfires in the U.S. has exceeded $2 billion
in recent years, the study said.

"Although considerable fire research in the United States has rightly focused on
increased fire activity (larger fires and more area burned) because of climate
change, we demonstrate that the expanded fire niche as a result of human-related
ignitions is equally profound," the study said.

Catastrophic fires have scorched the Western U.S. over the past decade. Several
states, such as Washington and California, have seen some of their largest
wildfires ever recorded.

"We have known for a long time that fires set by people are an extremely
important factor in wildfire problems, but this study shows in detail how
important people are in lengthening the fire season and contributing to
increasing numbers of large wildfires," said Thomas Swetnam of the University of
Arizona, who was not involved in this research.

It's not that people are becoming more careless or more arson is occurring, he
said. He said lightning-caused fires are increasing in the West because of
warming temperatures, earlier springs and droughts, which mean "that climate
change is still a primary driver of the trends."

The study appeared in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                              518 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 14, 2015 Saturday

SENATORS McCAIN, BARRASSO AND FLAKE REINTRODUCE LEGISLATION TO FULLY FUND
WILDFIRE SUPPRESSION AND BOOST PROACTIVE FOREST MANAGEMENT

LENGTH: 962  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator John McCain, U.S Government has issued the following news
release:

U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ), John Barrasso (R-WY), and Jeff Flake (R-AZ)
this week reintroduced the FLAME Act Amendments of 2015, legislation that would
allow for the full funding of wildland firefighting budgets for the U.S. Forest
Service and U.S. Department of the Interior, and dramatically increase resources
for forest restoration programs.

"Congress must fully fund our fire suppression needs, but to reduce wildfire
costs over time we must also thin our fire-prone forests," said Senator McCain.
"There are similar proposals in Congress that support fire suppression spending,
but they don't as clearly guarantee funding for forest treatment programs, put
an end to fire-borrowing, or promote the utility of private timber industry as
this legislation does. We need to end the current practice of throwing billions
of taxpayer dollars at wildfires year after year and begin to aggressively
manage our forests."

"It's crucial that our federal, state and local agencies have all the resources
they need to fight fires and ultimately save lives, homes and property across
Wyoming and the West," said Senator Barrasso. "We also must end the
unsustainable practice of 'fire-borrowing' and prioritize funding for active
management activities that will help prevent large scale forest fires in the
future. Our bill gives land managers the tools and resources they desperately
need to invest in hazardous fuels reduction and disease treatment projects. This
will go a long way in preventing forest fires and saving taxpayer dollars."

"This bill aims to get ahead of the massive wildfire threat that plagues
communities throughout the country by making fire suppression and proactive
forest management priorities," said Senator Flake. "Enacting this measure would
prohibit the crippling practice of fire borrowing, while responsibly budgeting
for wildfire management at levels commensurate with the size of the problem."

Rather than budgeting for wildfires using just 70 percent of a 10-year historic
average of suppression expenditures as the Obama Administration proposed in its
Fiscal Year 2015 budget request, this bill requires the Forest Service and the
Department of the Interior to budget for 100 percent of their suppression costs
using the most accurate budget forecast model available (known as the "FLAME
regression model"). The bill also would prohibit federal agencies from raiding
non-wildfire accounts to pay for wildfires, a practice known as
"fire-borrowing."

While the Administration's proposal would allow wildfire spending to
automatically exceed statutory budget caps on disaster funding, this legislation
would establish a limited process for accessing emergency funds in the event of
a catastrophic wildfire, while investing aggressively in suppression and forest
management programs. Finally, this bill would establish a streamlined
environmental review process to expedite forest treatment projects across 7.5
million acres of federal land and promote the use of private industry under
forest stewardship contracts. (See also: S. 1966, National Forest Jobs
Management Act of 2014 by Senator Barrasso as introduced in the 113th Congress
and S. 326, Stewardship Contracting Reauthorization and Improvement Act by
Senator Flake as introduced in the 114th Congress).

If this bill had been enacted for Fiscal Year 2015, the Forest Service could
have had on hand approximately $1.5 billion that the agency predicts is needed
this year to suppress wildfires compared to the $1.01 billion appropriated by
Congress. The Forest Service would also be allowed to access up to $1 billion in
emergency spending while dedicating at least $750 million for hazardous fuel
management under the Healthy Forest Restoration Act, landscape-scale forest
restoration, addressing insect infested areas, and promoting timber projects on
Indian reservations.

SUMMARY OF McCAIN-BARRASSO-FLAKE WILDFIRE BILL

Prohibits Forest Service and the Interior Department from "fire-borrowing" from
all accounts not connected to wildfire management.

Requires FS/DOI to use the best available budget forecast model to plan its
wildfire season and fully fund its suppression operations at 100 percent.
Currently, FS uses a 10-year historic average of past wildfire spending to
predict its future needs, which isn't keeping pace with the increase in size and
cost of wildfires.

Establishes a narrowly tailored process to access emergency funds in the event
of a catastrophic wildfire that exhausts suppression accounts, but also requires
Appropriators to invest in hazardous fuels reduction projects and insect disease
treatment projects.

In order to access this emergency process for catastrophic wildfires, two things
must happen: (1) 100 percent of the suppression needs must be funded; and (2) a
number equal to 50 percent of the suppression costs must go to hazardous fuel
reduction projects like those authorized under the Healthy Forest Restoration
Act (HFRA) of 2003, the Tribal Forests Protection Act, and landscape scale
forest restoration.

Incentivizes more funding to the HFRA (which is authorized at $760 million a
year) to prevent future wildfires near rural communities and bring down forest
suppression costs over the long term.

Requires Forest Service to treat 7.5 million acres of federal land designated as
"Forest Management Emphasis Areas" within 15 years under an expedited
environmental review process.

Promotes the use of private industry to help the Forest Service to thin our
forests by enhancing existing forest stewardship contracting law.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              519 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                     PR.com

                     November 5, 2016 Saturday 6:30 AM EST

Wildfire-Related Fatality Reported in Montgomery County

BYLINE: Mississippi Forestry Commission

LENGTH: 847  words


Jackson, MS,  November 05, 2016 --(PR.com)-- One wildfire-related fatality has
been reported in Montgomery County. The Mississippi Forestry Commission (MFC)
would like to express our deepest condolences to those affected by the tragic
incident.

On October 27, 2016, MFC wildland firefighters were called to suppress a
wildfire. It appears that a Private Landowner engaged in agricultural field
burning while his county was under a burn ban. The burn ban was issued due to
extreme drought conditions in the area. The fire escaped his control and became
a wildfire, which started to spread quickly. During his efforts to suppress the
wildfire, an event occurred which allowed the fire to overtake him. An
investigation into the incident is ongoing at this time.

This incident brings to light the importance of adhering to all burn bans
statewide. In Mississippi, 69 out of 82 counties remain under burn bans. The
Governor's partial state level burn ban, which offers no exemptions, and all
individual county burn bans remain in effect through the weekend.

To see a complete list of burn bans in Mississippi, please visit:
www.mfc.ms.gov/burn-bans

In September and October, the Mississippi Forestry Commission responded to and
suppressed 732 wildfires that burned 6,525 acres. During this time, 1,103
structures were threatened by wildfire activity and saved by MFC Wildland
Firefighters. 38 structures were damaged or destroyed.

"We are deeply saddened by the news from Montgomery County," said Charlie
Morgan, State Forester. "Wildfires can start with just a spark and spread
quickly to endanger forestland, homes, and lives. Please do your part to help
prevent wildfires by observing local burn bans and exercising proper fire
safety."

When a burn ban is in effect, it means no outdoor burning is allowed. Burn ban
restrictions include campfires, bonfires, fire pits, fire rings, fireworks, burn
barrels, brush piles, debris burning, field burning - anything that produces an
ember has the potential to start a wildfire. The wind can carry floating embers
away from the original fire and start a spot fire up to one-half mile away from
the burning area.

Any person who knowingly and willfully violates a burning ban is guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be fined not less than $100 and not more than $500. Fines
are enforced by the local Sheriff's Department. Anyone that sets a fire is
responsible for that fire and the smoke generated by that fire. If a fire
escapes and burns or damages the lands/property of another, the person that set
that fire is liable for those damages.

Propane/ gas grills, propane/ gas heaters, and charcoal grills are allowed under
burn bans. These devices do not produce an ember when they are in use. They
should be used as described by their manufacturer's instructions, located safely
away from combustible materials, and never left unattended.

Safety tip: Charcoal grill briquettes can be dangerous if they are not disposed
of properly after use. Always let the coals cool completely and douse in water
before disposing of them in a metal container. The residual ash should be cold
to the touch before disposal. The MFC has responded to wildfires in the past
started by improperly disposing of charcoal grill ash.

Wildfire prevention tips:

Find out if there is a burn ban in effect for your area before burning. For a
complete list of burn bans, visit: www.mfc.ms.gov/burn-bans

Check the local weather forecast - do not burn on dry, windy days. The wind
carries embers long distances, which can cause spot fires as far away as
one-half mile from the burning area.

The same preventive measures apply when using charcoal grills. When you are
finished using a charcoal grill, always let the coals cool completely and douse
in water before disposing of them in a metal container. Never leave a grill
unattended.

To report a wildfire, dial 911 or call the Central Dispatch Center for your
area, visit: www.mfc.ms.gov/wildfire-report

Nationwide, nine out of ten wildfires are caused by people and could have been
prevented with proper care. Please do your part to help prevent wildfire
activity by checking burn bans and weather conditions before doing any outdoor
recreational burning.

Established in 1926, the Mississippi Forestry Commission (MFC) protects the
state's valuable forest resources from wildfire, manages approximately 480,000
acres of forested School Trust Land, and delivers quality forest management
services and assistance to both rural and urban landowners. Our mission is to
provide active leadership in forest protection, forest management, forest
inventory, and effective forest information distribution, necessary for
Mississippi's sustainable forest-based economy.

There are approximately 19.8 million forested acres in Mississippi. The forestry
and forest products industry has a $12.3 billion economic impact on the state of
Mississippi and represents almost 70,000 jobs.

Resources:

Mississippi Forestry Commission Website - www.mfc.ms.gov

Mississippi Forestry Commission Contact

Brighton Forester

bforester@mfc.state.ms.us

(601) 359-2821; (601) 500-0489

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


               Copyright 2016 PR.com, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              520 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The Columbian (Vancouver, Washington)

                           November 2, 2017 Thursday

House OKs forest bill, but support is minimal

BYLINE: Katy Sword Columbian staff writer

SECTION: POLITICS LOCAL; Pg. a1

LENGTH: 748 words


White House opposes it as is; lawmakers agree wildfire funding flawed
There's an internal congressional battle for wildfire management reform. The
long-standing battle progressed Wednesday as the U.S. House approved the
Resilient Federal Forests Act with a vote of 232 to 188.

The bill expands access to logging and exempts 30,000 acres of annual forest
land activity from environmental review, refers federal Endangered Species Act
lawsuits to an arbitrator in lieu of a courtroom and allows the U.S. Forest
Service to use disaster funding to fight fires if earmarked funding runs out.
Local lawmakers agree: Something needs to be done to fix wildfire funding. But
support for the Resilient Federal Forests Act is minimal. The White House
doesn't support the bill as is, according to a statement released Wednesday.
The administration stated that it supports land management reforms outlined in
the bill, but not the revisions to the Stafford Act, "which would force
competition for funding between wildfires on Federal land and other disasters
already covered by the Stafford Act, including hurricanes," the statement read.
This isn't the first time the Resilient Act has been introduced. The bill was
first brought forward in 2015, when it passed in the House but died in the
Senate. This time, the number of logging acres with categorical exclusions is
up to 30,000, from a previously proposed 15,000. And the first 10,000 acres of
clearcutting are exempt from public consideration, up from 5,000 acres in the
2015 version.
Rep. Jaime Herrera
Beutler, R-Battle Ground, voted in favor of the bill both times.
"With the recent wildfires that drove people from their homes and scorched the
habitat of countless endangered species, we are unfortunately reaping what was
sown through 20-plus years of failed forest management,"
Herrera Beutler
said. "Skamania County was once the envy of other counties; now it struggles to
pay for basic police protection and essential school services, and we have
diseased forests and declining wildlife numbers to show for it. The bipartisan
bill we passed today begins to reform this complete mismanagement of our
forests in a manner that focuses on healthier ecosystems while preserving
environmental safeguards."
She added that legislators can either "have another wildfire season like this
last one that is estimated to have emitted as much carbon from the California
fires as every car in that state combined last year," or move forward to
protect the national forest system.
Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wash., agreed that Congress needs to address the growing
threat of wildfires and do more to protect local communities.
"Which is why I'm fighting for bipartisan bills that emphasize prevention and
improving forest health," Murray said. "What I won't support is legislation
that not only fails to establish long-term solutions, but would also upend our
bedrock environmental laws in the process."
Sen. Maria Cantwell, D-Wash., is also against the bill.
"The House bill would lead to clearcutting our forests and lead to post-fire
work that would cause flooding," Cantwell said. "Further, much of this bill
focuses on the salvage logging to happen after a wildfire. A smarter approach
is to be proactive - to restore our most at-risk forests with better management
ahead of wildfires."
Murray and Cantwell instead favor the Wildland Fires Act and Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act.
The Wildland Fires Act, introduced by Cantwell in October, provides up to $100
million in funding for at-risk communities to plan and prepare for wildfires
and emphasizes prescribed fire to prevent future wildfires.
"Our bipartisan senate bill has all six senators from Washington, Oregon, and
Idaho, who support reducing fire risk upfront and reduces costs," Cantwell
said.
Meanwhile, the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act attempts to fix fire funding
issues. The U.S. Forest Service has to borrow funding from other parts of their
budgets if allocated fire funding runs out. The bill creates a new budget for
wildfire suppression, starting at $1.4 billion for fiscal year 2017 and
increasing to nearly $2.7 billion in fiscal year 2026. The percentage of the
forest service budget allocated to fighting wildfires would also be capped.
Budget allocations are currently calculated using the average cost of wildfire
suppression over the last 10 years.
Both bills await a vote in the Senate before moving to the House.
Katy Sword: 360-735-4534;
katy.sword@columbian.com
 Twitter: twitter.com/katysword

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 The Columbian Publishing Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              521 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                 The Irish News

                             June 22, 2017 Thursday

Joint probe into deliberate wildfires

BYLINE: Suzanne McGonagle, s.mcgonagle@irishnews.com

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 338 words


A new joint operation has been launched to investigate hundreds of wildfires
started deliberately in Northern Ireland's countryside.

There were almost 1,000 gorse fires across the north in May alone with more than
90 per cent of the blazes started deliberately.

Operation WildFire brings together experts from the environment agency, police
and fire and rescue service to investigate recent wildfires, which spread
rapidly due to the dry ground conditions, putting the public, property,
firefighters and important habitats and species at risk.

It aims to determine the origin of a number of recent fires and their causes
with the help of international wildfire investigators from the European Forest
Institute and European Forest Risk Facility.

Colum McDaid from the environment agency said the investigation of wildfires was
"key to catching arsonists, and can be critical in identifying serial arsonists
before they can move on to bigger targets".

"The law states that burning of vegetation such as heather, gorse, whin or fern
must not be carried out between 15 April and 31 August, and only carried out at
other times of the year under controlled and expert supervision."

Constable Darryl Johnston said "wildfires are illegal and the deliberate setting
of wildfires is a criminal offence".

"We hope to use the Operation Wildfire investigations to determine the cause and
origin of a number of the recent fires with the ultimate aim of serving in court
cases and deterring arsonists," he said.

Mark Smyth of the fire service said more than 90 per cent of the gorse fires in
May alone were started deliberately.

"Given the nature of the fires and their rapid spread, identifying the exact
origin and cause of the fire while actively fighting the fires has been
difficult," he said.

"We look forward to working alongside our partner agencies and the wildfire
investigators from the European Forest Risk Facility as we visit the sites of
some of the larger gorse fires we dealt with including Slieve Beagh in Clogher
and Mullaghcarn in Omagh."

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 The Irish News Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              522 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                            August 9, 2014 Saturday
                                  Main Edition

Shift spending, reduce wildfires

BYLINE: Jay O'Laughlin<br>

SECTION: A; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 708 words


Guest opinion

Guest opinion: Preventive measures can reduce size of wildfires

By Jay O'Laughlin

Remember the TV commercial for Fram oil filters? A mechanic disassembling an
automobile engine looks up and says, "You can pay me now or pay me later." In
other words, paying a little bit every so often to replace the engine oil and
filter avoids the high cost of an engine overhaul later.

As with engines, forests require maintenance. The American West is indeed paying
for our lack of action earlier, as not enough preventive maintenance on federal
forests is flaring up in large-scale wildfires. Although more than 98 percent of
all wildfires are effectively controlled while they are small, the few that get
away are becoming bigger and having more severe effects. For example, the
Carlton Complex fire in Central Washington has burned more than 400 square
miles, destroyed more than 150 homes, and cost (so far) more than $20 million as
crews attempt to get it under control.

Drought, climate change and the impact of insects and disease have been and will
continue to add to an increasingly unsustainable situation.

A primary cause of the increased magnitude and intensity of wildfire is the
unnatural overstocked conditions on our lands. Overly aggressive wildfire
suppression activities coupled with more recent reductions in active forest
management on public lands have increased the volume of fuels that lead to large
fires and subsequent loss of a range of goods and services. According to the
Society of American Foresters, the trend toward larger wildfires can be reversed
by stepping up the pace and scale of management activities, especially hazardous
fuels treatments, to restore fire-adapted forest landscapes.

On federal lands in Washington where active management can be used,
approximately one acre of every three needs restoration treatment. In Idaho,
approximately one acre of every four in the state needs treatment.

The primary mechanism to avoid large wildfires is hazardous fuel reduction, a
form of vegetation management that also maintains or improves forest health
conditions. Expenditures for wildfire suppression, necessary as they are, far
exceed expenditures for vegetation management. Worse, in big fire years,
vegetation management projects on public lands are canceled in order to provide
additional firefighting funds. The high level of suppression expenditures is not
sustainable, and vegetation management activities are falling further behind
what is needed to improve the problems associated with large wildfires.

A recent report from Northern Arizona University highlights the role and
effectiveness of fuel reduction treatments in reducing the severity and costs of
wildland fire with a few simple points:

In many forest ecosystems, restoration treatments can reduce fire severity and
tree mortality in the face of wildfire, and also increase carbon storage over
the long term.

Fuel reduction treatments applied at a larger scale will be more likely to
modify subsequent fire behavior, thus decreasing the size and suppression costs
of future wildfires.

Fuel treatments applied only near human communities will result in areas of
unchanged crown fire potential across the untreated landscape, leaving forests
vulnerable to large, severe and expensive landscape-scale fires that will
persist without restoration treatments.

We have a choice. Pay a little now to reduce hazardous fuels, or pay a lot more
later to battle big wildfires. Vegetation management is, after all, a triple
win. Not only is future wildfire behavior modified, thereby protecting wildlife
habitat as well as air and water quality, but we can use the removed material to
make useful products, including energy (the University of Idaho, for example,
heats its Moscow campus with wood residues from local sawmills), and the
management activities put people to work in our rural communities.

By contacting your legislators and urging preventive maintenance on federal
lands, you can help land managers get the budgets they need to help protect
firefighters and our communities by reducing fuel loads so that landscapes are
more resilient to fire.

Jay O'Laughlin, Ph.D., is a professor of forestry and policy sciences at the
University of Idaho.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2014 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                              523 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            July 27, 2016 Wednesday

Hawaii: DLNR NEWS RELEASE: Community wildfire protection plans now address 3 new
wildfire  prone regions of Maui Nui

LENGTH: 608  words



 Honolulu: David Y. lge Governor of the State of Hawaii, The State of Hawaii has
issued the following news release:



  Three new Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs) for Maui County will be
signed on Friday, July 29, 2016 at 1:00 p.m. at the Maui Fire Department's
Prevention Building. The plans cover Upcountry Maui, South Maui, and all of
Molokai. Three government agencies worked with the Hawaii Wildfire Management
Organization (HWMO), a local non-profit that coordinates wildfire protection
activities in and around communities and wildlands, to develop the CWPPs.





 David Smith, Administrator for the Department of Land and Natural Resources'
Division of Forestry and Wildlife (DLNR-DOFAW), Anna Foust, Emergency Management
Officer for the Maui County Civil Defense Agency, and Maui Fire Department Fire
Chief, Jeffrey Murray, will be signing the plans.



 The CWPP process offers a nationally-recognized process to gather people living
and working in wildfire-prone areas and put their fire-related concerns and
proposed solutions in one place.  CWPPs assist a community in identifying and
prioritizing areas for hazardous fuel reduction treatments and supports
communities to take action.  The plans assess values at risk such as safety,
natural resource protection, recreation, scenic values, and economic assets.



 Through a collaborative process involving input from community members,
resource management and firefighting agencies, and a variety of other interested
parties, CWPPs help bring wildfire hazard information and planning and action
opportunities to all parties. These plans are becoming increasingly important in
Hawaii, which faces unique wildfire threats that are becoming more challenging
due to increasing ignitions, drought episodes and land use changes. Wildfires
have great impacts on Maui Nui residents and natural resources, affecting:



     Daily life (road closures, traffic, evacuations, post-fire flooding, tax
payer dollars);

     Human health and safety (dust, smoke, water quality, burned homes and
structures, resident and firefighter safety);

     Ecosystem health and resilience (watersheds, forests, coral reefs,
fisheries).



 A collaborative process that involves representation from every level is
critical towards mitigating wildfire issues. CWPP process participants included
representatives from government agencies, non-profits, small businesses,
homeowners, and other local organizations.  These plans are already catalyzing
communities into action.  Some are now working with the Hawaii Wildfire
Management Organization to become Firewise-certified. The CWPPs will also allow
communities and organizations to apply for federal funding for wildfire
prevention and preparedness activities such as public outreach & education and
vegetative fuels management.



 "In a time of increasing fires, the CWPPs offer a clear pathway forward to
greater protection based on the priorities of people living and working in the
affected areas.  Signing into effect these three new CWPPs in Maui County marks
an important turning point for fire prevention and mitigation across the County
of Maui. It brings us closer to being able to implement critical wildfire
mitigation projects over the coming years," explains Elizabeth Pickett,
Executive Director of Hawaii Wildfire Management Organization and lead planner
for the CWPPs. "They will be useful tools for residents, land managers,
firefighters, planners, and elected officials for helping make Maui Nui's
neighborhoods and natural areas fire-safe."



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              524 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 13, 1998 Tuesday

Phone services that track you down  Voice recognition enables Wildfire and
Webleyto be personal aides

BYLINE: GRANT BUCKLER Special to The Globe and Mail; SPCL

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS SPECIAL REPORT; TELECOMMUNICATIONS; Pg. C6

LENGTH: 824 words


When Trevor Welby-Solomon gets a phone call, or makes one, he can be just about
anywhere -- even on the roof of a building.

Mr. Welby-Solomon is president of Ontario's Provincial Association of Certified
Home Inspectors, and secretary of a similar national association.

Home inspectors -- whose job is checking over houses on behalf of prospective
buyers -- are mostly self-employed and "you're on the move all the time," Mr.
Welby-Solomon says. So he needs help dealing with the many phone calls he
handles -- and he gets it from an automated assistant called Wildfire.

The service, from Wildfire Communications, Inc. of Lexington, Mass., answers
telephone calls and routes them to wherever the recipient is. It -- or she, if
you prefer, since Wildfire talks in a female voice -- can also look up telephone
numbers and place calls, play back messages and set up conference calls.

Mr. Welby-Solomon likes the conference calling especially. To do association
business, he likes to be able to set up a five-person conference call "on the
fly" from wherever he is -- and the cost is lower than doing it through the
phone company, he says.

The ability to look up a phone number and place a call is handy, too. Wildfire
uses speech recognition technology. So a subscriber can dial the service and say
something like "Call John Smith at home" and Wildfire will retrieve the number
from the caller's personal data base and place the call.

That's useful for those who are on the move, since, as Mr. Welby-Solomon says,
when "you happen to be on the roof of a building and you need to do something,
you don't always have your phone directory."

Wildfire is not the only electronic phone assistant that aims to make it easier
for constant travellers to receive and make calls and deal with messages.
Another is Webley, from Webley Systems Inc., of Deerfield, Ill.

Like Wildfire, Webley answers your calls and routes them to where you have told
it you will be. Instead of Wildfire's female voice, Webley has the plummy voice
of a proper English butler.

One of the beauties of both services is that you can tell them where to find you
so that your callers don't need to know. Your contacts call one number, and the
automated assistant answers. It then puts the call through to you at your
office, on your cell phone, in your hotel room in Chicago, your home, a client's
office -- wherever you have told it you will be.

"There's basically no worry about receiving phone calls," says Tom Delibassis, a
partner in Compendium Holding Corp. in Toronto, an on-line retailing consultancy
that uses Wildfire.

The two services handle incoming calls much the same way, but Webley approaches
the question of helping you make calls while on the move rather differently from
Wildfire.

While Wildfire stores a directory of phone numbers and lets you make calls using
voice commands, the Webley service includes access to a personal World Wide Web
page where you can store data, including a contact list. This means you need
access to a computer to look up a phone number you don't happen to have with
you.

Webley, on the other hand, lets you check your electronic mail -- either through
your personal Web page or on the phone by having Webley read it to you.

You can even reply to E-mail over the telephone, explains Hal Poel, senior
vice-president of products and marketing at Webley. Rather than risk relying on
today's unpredictable speech-recognition technology, Webley simply sends your
reply as a digitized voice message.

The recipient needs speakers and RealAudio -- audio add-on software for Web
browsers that can be downloaded free from the Internet -- to listen to your
message.

Wildfire is available in two forms: directly to corporate customers and, more
recently, through Bell Mobility, which is initially offering it only in the
Toronto area.

For a company, a basic subscription to Wildfire costs $125 a month, says Dan
Melymuk, president of ThinApse Corp., which resells the service in Canada, and
there are usage charges on top of that. Packages are available that provide
unlimited usage for $199 per month.

Bell Mobility offers the service for $20 a month, plus $3 for the call-routing
feature, with no additional usage charges except normal long-distance fees if
you contact it from outside your home calling area. The basic fee allows you to
store 50 contact names and numbers; you can add as many as 100 more at $3 per
month for a block of 50.

Webley is aimed at individual users, and priced accordingly. The basic service
costs $9.95 (U.S.) a month, Mr. Poel says, which does not include the E-mail
access or the ability to receive and forward faxes. Each of those additional
features costs an extra $3 a month, or you can have both for $5, making a total
monthly bill of $14.95.

Then there's a charge of 15 cents a minute for all the time you spend connected
to Webley -- but, Mr. Poel notes, you don't pay long-distance charges when
returning calls through the service.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1998 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              525 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Abbotsford News

                             July 18, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Aussies are on the way to battle BC fires

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 481 words


Firefighters have come from across Canada to help B.C. battle one its worst fire
years on record and now more support is on the way, courtesy of Australia.

The B.C. government reports a contingent of specialized wildfire personnel from
Australia will be coming to B.C. to assist with wildfire response.

"About 50 wildfire personnel, including a combination of officers and technical
specialists, are scheduled to arrive in Vancouver on Wednesday, July 19,"
reports the BC Wildfire Service.

"These personnel will be deployed throughout the province, based on current and
anticipated wildfire activity. They could remain in B.C. for up to 38 days."

The province says the Australians' expertise will help maintain the BC Wildfire
Service's 'high success rate for containing new fires'.

They also will augment the response to existing fires by allowing B.C. personnel
to take mandatory days off so they can begin another cycle of fire suppression
operations.

British Columbia has fostered a mutually beneficial wildfire management
relationship with Australia for more than 10 years and has a resource-sharing
agreement in place with the State of Victoria.

This agreement allows for the exchange of personnel, knowledge, skills,
equipment, technology and mutual support in the event of an emergency. The cost
of bringing in the Australians will be covered by the Province of B.C.

Wildland fire personnel from B.C. were deployed to Australia in 2007 and 2009 to
help respond to busy fire seasons there, since the height of the Australian fire
season typically occurs during B.C.'s winter and spring months. Personnel from
Australia also were deployed to B.C. to assist with firefighting efforts in
2009, 2014 and 2015.

"These personnel will join more than 1,600 provincial staff, 940 B.C.
contractors and over 450 out-of-province personnel already actively engaged in
fire suppression in British Columbia," adds the wildfire service.

"Hot and dry weather conditions have once again elevated the fire danger rating
throughout the province. Most of B.C. is currently experiencing a "high" to
"extreme" fire danger rating, which means that forest fuels are easily ignited.
Firefighting crews are on standby in all six of B.C.'s fire centres in
preparation for an anticipated increase in fire starts over the next few days."

The BC Wildfire Service has responded to 657 wildfires so far this season. About
half of these fires were caused by lightning and serve as a reminder that as
lightning activity increases, extra caution is needed to prevent person-caused
wildfires. Each person-caused fire diverts critical resources away from
lightning-caused fires.

Report a wildfire or unattended campfire by calling 1 800 663-5555 toll-free or
*5555 on a cellphone.

For the latest information on current wildfire activity, burning restrictions,
road closures and air quality advisories, go to: http://www.bcwildfire.ca

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              526 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                  Edmonton Sun

                          September 20, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Fewer wildfires this year

BYLINE: Shawn Logan, Edmonton Sun

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A43

LENGTH: 324  words


Despite a sizzling summer that left much of the province tinder dry, Alberta
largely dodged a bullet when it comes to devastating wildfires, registering far
fewer in 2017 than normal.

Coming off a pair of particularly rough years for wildfires in Alberta,
including last year's Fort McMurray firestorm that scorched 600,000 hectares and
forced 88,000 people to flee their homes, the province this year has recorded
237 fewer fires in its Wildfire Management Areas compared with the five-year
average of 1,391.

While two of Alberta's largest blazes this year - the late-summer Kenow fire
that swept through Waterton Lakes National Park and the stubborn Verdant Creek
fire near Banff - occurred on federal land, even when combined with wildfires in
Alberta Wildfire Management Areas, the amount of land burned was a mere fraction
of the area charred in the previous two years.

Alberta Wildfire spokeswoman Melissa Crawford said a combination of luck, timing
and legislative changes prompted by last year's massive Fort McMurray blaze may
have spared the province a more devastating fire season.

"We actually had some pretty helpful weather conditions this year and we've also
implemented some legislative changes that have helped," Crawford said.

As of Tuesday morning, the province was still battling 17 wildfires in Wildfire
Management Areas throughout Alberta, while the Kenow and Verdant Creek fires
were both considered to be held.

To date, some 45,400 hectares of Alberta Crown land has been lost to wildfires,
though that number doesn't include the combined 55,000 hectares scorched between
the Kenow and Verdant Creek fires. Even so, it's a far cry from the 611,000
hectares of provincial Crown land burned in 2016, and the 471,000 hectares in
the previous year.

After the Fort McMurray blaze, the province hiked fines for people who ignore
fire bans from $5,000 to as high as $100,000. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Sun Media
Corporation. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2017 Edmonton Sun
                              All Rights Reserved


                              527 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    Prince George Citizen (British Columbia)

                             May 12, 2012 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire threat returns to northern Alberta

BYLINE: Canadian Press

SECTION: NEWS; News in Brief; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 165 words

DATELINE: EDMONTON


(CP) -- As people in Slave Lake prepare to mark the one-year anniversary of
wildfires that ravaged the town, the threat of new wildfires in the region was
listed as extreme Friday.

Alberta fire officials say the forests north of Edmonton are bone-dry, trees and
grass haven't greened up, humidity is low and winds are strong and gusty.

The combination of factors means the potential in the northern half of the
province for wildfires ranges from high, to very-high to extreme, Geoffrey
Driscoll, a wildfire information officer, said Friday.

"Those types of conditions are really ripe for strong and big wildfires,"
Driscoll said. "If a wildfire does start in a lot of these areas it can grow
really big, really fast."

That is exactly what happened last May when wildfires, whipped by high winds,
tore through the town of Slave Lake northwest of Edmonton, destroying more than
500 homes and buildings and forcing thousands of people to flee to safety.
Damage is estimated at close to $1 billion.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News; Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 Prince George Citizen
                              All Rights Reserved


                              528 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                 Network World

                          November 14, 2012, Wednesday

Palo Alto Networks aspires to anti-malware defense role with WildFire;
But can the next-generation firewall vendor meet the demands around BYOD mobile
devices?

BYLINE: Ellen Messmer

LENGTH: 909 words


LAS VEGAS -- Palo Alto Networks wants its next-generation firewall to be the
center of enterprise security, giving ita malware-detection and analysis
capability called WildFire that's intended to inspect all traffic passing
through the firewall to detect targeted attacks within 30 minutes.

"The firewall is the most pervasive network security device you have," said Lee
Klarich, vice president of product management at Palo Alto Networks, in his
presentation on the array of new Palo Alto next-generation products released
this week, including its first virtualized next-generation firewall. But here at
Palo Alto's first customer conference, called Ignite, the company made it clear
it also wants to be a significant player in malware detection, too, with its
WildFire cloud-based service intended to identify targeted zero-day
malware-based attacks at Palo Alto customers.

BACKGROUND: Palo Alto Networks targets VMware shops with virtualized next-gen
firewall WildFire was introduced as a free service for customers with Palo Alto
NGFWs to monitor for what could be zero-day malware attacks. WildFire is now
ready to not just monitor for detection but also ready to block malware, too.
It's now being offered under a subscription-based service, Klarich said.

"It has to be preventative. If all we're do is tell you something bad happened,
you have to close it down, you'll stop using it," he said.

The WildFire malware-detection component resides in the NGFW to look at all the
traffic passing through and make a copy of executables to send to a cloud-based
service that within a few minutes will analyze it and, if it's deemed malicious,
save it and notify the security manager.

But WildFire isn't necessarily going to catch things on the first try.

"At first the file goes through," said Wade Williamson, senior security analyst
at Palo Alto. The idea is to determine as quickly as possible a targeted attack
and generate a custom signature to prevent specific malware zero days in the
future.

However, since targeted attacks today often are made with rapid malware changes
made by attackers, it's a question if WildFire can keep up with a bombardment,
or if security manages will always be looking in the rear-view mirror.

WildFire technology is being used already by Palo Alto customers, among them
Concord Hospital. Conference attendee Mark Starry, director of architecture and
security at Concord Hospital, said WildFire has detected a few attacks, although
from time to time the technology may simply result in false positives.
Nevertheless, the healthcare organization, which has migrated over the past few
years from competing firewall products to use of the Palo Alto application-aware
firewalls, finds WildFire to be well worthwhile as an additional
threat-detection tool.

Klarich said 973 Palo Alto NGFW customers now use WildFire, and over the past
year, WildFire has scanned millions of files passing through customer networks,
finding nearly 170,000 of them were malware, and 69,111 of these were zero-day
malware not detected by the host antivirus companies at the time.

Klarich further piled on the antivirus vendors, saying days go by and still the
A/V vendors don't have coverage for 40% of the malware Palo Alto is finding. But
it's the first 24 hours that are important to respond to any attack that
penetrates into the corporate network, he said.

In spite of its tough words for antivirus vendors, Palo Alto says it regards
WildFire as an addition to network defense, not a substitute for antivirus
software. Klarich acknowledged WildFire still remains an evolving
threat-detection service.

Palo Alto's stance is that its NGFW can and should be the cornerstone for an
expanding wide range of defense based on application-aware controls and features
such as URL and reputation-based filtering, which Palo Alto this week said it is
now doing based on its own research and development, rather than relying on
third-party licensing.

But in an age where companies are now trying to come to grips with the influx of
mobile devices, including Google Android and Apple iOS smartphones and tablets,
often in situations where employees are allowed to "bring your own device," it's
a question how successful a strategy can be that relies on pushing traffic
through corporate firewalls to meet security policies.

Palo Alto does have client software called GlobalProtect for Windows and Mac
computers that can direct remote traffic to the firewall for application-aware
security, and versions for Apple iOS and Google Android that connect via IPsec.

Mike Dundas, senior manager, security architecture at TD Bank, who yesterday
spoke at the Ignite user conference about the bank's global rollout and
centralized management of Palo Alto NGFWs, pointed out the application-aware
firewalls are playing a key role in understanding if TD Bank is being attacked.
But he acknowledged his firm is grappling with the BYOD question.

"We're just exploring BYOD," Dundas noted, adding that the bank does use some
tablets. TD Bank is not using the Palo Alto software but that's under
consideration, as well as using another vendor's mobile-device management
software. Next year will be when TD Bank wants to finalize its security approach
to BYOD and mobile, said Dundas.

Ellen Messmer is senior editor at Network World, an IDG publication and website,
where she covers news and technology trends related to information security.
Twitter: @MessmerE. Email: emessmer@nww.com




LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter


                       Copyright 2012 Network World, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              529 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                          September 20, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Early Edition

Alberta mostly dodged wildfire threat this year

BYLINE: Shawn Logan, Calgary Herald

SECTION: CITY; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 432 words


Despite a sizzling summer that left much of the province tinder dry, Alberta
largely dodged a bullet when it comes to devastating wildfires, registering far
fewer in 2017 than normal.

Coming off a pair of particularly rough years for wildfires in Alberta,
including last year's Fort McMurray firestorm that scorched 600,000 hectares and
forced 88,000 people to flee their homes, the province this year has recorded
237 fewer fires in its Wildfire Management Areas compared with the five-year
average of 1,391.

While two of Alberta's largest blazes this year - the late-summer Kenow fire
that swept through Waterton Lakes National Park and the stubborn Verdant Creek
fire near Banff - occurred on federal land, even when combined with wildfires in
Alberta Wildfire Management Areas, the amount of land burned was a mere fraction
of the area charred in the previous two years.

Alberta Wildfire spokeswoman Melissa Crawford said a combination of luck, timing
and legislative changes prompted by last year's massive Fort McMurray blaze may
have spared the province a more devastating fire season.

"We've gotten quite lucky this year," Crawford said. "We actually had some
pretty helpful weather conditions this year and we've also implemented some
legislative changes that have helped."

As of Tuesday morning, the province was still battling 17 wildfires in Wildfire
Management Areas throughout Alberta, while the Kenow and Verdant Creek fires
were both considered to be held.

To date, some 45,400 hectares of Alberta Crown land has been lost to wildfires,
though that number doesn't include the combined 55,000 hectares scorched between
the Kenow and Verdant Creek fires. Even so, it's a far cry from the 611,000
hectares of provincial Crown land burned in 2016, and the 471,000 hectares in
the previous year.

After the Fort McMurray blaze, the province hiked fines for people who ignore
fire bans from $5,000 to as high as $100,000. Corporations that once would have
to pay as little as $5,000 may now face a penalty of $1 million.

Crawford said after the fines were increased in February, the province has
noticed significantly more compliance during fire bans, something the province
believes may have helped reduce the fire threat.

She added that lessons learned in the aftermath of Fort McMurray prompted the
province to take another look at its fire prevention strategies. "We put a lot
of prevention resources in place and that helped lower the number of fires this
year," Crawford said. slogan@postmedia.com On Twitter: @ShawnLogan403
!@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Parks Canada; A combination of luck, timing and legislative changes may
have spared the province a more devastating fire season.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Calgary Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              530 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                            March 8, 2017 Wednesday

Haze problem worsens in North as many provinces hit by wildfires

BYLINE:

LENGTH: 983 words


MANY PROVINCES were affected by wildfires yesterday, causing the acute haze
problem to intensify, while the Disease Control Department warned vulnerable
groups such as the elderly and the infirm to stay indoors and wear face masks.
The Disaster Prevention and Mitigation Department said that due to worsening
smog caused by wildfires, Lampang province had suffered from harmful air
pollution levels for three days in a row. The departments director-general
Chatchai Promlert said his department had been informed that wildfires in Nan,
Payao and Surat Thani had ravaged more than 80 rai (13 hectares) of forestland.
I have already ordered our local offices in these provinces to work with related
agencies to extinguish the fires and build the firebreaks to control the
wildfires spreading, Chatchai said.

We have also cooperated with the Pollution Control Department [PCD] and found
that nine northern provinces still have average air quality. However, Lampang
still suffers from harmful levels of air pollution, so I have told the local
authorities to |rapidly tackle the haze problem and |prevent burning in their
areas of responsibility. The PCD yesterday reported that the level of
particulate matter of up to 10 microns in size (PM10) in Lampangs Mae Moh
district was at 154 micrograms. It was the highest air pollution recorded in the
northern region. An uncontrolled wildfire was also reported at Thung Salaeng
Luang National Park in Phitsanulok, where a large area has burned for five days.
Phitsanulok Wildfire Control Division chief Banjong Srijaiwong said that since
October, the province had experienced 218 wildfire incidents, mostly caused by
people burning to expand their farmland. Regarding the current wildfire in the
national park, Banjong said officers had been working to extinguish the blaze
and build firebreaks, adding that it would take one or two days to get it under
control. According to information from the Royal Forestry Department and
Geo-Informatics and Space Technology Development Agency, there were 47 hotspots
in Thailand yesterday 28 on agricultural land, 12 in national park areas and
seven at national forest reserves. Meanwhile, Disease Control Department
director Jessada Chokdamrongsuk recommended that vulnerable groups including the
elderly, pregnant women, sick people and children should avoid going outside and
wear face masks. If the PM10 level is above 120 micrograms, it is harmful to
health, so people should refrain from outdoor activities and always close doors
and windows. People in poor health or suffering from chronic diseases should
always wear a face mask, Jessada said. In an effort to reduce air pollution,
water-spraying equipment was deployed in northern provinces such as Chiang Mai
and Lampang to increase moisture and reduce dust particles in the air.
Authorities also warned people not to burn during this period, with penalties of
one month imprisonment, a Bt2,000 fine or both. MANY PROVINCES were affected by
wildfires yesterday, causing the acute haze problem to intensify, while the
Disease Control Department warned vulnerable groups such as the elderly and the
infirm to stay indoors and wear face masks. The Disaster Prevention and
Mitigation Department said that due to worsening smog caused by wildfires,
Lampang province had suffered from harmful air pollution levels for three days
in a row. The departments director-general Chatchai Promlert said his department
had been informed that wildfires in Nan, Payao and Surat Thani had ravaged more
than 80 rai (13 hectares) of forestland. I have already ordered our local
offices in these provinces to work with related agencies to extinguish the fires
and build the firebreaks to control the wildfires spreading, Chatchai said. We
have also cooperated with the Pollution Control Department [PCD] and found that
nine northern provinces still have average air quality. However, Lampang still
suffers from harmful levels of air pollution, so I have told the local
authorities to |rapidly tackle the haze problem and |prevent burning in their
areas of responsibility. The PCD yesterday reported that the level of
particulate matter of up to 10 microns in size (PM10) in Lampangs Mae Moh
district was at 154 micrograms. It was the highest air pollution recorded in the
northern region. An uncontrolled wildfire was also reported at Thung Salaeng
Luang National Park in Phitsanulok, where a large area has burned for five days.
Phitsanulok Wildfire Control Division chief Banjong Srijaiwong said that since
October, the province had experienced 218 wildfire incidents, mostly caused by
people burning to expand their farmland. Regarding the current wildfire in the
national park, Banjong said officers had been working to extinguish the blaze
and build firebreaks, adding that it would take one or two days to get it under
control. According to information from the Royal Forestry Department and
Geo-Informatics and Space Technology Development Agency, there were 47 hotspots
in Thailand yesterday 28 on agricultural land, 12 in national park areas and
seven at national forest reserves. Meanwhile, Disease Control Department
director Jessada Chokdamrongsuk recommended that vulnerable groups including the
elderly, pregnant women, sick people and children should avoid going outside and
wear face masks. If the PM10 level is above 120 micrograms, it is harmful to
health, so people should refrain from outdoor activities and always close doors
and windows. People in poor health or suffering from chronic diseases should
always wear a face mask, Jessada said. In an effort to reduce air pollution,
water-spraying equipment was deployed in northern provinces such as Chiang Mai
and Lampang to increase moisture and reduce dust particles in the air.
Authorities also warned people not to burn during this period, with penalties of
one month imprisonment, a Bt2,000 fine or both.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 Nation News Network Co., Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              531 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Drayton Valley Western Review

                             March 7, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire season begins

BYLINE: Justine Kimoden, Drayton Valley Western Review

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 272  words


On March 1, Alberta wildfire season began. This means Albertans are reminded by
the provincial government to be cautious and be a part of wildfire prevention
especially in forested areas. Based on a press release sent out by the Alberta
government, "more than 60 per cent of the wildfires last year were caused by
human activity." It was reported that 1,338 wildfires in 2016 "burned more than
611,000 hectares, including the Horse River wildfire that spread into Fort
McMurray."

According to Oneil Carlier, Alberta Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, it is
the government's priority to protect Albertans "from the threat of wildfire."
There are increased penalties "for abandoning campfires or burning during fire
bans and improves the government's ability to restrict higher-risk activities,
such as fireworks and incendiary targets during hazardous fire conditions."

Drayton Valley/Brazeau County Fire Services Deputy Fire Chief of Training Kamil
Lasek said fire permits are required for the Alberta Forest Protection Area
during wildfire season.

"We are reminding anybody within the Alberta Forest Protection Area that the
government requires fire permits starting March 1 continuing until Oct. 31 so
any burning within the fire protection area or also known as the green zone you
will require a fire permit from either the Rocky Mountain House office or the
Edson office," said Lasek. "Year-round permitting within the Brazeau County
outside of the fire protection area is required year-round."

Anyone who wants to report a wildfire can call 310-FIRE(3473). For more
information, contact the local fire department at (780)514-2216.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 Drayton Valley Western Review
                              All Rights Reserved


                              532 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Himalayan Times

                             April 26, 2016 Tuesday

Fire turns 13 houses to ashes

BYLINE: Himalayan News Service

LENGTH: 299  words


Phidim, April 26: As many as 13 houses and four cowsheds turned in to ashes
after a wildfire spread to the human settlements at Syabrumba VDC in Panchthar.

The wildfire, which had spread at Bhute Khola Community Forest, has spread to
the human settlements yesterday, said police. Police added that more than five
houses were destroyed yesterday evening.

Ramesh Thapa, a local, said that the villagers along with security personnel had
brought the fire under control, but the wildfire had again spread at night from
the same place and destroyed eight more houses today.

According to police, the wildfire had spread to Loripa and Nigale of Syabrumba
VDC.

The wildfire had destroyed property belonging to Ganga Bohora of the VDC.
aHouses, property, and food grains, among others. worth Rs eight lakh was
destroyed in the blaze,a? he informed.

He said that the fire had destroyed everything in his house. Bohora further
added that nothing was left in the house though there was no human casualty.

Similarly, the wildfire also destroyed houses belonging to locals Jitendra
Bohora, Chhatra Bahadur Bohora, Yogendra Bahadur Bohora, Tanka Khatiwada,
Bhawani Khatiwada, Sushma Bohora, Bimal Poudel, Chandra Bahadur Pandey, Damber
Pandey and Man Bahadur Pandey.

It is said that five goats were burnt to death after the wildfire engulfed
cowsheds.

Primary estimates of the police said that property worth Rs 69 lakh was
destroyed in the wildfire. The locals, along with the police personnel, are
trying hard to bring the fire under control to prevent further damage today
also.

It is reported that the wildfire is yet to be brought under control though the
locals and the police are trying hard.

Police urged the locals of affected areas to live in the safer places. The
reason behind the wildfire is yet to be known.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2016 Himalayan Times, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              533 of 987 DOCUMENTS

                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      May 27, 2004 Thursday Final Edition

A course to heat you up; Wildfire uses natural attractions to confuse golfers
but brand-new facility is great to walk

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. SP06

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: LAKEFIELD, ONT.


If the Kawarthas figure into your vacation plans this summer you may want to add
a side trip to Wildfire Golf Club.

Located near Stoney Lake, Wildfire is another gem by architect Tom McBroom whose
well-known designs include Rocky Crest, Lake Joseph, RattleSnake Point and Heron
Point.

Wildfire, nominated for Golf Digest's Best New Private Course in Canada for
2003, rolls over 210 acres of meadowlands and marsh, through pine and maple
forest and is traversed by brooks and streams.

McBroom, one of the first to use granite outcroppings in his designs in the
Muskokas, does it at Wildfire with both granite and limestone.

McBroom has long used sand traps to create false fronts on greens to confuse
golfers' depth perceptions -- a trick used by legendary architect Stanley
Thompson.

In a neat twist at Wildfire, he used a low rock outcropping to create a false
front on the par three 14th, one of several signature holes on the course.

Wildfire is also surprisingly easy to walk.

"I would have to say it's the best walking course we have ever done," said
McBroom who has 60 designs to his credit including courses in Canada, the United
States, Finland, Sweden and St. Kitts in the West Indies.

"One of the great features of this golf course is that you can walk it," said
Bruce Murray, Wildfire's golf director and head pro.

"There are not a lot of long walks between greens and tees. There are changes of
elevations but they are very subtle."

A par 72, Wildfire is somewhat unique with five par fives, and five par threes.

The course has four sets of tees and can be played at (red) 5,176 yards, (white)
5,986 yards, (blue) 6,392 yards or (black) 7,020 yards.

Wildfire was built to be a private club and will be in time.

Until all the memberships sell, however, they are offering limited greens fee
play.

"As our membership goes forward we will slow down the (non-member) access," said
Murray.

"At the present time we want to get exposure. That's also the reason we're
hosting the Ontario Junior this summer.

"We think we have a wonderful product and we just need the exposure."

Wildfire is about a two-hour drive from Hamilton.

"But we have some wonderful resorts up here that we have arrangements with,"
said Murray.

"For a couple or a group that wants to come up here for a weekend and play some
golf on a great course and have nice accommodation it's fabulous."

gmckay@thespec.com

905-526-3242

Wildfire Golf Course

Type: Private (limited greens fee play).

Par: 72.

Yardage: Black-7,020 yards. Blue-6,392 yards. White-5,986. Red-5,176.

Course rating/slope: Black-73.0/136. Blue-70.8/126. White-68.8/124.
Red-65.5/116.

Practice facility: The course has a complete practice facility.

Green fees: Weekdays - $85 in May & October, $95 in June & September, $105 in
July & August. Weekends - $95 in May & October, $105 June to September.

Architect: Tom McBroom

Opened: 2003

Director of golf/head pro: Bruce Murray

Phone: 705-877-9453 or 1-866-570-9453.

Website: www.golfwildfire.com.

Directions: Highway 401 east to Highway 115. Highway 115 north to Highway 7
East. Highway 7 east to the village of Norwood. Turn left on regional road 40
and go north to regional road six. Turn left on regional road six and the golf
course will be on the right. There is a map on the website.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Special to the Spectator; New course uses nature to trip up
golfers, including these forbidding rocks.

TYPE: News

                    Copyright 2004 Metroland Media Group Ltd


                              534 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 14, 2015 Saturday

SENATORS McCAIN, BARRASSO AND FLAKE REINTRODUCE LEGISLATION TO FULLY FUND
WILDFIRE SUPPRESSION AND BOOST PROACTIVE FOREST MANAGEMENT

LENGTH: 962  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator John McCain, U.S Government has issued the following news
release:

U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ), John Barrasso (R-WY), and Jeff Flake (R-AZ)
this week reintroduced the FLAME Act Amendments of 2015, legislation that would
allow for the full funding of wildland firefighting budgets for the U.S. Forest
Service and U.S. Department of the Interior, and dramatically increase resources
for forest restoration programs.

"Congress must fully fund our fire suppression needs, but to reduce wildfire
costs over time we must also thin our fire-prone forests," said Senator McCain.
"There are similar proposals in Congress that support fire suppression spending,
but they don't as clearly guarantee funding for forest treatment programs, put
an end to fire-borrowing, or promote the utility of private timber industry as
this legislation does. We need to end the current practice of throwing billions
of taxpayer dollars at wildfires year after year and begin to aggressively
manage our forests."

"It's crucial that our federal, state and local agencies have all the resources
they need to fight fires and ultimately save lives, homes and property across
Wyoming and the West," said Senator Barrasso. "We also must end the
unsustainable practice of 'fire-borrowing' and prioritize funding for active
management activities that will help prevent large scale forest fires in the
future. Our bill gives land managers the tools and resources they desperately
need to invest in hazardous fuels reduction and disease treatment projects. This
will go a long way in preventing forest fires and saving taxpayer dollars."

"This bill aims to get ahead of the massive wildfire threat that plagues
communities throughout the country by making fire suppression and proactive
forest management priorities," said Senator Flake. "Enacting this measure would
prohibit the crippling practice of fire borrowing, while responsibly budgeting
for wildfire management at levels commensurate with the size of the problem."

Rather than budgeting for wildfires using just 70 percent of a 10-year historic
average of suppression expenditures as the Obama Administration proposed in its
Fiscal Year 2015 budget request, this bill requires the Forest Service and the
Department of the Interior to budget for 100 percent of their suppression costs
using the most accurate budget forecast model available (known as the "FLAME
regression model"). The bill also would prohibit federal agencies from raiding
non-wildfire accounts to pay for wildfires, a practice known as
"fire-borrowing."

While the Administration's proposal would allow wildfire spending to
automatically exceed statutory budget caps on disaster funding, this legislation
would establish a limited process for accessing emergency funds in the event of
a catastrophic wildfire, while investing aggressively in suppression and forest
management programs. Finally, this bill would establish a streamlined
environmental review process to expedite forest treatment projects across 7.5
million acres of federal land and promote the use of private industry under
forest stewardship contracts. (See also: S. 1966, National Forest Jobs
Management Act of 2014 by Senator Barrasso as introduced in the 113th Congress
and S. 326, Stewardship Contracting Reauthorization and Improvement Act by
Senator Flake as introduced in the 114th Congress).

If this bill had been enacted for Fiscal Year 2015, the Forest Service could
have had on hand approximately $1.5 billion that the agency predicts is needed
this year to suppress wildfires compared to the $1.01 billion appropriated by
Congress. The Forest Service would also be allowed to access up to $1 billion in
emergency spending while dedicating at least $750 million for hazardous fuel
management under the Healthy Forest Restoration Act, landscape-scale forest
restoration, addressing insect infested areas, and promoting timber projects on
Indian reservations.

SUMMARY OF McCAIN-BARRASSO-FLAKE WILDFIRE BILL

Prohibits Forest Service and the Interior Department from "fire-borrowing" from
all accounts not connected to wildfire management.

Requires FS/DOI to use the best available budget forecast model to plan its
wildfire season and fully fund its suppression operations at 100 percent.
Currently, FS uses a 10-year historic average of past wildfire spending to
predict its future needs, which isn't keeping pace with the increase in size and
cost of wildfires.

Establishes a narrowly tailored process to access emergency funds in the event
of a catastrophic wildfire that exhausts suppression accounts, but also requires
Appropriators to invest in hazardous fuels reduction projects and insect disease
treatment projects.

In order to access this emergency process for catastrophic wildfires, two things
must happen: (1) 100 percent of the suppression needs must be funded; and (2) a
number equal to 50 percent of the suppression costs must go to hazardous fuel
reduction projects like those authorized under the Healthy Forest Restoration
Act (HFRA) of 2003, the Tribal Forests Protection Act, and landscape scale
forest restoration.

Incentivizes more funding to the HFRA (which is authorized at $760 million a
year) to prevent future wildfires near rural communities and bring down forest
suppression costs over the long term.

Requires Forest Service to treat 7.5 million acres of federal land designated as
"Forest Management Emphasis Areas" within 15 years under an expedited
environmental review process.

Promotes the use of private industry to help the Forest Service to thin our
forests by enhancing existing forest stewardship contracting law.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              535 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Himalayan Times

                              April 8, 2016 Friday

Wildfire incidents on rise in Tanahun

BYLINE: Himalayan News Service

LENGTH: 297  words


Damauli, April 8: Incidents of wildfire have increased in various community
forests dried up by the prolonged drought in Tanahun.

Over half a dozen forests in Bandipur, Abukhaireni, Ghasikuwa, Barbhanjyang,
Kashunshivapur, Dharampani, Satiwara VDCs, and Bhanu and Byas municipalities
were destroyed in recent wildfires.

According to District Forest Officer Ambika Poudel, most of the wildfires were
caused due to people's carelessness. The fires that are triggered largely by the
carelessness of locals and pedestrians walking through or near the forests have
raised concern among the authorities.

In Bhanu and Bandipur municipalities, the local community forest users'
committees have fined more than seven culprits for causing forest fires so far.
Community forest committees slap a fine of up to Rs 1,000 on anyone found guilty
of causing wildfires.

In Byas municipality, Akala Community Forest of Galbubeshi has formed a separate
sub-committee to control wildfires. "As everyone of us are concerned about such
incidents, we are doing the needful," said chairperson of the community forest,
Rajeshor Hankhale. He informed that the District Forest Office and Federation of
Community Forest Users were distributing tools used to control wildfires to over
a dozen community forests.

On his part, Assistant Forest Officer Govinda Pande said an awareness programme
has been launched by the DFO to control forest fires. He also expressed hope
that the drive will be helpful in mitigating such incidents.

"A week-long wildfire control training was organised in the first week of March
as part of our campaign. We have declared Jamune and Ramjakot wildfire free
zones and are working to make the people aware about the damage caused by
wildfires," he said. The district has 587 community forests.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2016 Himalayan Times, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              536 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       Vallejo Times-Herald (California)

                           January 18, 2018 Thursday

Bill seeks to reduce wildfire risk from downed power lines

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 639 words

ABSTRACT

fire prevention from utilities

FULL TEXT

A bill aimed at reducing the risk of wildfires caused by downed power lines was
introduced Wednesday by State Sen. Bill Dodd, his office staff announced.

The Napa Democrat's bill requires electric utilities to adopt comprehensive
policies and procedures for proactively de-energizing power lines during extreme
weather, they said.

"This last fire season underscored the need to think innovatively and
proactively about fire prevention," Dodd said. "We know downed power lines have
caused devastating fires in the past, and we need electric utilities and the
Public Utilities Commission to plan ahead and implement best practices. This
isn't a panacea, but it's an important part of the holistic improvements needed
for fire prevention and preparedness. As we adjust to a changing climate,
ensuring electricity providers have concrete, well researched wildfire
prevention plans in place is absolutely critical. Taking initiative now will
minimize disruption and, most importantly, save lives and property."

Wildfires caused by power lines are not uncommon, and examples span the state
from the 2007 San Diego County Witch Fire to the 2015 Butte Fire in Amador and
Calaveras Counties, Dodd's staff said. The California Department of Forestry and
Fire Protection is currently investigating the causes of the wildfires that
swept across the North Bay in October, they said. Wildfires across the state
cost lives, homes, and cause billions of dollars in losses and taxpayer costs.

"This bill addresses what we can do proactively when circumstances, like the
speed of wind or other natural factors, are beyond our control," said Napa
County Supervisor Diane Dillon, who represents portions of Napa County hit by
the Tubbs Fire, the most destructive fire in state history. "Although the causes
of these unprecedented wildfires remain under investigation, this experience
highlights a need to think differently about our approach to emergency
preparedness statewide. This legislation underscores our focus on planning for a
time of crisis, and I applaud the authors for their leadership on this issue."

Dodd's bill would require investor and municipal electric utilities to update
their wildfire mitigation plans to include policies and procedures for
determining if, when and where to temporarily de-energize a power line during
extreme weather events for the purpose of preventing a wildfire, according to
the news release. The utilities would have to assess meteorological conditions,
mapping of fire risk zones, observations of vegetation conditions around and
near power lines, and establish a protocol for notifying impacted customers, it
says.

Current law requires all electric utilities to construct, maintain and operate
its electric lines and equipment in a manner that will minimize the risk of
wildfire, the release notes. They are required to prepare a wildfire mitigation
plan, detailing the steps its officials will take to mitigate wildfire risk.
Investor-owned utilities must submit the plan to the California Public Utilities
Commission for review and comment.

However, the plans are not currently required to contemplate de-energizing
lines, according to the release. In recognition of the wildfire threat a downed
power line may present, at least one utility has taken steps to address the
issue, it says. San Diego Gas & Electric has developed a set of policies and
procedures to determine if, when and where it may need to temporarily
de-energize a power line to prevent the possibility of triggering a wildfire,
and has done so at least 17 times, it says.

The bill, SB 901, is co-authored by Sen. Mike McGuire (D-Healdsburg) and
Assemblymembers Jim Wood (D-Healdsburg) and Marc Levine (D-San Rafael), and
should receive its first committee hearing in March, Dodd's office staff said.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2018 The Times-Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              537 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 31, 2015 Tuesday

STATEMENT BY SENATORS JOHN McCAIN, JEFF FLAKE & JOHN BARRASSO APPLAUDING
WILDFIRE PREVENTION REFORMS IN BUDGET RESOLUTION

LENGTH: 370  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator John McCain, U.S Government has issued the following news
release:

U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ), Jeff Flake (R-AZ) and John Barrasso (R-WY)
released the following statement today applauding the wildfire prevention
reforms included in the Senate Budget Resolution for Fiscal Year 2016:

"We commend Budget Committee Chairman Mike Enzi for reporting and passing a
Budget Resolution that calls on Congress to address funding shortfalls in Forest
Service's suppression budget but also promotes wildfire prevention using
industry-led forest thinning and forest stewardship contracts.

"We believe that thinning our forests is one of the best ways to control the
ballooning costs of fighting wildfires. We also believe that the Forest Service
and the U.S. Department of the Interior should have the funding they need to
fight wildfires. The provision on wildfires in the Budget Resolution is largely
based on the FLAME Act Amendments, legislation we recently reintroduced in
Congress and that Chairman Enzi has supported. We're pleased that our approach
is reflected in the Senate Budget Resolution.

"We also want to commend our colleagues, Senators Ron Wyden and Mike Crapo, for
offering a different amendment that focuses solely on boosting suppression
funding, and thank Senator Wyden for modifying his amendment to state that
Congress may establish additional criteria for how wildfires access FEMA's
Disaster Relief Fund. By merging elements of our proposals, we can improve the
federal government's wildfire suppression and prevention budgets in a fiscally
responsible manner. We look forward to continuing our work to advance mutually
agreeable wildfire prevention and suppression legislation beyond the Budget
Resolution.

"As catastrophic wildfires grow in frequency and intensity across the West, it
is critical that we do everything we can to prevent them from spreading in the
first place. The Senate Budget Resolution calls for a common-sense, fiscally
responsible approach to addressing the growing threat of wildfires and
protecting fire-prone communities across the country."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              538 of 987 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright (c) 2010 Fordham Environmental Law Review
                        Fordham Environmental Law Review

                                   Fall, 2010

                        Fordham Environmental Law Review

                         21 Fordham Envtl. Law Rev. 445

LENGTH: 12475 words

ARTICLE: A MODERN OVERVIEW OF WILDFIRE LAW

NAME: Karen M. Bradshaw*

BIO: * Clerk to the Honorable E. Grady Jolly, Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals;
J.D. 2010, The University of Chicago; M.B.A. 2006, California State University,
Chico, B.S. 2004, The University of California Berkeley. Support provided by the
Casper Platt Award, and Olin Fellowship. The author acknowledges the invaluable
guidance of Saul Levmore; helpful comments provided by Dean Lueck, Lisa
Bernstein, Jianlin Chen; and invaluable information provided by numerous
wildfire experts, especially Lloyd Bradshaw and Ron Berryman.

TEXT:
 [*445]

   I. Introduction

 Wildfire presents an unprecedented and growing threat to America's forests. A
variety of factors have combined to create some of the worst and largest
wildfires in modern history. n1 The negative effects from wildfires stretch
beyond environmental concerns; wildfire suppression costs are also an enormous
drain on increasingly-tight public funds. In 2008, state and federal governments
spent over $ 1.7 billion on fighting wildfire in California alone, n2 the same
amount needed in education funding to help all K-12 students in the state reach
academic achievement standards. n3 Yet, the  [*446]  destructiveness of wildfire
, unlike other natural disasters, can be substantially lessened and contained
through suppression or firefighting, activity. Public policies, enacted by
legislatures and carried out by government agencies and private actors, have the
potential to dramatically reduce wildfire's incredible ecological costs and
drain on public resources.

   Despite the potential for policy changes to produce profound benefits, little
legislative effort has been made to understand or stem the causes of wildfire
spread and funding increases. Similarly, legal literature has historically
ignored the topic of wildfire. n4 Wildfire has only gained note in academia
recently, and still only in limited areas concentrated around clusters of
administrative and environmental law. n5 The current level of minimal attention
is shocking given the helpful policy suggestions legal academics could
contribute.

    [*447]  This Article seeks to overcome the reticence of legal thinkers to
engage in this unfamiliar but important area by providing a brief background of
the aspects of wildfire most pertinent to legal analysis. In particular, this
Article assesses the incentive structures that guide the actions of government
firefighting suppression agencies, wildland urban interface owners, and private
institutional landowners, who often have conflicting views on the appropriate
treatment of wildfire suppression efforts.

   Section II sets forth a basic overview of the conditions that give rise to
wildfire and the different types of wildfire. Next, Section III discusses the
public and private actors who are most impacted by wildfire; specifically
government land management agencies, wildfire-urban interface owners, and public
institutional landowners. Section IV examines the damage caused by wildfires and
evaluates the ecological and fiscal costs associated with this damage. Finally,
Section V discusses current issues in wildfire law that demand thoughtful
contributions from legal academics and others in order to develop sound policy.

[*448]

   II. The Fundamental Concepts of Wildfire

   A. An Overview of Wildfire

 Wildfire is best understood as fire occurring on sparsely or unpopulated land
that is not burning at the intention of a responsible land manager. n6 To start
a fire, the elements of fuel, heat, and oxygen must combine. n7 In wildlands,
fuel is everywhere: trees, underbrush,  [*449]  and slash?or vegetative
debris?provide excellent fodder for fire. n8 Heat can be produced naturally, as
with lighting, or by human activity. Once a fire starts, its continuation
depends upon a number of natural factors. For example, weather plays a crucial
role in determining whether a fire will spread or extinguish. n9 Wildfires can
be started by natural conditions or, more frequently, human action. n10 In
recent decades, wildfires have grown significantly in size. n11 Additionally,
fire suppression costs are at a record high. Federal expenditures on fire
fighting rose from $ 1 billion spent annually prior to 1997 to more than $ 3
billion annually after 2003. n12 The graph below shows this dramatic spike in
wildfire spending between 1970  [*450]  [SEE GRAPH IN ORIGINAL]

   and 2008, which occurred even though the size of wildfires (depicted in red)
grew at a much slower pace: n13

   Moreover, the nature of wildfire has changed over time, with fires becoming
larger and more intense; n14 some attribute increases in intensity and severity
to global warming. n15 Further, changing firescape patterns leave some regions,
such as California, at particular risk. n16 Coupled with these changes, the
government sometimes has had insufficient resources to fight all fires burning
simultaneously, n17  [*451]  requiring agencies to prioritize their allocation
of resources including manpower, equipment, and money. n18

   III. Stakeholders in Wildfire Suppression

 Although fire itself seems simple?a mere mix of fuel, heat, and oxygen?its
effect on people, property interests, laws, and the government agencies involved
is stunningly complex. n19 This Section outlines the stakeholders who drive and
bear the costs of wildfire decision-making.

   Wildfire profoundly affects a diffuse group of people. n20 Wildfire impacts
are particularly concentrated among groups with wildland property interests
whose well-being is directly diminished by the occurrence of wildfire. More
specifically, three groups have property interests that are directly impacted by
wildfire: (1) government land management agencies, n21 (2) small private
landowners, n22 and (3) institutional landowners. n23 These groups often have
wildly divergent land use goals, which also leads to similarly variant interests
in  [*452]  defining ideal wildfire outcomes. n24 This "lack of cooperation
means that neighboring land managers may be making very different and even
conflicting choices about what fire regime to allow." n25 This Section briefly
sketches the prevalence and role of each of these groups in owning land that is
at risk of wildfire.

   A. Government Land Management Agencies

 Government land management agencies control public lands. n26 At the federal
level, the Forest Service in the Department of Agriculture, the Bureau of Land
Management, the Fish and Wildlife Service, and the National Park Service in the
Department of the Interior are responsible for various wildland holdings. n27
The wildfire risks facing these holdings are shockingly high. n28 Many states
have land management agencies as well. n29 However these various state land
[*453]  management agencies operate under differing regimes for fire suppression
than federal agencies. n30 Some federal agencies have a "let burn" policy, and
as a result, conflicts can arise when properties controlled by agencies with
different policies border one another. n31

   The federal government specifies that land management agencies are
responsible for controlling the costs of wildfire. n32 U.S. policy often focuses
upon ex ante fire prevention: steps that can be taken prior to a fire breaking
out. For example, land managers might thin the trees on their land, reduce
slash, and educate the public on wildfire prevention to reduce the risk and
spread of wildfire on their land. However, these efforts are constrained by
significant environmental pressure and budgetary constraints. n33 Unlike ex ante
[*454]  fire reduction measures that are carried out by land managers, ex post
fire suppression measures carried out by government fire suppression agencies do
not face budgetary constraints. n34



   This legal shell-game [of shifting funds from other agency activities to
wildfire suppression] has crippled some of the very projects meant to forestall
catastrophic fires by siphoning off money intended for things such as forest
thinning and equipment purchases. And in the end, only 80% of the overall amount
taken from other agencies is actually repaid, according to the report.
Transferring funds for wildfire suppression resulted in canceled and delayed
projects, strained relationships with state and local agency partners, and
difficulties in managing programs ... . These impacts affected numerous
activities including fuels reduction (the clearing of dead wood and brush in
forests) and land acquisition. n35

 After a fire, rules governing land management practices are substantially
relaxed. n36 Such relaxation creates considerable incentives to shift fire
suppression from an ex ante activity (which federal policy dictates should be
employed) to an ex post activity. Thus, because no system of accountability
exists for land manager fire suppression efforts, these perverse incentives are
not offset by  [*455]  sanctions, there is no generally-used measure against
which fire management costs are measured. n37

   1. Firefighting Responsibility Is Clear; Appropriate Prioritization Is Not

 Wildland agencies at the federal and state level divide fire suppression
responsibility in a complicated system of agreements in which responsibility is
assigned for covering public and private lands within particular regions. n38
Agencies reimburse one another for fire suppression efforts that cross
jurisdictions. n39 Federally, firefighting has replaced land management as the
core competency for the Forest Service. n40 In turn, the Forest Service has
reallocated funds from other areas to fund fire suppression efforts. n41

   Agency managers issue policies guiding on-the-ground personnel in
prioritizing competing demands for fire suppression. n42 The order of  [*456]
priorities in government fire suppression is "life, property, and resources" n43
and "property" is not interpreted as including timbered land, regardless of the
value of the timber to its commercial owner.  n44 This definition is instead
limited to structures, primarily homes. n45 The anomalous result is that
hundreds of acres of timberland can be allowed to burn to save a single,
unoccupied home. n46 This situation occurs with increasing frequency due to
changing land use patterns as homeowners increasingly build in areas which were
once purely forested. n47 The increasing costs of fire suppression can thus be
partially attributed to the increase of wildlife-urban interface areas which are
a product of new land use patterns. n48

   Prioritization of firefighting resources is difficult, n49 but policies can
be flexible in response to emerging circumstances. For example, in 1994, a
series of fires diverted resources from protecting federal lands toward
protecting wildland-urban interface homes and communities. n50 In response, a
report was issued that "altered federal  [*457]  fire policy from priority for
private property to equal priority for private property and federal resources,
based on values at risk." n51

   An additional concern is that government agencies must make difficult
decisions under exigent circumstances. n52 In times of severe fires, they must
quickly decide which areas to suppress and which to let burn. Within an
individual fire, they must decide which among several assets to protect and what
firefighting methodologies to use.  [*458]  A surprising number of factors
correlate with, or contribute to, the efficacy of fire suppression efforts. n53

   Fire science is inexact: no formulaic approach has been proven to
consistently produce the best suppression result. Computerized firefighting
models exist, n54 but they are largely unused in practice. n55 Therefore, the
choice of which suppression tool to use is made by incident teams n56
--firefighting leadership groups that control strategic choices based upon their
experience. n57 Firefighting decision-makers rely heavily upon institutional
knowledge, informal, unwritten, and shared information of how best to approach a
situation based upon past experience. n58 This knowledge is developed through
learning from past wildfires, as well as learning from controlled burns. n59

   Given the inexact nature of fire management, it is difficult to analyze the
decisions made under exigent circumstances. George  [*459]  Nickas explained the
balancing in which firefighting teams must engage when reaching prioritization
decisions:



   Is it appropriate to attempt to suppress a fire that might burn for weeks in
a twenty thousand acre wilderness drainage in order to protect a private cabin
on a twenty acre inholding? Is it okay to control a fire in wilderness to reduce
the likelihood it will burn up an adjacent timber stand, and should it make a
difference if the timber stand is on private or public land? What
responsibilities, both legal and ethical, do land managers have to protect
private interests from natural events? n60

 Further, no clear guidance or external accountability exists for fire
suppression managers who make these difficult prioritization choices, and
internal examinations unsurprisingly result in few recriminating judgments about
the decisions made.

   2. The Funding Structure For Firefighting Encourages Government Agencies To
Allow Fires To Grow

 Current funding policies for Government Firefighting Agencies ("GFA"s) provide
perverse incentives for firefighters to allow wildfires to grow larger and
consume greater resources: "essentially ... the resources available for wildland
fire suppression are unlimited, and thus normal economic analysis is
inapplicable." n61 A government report found that firefighters viewed funds from
emergency supplemental appropriations to be "free money" that was available if
fires were allowed to grow particularly large. n62 The result is "wasting
federal firefighting funds, which [one critic] calls "fire  [*460]
boondoggles.'" n63 Firefighting agencies also profit when more fires occur. n64
This leads to inadequate ex ante fire management practices and inadequate ex
post fire suppression efforts.

   One example of the impact incentives can have on firefighting practice can be
seen where firefighters are financially encouraged to allow suppressible fires
to build towards a conflagration; a large media-worthy fire also called a
"campaign" fire, n65 in order to receive increased media attention and emergency
appropriations. n66 Conflagration presents emergency conditions which allow
agencies to apply for emergency supplemental appropriations. n67 Commentators
have criticized the current funding structure and have argued for change,
stating that "funding structures for wildland fire management should be
restructured to remove incentives to wait for the conflagration." n68
Firefighters are not forced to internalize the damage caused to private land and
receive little negative media attention for failing to protect institutional
landowners. n69

   B. Wildland-Urban Interface Owners

 The land use pattern of residential homes in areas traditionally used as
forests or wildland is described as the "wildland-urban interface." n70 For the
purposes of this Article, I define wildland-urban interface owners as parties
who own homes or small amounts of land (less than 5,000 acres) in areas that are
highly susceptible to wildfire. Construction of private residences in
wildland-urban interface areas  [*461]  has increased over the past two decades.
n71 The influx of people into traditionally forested areas increases the risk of
wildfire reaching people and homes. n72

   The potential devastation caused by wildfire to wildland-urban interface
owners is, on an individual level, catastrophic. Fire can destroy homes, which
often represents the largest asset for a majority of homeowners. n73 Although
this financial loss is not large when compared to the damage to timber values,
the percentage loss to a homeowner as compared to an institutional private
landowner is tremendous. That is to say that the proportional share of
devastating loss is greater for a homeowner than an institutional landowner. n74
On the other hand, the aggregate loss experienced by wildland-urban interface
owners in any given fire may be less than the aggregate loss experienced by
government land management agencies or institutional landowners.

   In addition to lost home value, homeowners also face numerous additional
losses. They may be forced to evacuate in order to avoid wildfire, be subjected
to smoke-affected air or water systems, n75 or experience economic downfall in
their communities n76 because of a catastrophic fire. When describing these
impacts, one expert explained: "Human lives are altered. Big fires, beyond the
ecology  [*462]  of a forest, destroy homes, injure and kill people and alter
the local economy." n77 Despite these obvious downsides, the growth and
prevalence of persons willing to assume the risk of wildfire suggest that the
benefits of living in a wildland-urban interface area must overwhelm the
potential fire damage for some actors. In addition to the unique natural beauty
of these settings, the availability to receive full insurance at a rate not
reflective of the entire risk assumed likely contributes to homeowners'
willingness to assume the risk of wildfire. n78

   1. Wildland-Urban Interface Owners Typically Only Have Ex-Ante Obligations
For Fire Management

 Although wildland-urban interface property managers do not have any ex post
obligations to suppress fire, they are sometimes responsible for ex ante fire
protection efforts. To encourage loss reduction among homeowners, fire
departments heavily emphasize the need for homeowners to proactively protect
their properties. Simple actions, such as reducing vegetation near homes or
storing firewood away from structures, can be remarkably effective in reducing
the risk of damage if a fire reaches a home. n79

   Despite the efficacy of these relatively inexpensive protective measures,
many wildland-urban interface owners do not take appropriate precautions. To
counteract this, some states impose increased liability against wildland-urban
interface owners who do not engage in appropriate vegetation clearing practices.
n80 Private  [*463]  insurance companies are also becoming proactive in ex post
fire suppression efforts by hiring private firefighting companies to protect
properties after a fire starts and a property is at risk, but before the fire
reaches the wildland-urban interface property. n81

   2. Wildland-Urban Interface Properties Are Overprotected From An Economic
Perspective

 Wildland-urban interface residents receive more protection against wildfires
than is economically efficient. Protection comes in two forms: (1) suppression
efforts by GFAs, and (2) insurance structures that shield wildland-urban
homeowners from the risks that they assume from living in areas with high fire
risks.

   Protecting structures from fire damage is often not cost-justified, based
solely on government expenditure. GFAs give structures higher protection
priority than alternative assets. n82 "Property" is interpreted as
structures?not land, regardless of their relative values. n83 Thus, the result
can be the overprotection of structures. A 2003 government report states, "in
some western areas, the government pays more in suppressing fires than the fair
market value of the structures threatened by those fires. It would literally be
cheaper to let the fires burn and pay 100% of the rebuilding cost." n84 Other
commentators agree that federal firefighting agencies are "[willing] to spend
millions to protect homes that may only be worth thousands." n85

   This overprotection is fueled by intense public scrutiny and media coverage.
n86 It leads to a situation where "fire commanders say that  [*464]  they
sometimes "have to sacrifice control of the wildfire to defend buildings.'" n87
A representative for firefighters publicly acknowledged this, stating, "often we
use resources because of the public and political pressure to do something, even
though it has no effect on the fire and is an economic waste." n88 Similarly,
insurance overprotects homeowners in wildland-urban interface areas.



   the role of the insurance sector can also prove important in providing
incentives for adaptive measures. For example, there are proven construction
methods and materials known to reduce fire risk for homes in areas subject to
risks from wildfires. However the availability of federal disaster assistance
has reduced the incentives for insurance companies to adjust premiums and
condition the availability of coverage for homeowners adopting these measures.
n89

 The result is that insurers are deterred from requiring that homebuilders in
wildland-urban interface areas use fire safe materials. n90 Further, homeowners
do not fully internalize the risks of living in dangerous high fire risk areas
because the government requires insurance companies to provide
artificially-lowered insurance rates for primary residences in high fire areas.
n91 This  [*465]  insurance is not priced according to the risk, n92 and has led
to a "build-destroy-rebuild cycle" in which the wildland-urban interface owner's
loss is subsidized by government insurance schemes. n93 In response, some
insurance companies send privatized firefighting teams to protect the homes that
they insure when GFAs are unable to do so. n94

   C. Institutional Private Landowners

 For the purposes of this Article, I define institutional private landowners are
non-governmental actors who own at least 5,000 acres of forested wildland. This
ownership structure may include individuals, trusts, partnerships, or
corporations. The role of institutional private landowners in wildfires is
virtually unstudied. n95 This lack of attention is surprising because the
majority of timberland in the United States, and therefore the majority of
property affected by wildfire, is held by private institutional landowners. n96
Roughly 809.5 million acres of private forests and rangelands exist in the
coterminous forty-eight states, as compared to 426.1 million acres of all
federal lands in those states. n97 Thus, studies of wildfire policy have, in
effect, ignored the 800-pound gorilla in the room.

   Private institutional landowners can be significantly affected by backfire.
Profit generation through timber harvest is often a key component of the private
land value. As such, backfire destroys a portion of the profit generator for
private institutional landowners. These losses are generated through the
scorching of mature marketable timber, and other less obvious, sources discussed
below. n98

[*466]

   1. Institutional Landowners Internalize The Damage Caused By Fire, And Thus
Undertake Extensive Precautions Against The Spread Of Wildfire On Their Property


 Institutional landowners take substantial ex ante precaution against wildfire.
Because they do not carry insurance, n99 institutional landowners fully
internalize the loss caused by wildfire. Consequently, they make decisions on
large issues such as engaging in timber harvest practices to reduce the
potential for wildfire. n100 Although these efforts may arguably produce
undesirable collateral effects of increasing the risk of fire,  n101 the
willingness of institutional land managers to invest in substantial ex ante
protection against fire illustrates that they do not have the moral hazard
toward fire that is seen among wildland-urban interface owners.

   IV.

 The Costs of Wildfire

 To properly understand the costs associated with wildfire it is helpful to
categorize the variety of losses caused by wildfire. This Section presents a
modernized framework similar to that presented in the 1946 work Fire in the
Forests of the United States. n102 This Section categorizes the damage to
property n103 along the dimensions  [*467]  of (a) lost stumpage value, (b)
infrastructure damage (c) retarded tree growth, (d) waterway and soil
composition and productivity, (e) disease and insect damage (f) human activity
and mortality, and (g) wildlife losses.

   A. Stumpage Value

 An obvious cost of wildfire is the financial loss of stumpage, the industry's
term describing the value of mature, marketable trees. n104 Although some burned
timber can be harvested and sold, it is far less valuable than timber that has
not been burned. n105 Further, wildfire typically burns large swaths of timber,
the sheer amount of which produces market dynamics that are unfavorable to
private landowners. n106 In non-fire conditions foresters harvest according to
prevailing market prices. n107 Unlike typical tree stands, burned timber cannot
wait indefinitely for market prices to reach an acceptable level; it must be
harvested before it begins to rot or is diseased. n108 This time pressure
results in a glut of damaged timber on the log-selling market after a heavy fire
season. n109 Similarly, if multiple properties experience wildfire, the costs
associated with removing the timber, such as manpower or rental of heavy
equipment from logging  [*468]  contractors increases due to the increase in
demand, which in turn further reduces the profit margin for landowners.

   B. Infrastructure Damage

 Backfire causes damage to the infrastructure of land management operations?
buildings and equipment may be burned. The unique nature of outdoor business
occupations mandates that unusually valuable equipment be stored in remote
areas, the value of which can be surprising. n110 As a result, wildfire can
destroy many of the capital investments of an outdoor business operation. n111
Such damage is incurred by landowners in forest settings when their helicopters,
bulldozers, water trucks, and storage facilities are damaged or destroyed. n112
Also, at any given time, a timber operation may have millions of dollars in
timber harvest equipment on the ground. n113 In the unlikely event that wildfire
strikes this equipment may be lost.

   Further, firefighting operations can cause damage to privately-owned road
systems or fences. In Dovenberg v. U.S. ex rel. U.S. Forest Service, n114 the
United States Forest Service used the plaintiff's land as a base of operations
for fighting the Shake Table Complex Fire. n115 Dovenberg provides a compelling
description of how land can be heavily used and damaged by government
firefighting operations:



   in response to the fire's expansion onto Mr. Dovenberg's property, the IMT
[Incident Management Team] set up a  [*469]  staging area near the entrance to
the Ranch. The team also used roads on Mr. Dovenberg's property to access the
fire and to construct a Safety Zone, Drop Points, and a Dozer Line. His roads
provided primary access to the fire and were used by up to 1500 firefighters and
staff personnel during the four days when the fire remained out of control. The
IMT continued to use the Ranch to access the fire area for approximately two
weeks following control of the fire. Mr. Dovenberg asserts that the team's use
of the Ranch resulted in the destruction of roads, culverts and fencing, the
clearing of areas for staging, the Safety Zone, Drop Points, and the Dozer Line.
Mr. Dovenberg submitted a claim for damages to defendant United States on March
13, 2007, which was denied nearly a year later. n116

 The costs of an incident management team situating on a property to manage a
fire can impose substantial costs on privately-owned road systems, fencing, etc.

   C. Tree Growth

 Wildfire also significantly retards tree growth. n117 A forest has trees in
every phase of the timber life cycle; from seeds germinating, to seedlings, to
saplings, to poles, to standards. Trees at every point in the life cycle reflect
the future income stream of the timber operator. n118 Fire damage represents a
loss in net present value of that income stream. Trees which have grown to the
seedling and sapling stages may be damaged or killed by wildfire. The number of
trees killed is not immediately obvious. " ... approximately six months [are]
necessary to determine the final mortality due to the fire." n119 The growth of
trees that survive a wildfire is retarded as a result of having been scarred in
the fire. n120

    [*470]  The extent to which fire damage effects mechanisms influencing
growth are not fully known, but some specific sources of damage have been
identified: "there is a reduction in the number of vessels that are needed by
the tree in carrying on physiological functions such as transporting raw
materials from the soil to the leaves. The mechanical properties of the trees
are also affected." n121 Such damage may be hard to prove until several years
after the fire occurs or, in the area of tree rings, until after the tree is
cut. The costs of seed loss and retarded growth caused in a specific setting by
wildfire is difficult to quantify, particularly within a five year period after
a fire.

   D. Water And Soil Composition And Productivity

 Wildfire changes the forest landscape in other more subtle ways. Important
shifts in the soil composition and waterways effect future growth among trees
and other organisms. "When the protective mantle of green leaves or needles and
the forest debris commonly referred to as litter and humus are removed by fire,
the result is reflected in the soil... ." n122

   In some forests, the soil, badly damaged by wildfire, is so poor that trees
cannot grow regardless of the replanting efforts taken. n123 Similarly,
waterways vital to forest health are damaged by wildfire. n124 Burned watersheds
have less ability to cut down runoff, and in the absence of forest cover, a
watershed supplying water to a dam may be prone to rapid. n125 The silting and
inability to stem runoff can cause flooding among saplings, or damage aquatic
life in the watershed. n126

[*471]

   E.

 Disease And Insects

 A fire-damaged landscape gives rise to increased disease among, and insect
attack against, trees. Fire puts trees at risk by damaging their natural defense
mechanisms. n127 A tree's natural defense mechanisms are especially vulnerable
if the tree is exposed to repeated fire. n128 But, the extent of damage is not
immediately obvious. "Fire damage is insidious because so often the new lesions
are concealed by dead bark ... Symptoms of dead cambium may not be apparent for
several years after the fire." n129 Trees damaged by disease and insect attack
have far less value than their healthy counterparts. n130 Further, disease and
insects spread rapidly from unhealthy (burned) trees to the healthy
counterparts, without appropriate management. n131

   F. Human Activity

 Wildfire also has a detrimental impact on human lives. Among commercial land
managers, wildfire diverts man power from timber operations to wildfire fighting
activities. n132 Smoke conditions from nearby wildfires can impact workers'
ability to be outside. Mitigation and restoration efforts can consume an entire
workforce of foresters and contractors for several months. n133 Wildfire can
also devastate landowners and their employees, area residents, foresters,
ecologists, nearby business owners, firefighters, tourists, environmentalists,
[*472]  historians, and government employees. n134 Psychological harms may also
arise from wildfire and people feel an intense desire to rebuild damaged forests
quickly. n135

   G. Wildlife Losses

 Wildlife losses from wildfire can be considerable, n136 and the deaths are
often painful and prolonged.

   after a 120,000 acre fire in Wisconsin in 1930, "the carcasses of 18 deer
were found in the close proximity; undoubtedly many more died because a 100%
survey was not conducted. It was estimated that after the fire 60% of the life
deer in the region had badly burned feet. A deer was encountered walking on its
knees; its hooves and foot bones had broken off due to excessive heat. The deer
herds were weakened so badly that they became ready prey to their natural
predators, thus providing another factor in diminishing their number.' n137

   In addition to the psychological harms that workers can experience from
seeing such devastation to the wildlife on timberland fiscal losses may also
ensue. n138

   H. Countervailing Considerations

   1. Mitigation

 Mitigation measures taken by a forest manager to offset damage are a corollary
to most sources of damage. For example, foresters  [*473]  engage large teams of
workers after wildfire to mitigate soil erosion, n139 implement water quality
measures, replant trees, harvest damaged trees, and attempt to counteract
disease and insect. n140 Although the costs of mitigation measures are
considerable, they are estimated to be less than the cost of inaction, n141 and
are necessary to continue viable timber harvest operations. However, there is no
available study that demonstrates the frequency, cost, or efficiency of
mitigation measures foresters make to offset the damage caused by wildfire.

   2. Benefits Of Wildfire

 Although generally characterized as disastrous, wildfires actually produce a
mix of ecological costs and benefits. n142 On one hand, fires devastate forests
by killing healthy trees and animals, contributing to soil erosion, and damaging
air quality. n143 On the other hand, occasional fires are essential to the
health of wildlands. n144 Fires rid wildlands of diseased vegetation, reduce
competition among plants for resources such as light, and renew soil. n145 In
Westvaco Corp. v. United States n146 a timber company adjusted the amount of
losses caused by wildfire to account for "the estimated increase in value of the
affected area due to "pine release' which is the elimination or reduction of
vegetative material, usually woody plants and trees, that interfere with the
growth of pine trees being managed." n147 Indeed, some plant species, such as
the Lodgepole Pine, are dependent upon  [*474]  fire for their intergenerational
survival; they cannot reproduce without it. n148

   In addition to ecological and social concerns, there are also legal and tax
advantages to property damaged by fire. The losses to commercially-viable trees
("stumpage losses") may be partially or fully offset in two ways. First,
fire-damaged timber stands are subject to fewer environmental regulations than
regular forests. n149 Emergency timber harvest plans can be used to clear more
trees more quickly than could otherwise be harvested. n150 In some cases, timber
that would not have been harvestable, due for example to local regulations, can
be harvested under state emergency harvest procedures. n151 Second, the owner of
burned forest can claim some of the value of lost timber on his taxes. n152

   V. Pressing Issues of Wildfire Law

 Having set forth a brief background about wildfire issues pertinent to legal
analysis, this section takes the next step of identifying the key  [*475]  legal
and policy issues in wildfire law today. n153 Despite minimal attention among
academics, wildfire has garnered substantial public attention. This section
draws on media reports and interviews with persons regularly engaged in wildfire
issues to identify what I believe are two of the most pressing areas of wildfire
law. Further, this section identifies some relevant considerations relating to
each issue raised.

   A. Liability For Suppression Costs

 Liability for suppression costs is a key litigation growth area in wildfire
law. Some state statutes permit government firefighting agencies to charge
parties responsible for starting wildfire the cost of suppressing that fire, a
practice known as "cost recovery." n154 On its face, cost recovery seems like a
reasonable way to replenish public coffers. But, in practice, the liability
issues and suppression activity complicate cost-recovery efforts. Historically,
the government and an at-fault party settled a cost-recovery claim. n155 In
2004, cost recovery was estimated to yield four to six million dollars annually.
n156 But recent exorbitant settlements and other factors are influencing parties
to litigate rather than settle. n157 This litigation brings before courts, for
the first time in decades, key issues of wildfire liability and suppression.

   Many cases of liability spring from the accidental nature of most wildfires.
Humans start the majority of wildfires, but very few are arsons. n158 Power
lines and railroads are two notorious sources of fire-starters that can cause
wildfire even in the cases of little or no  [*476]  negligence. While public
utilities and railroads are required to employ basic safety measures, such as
clearing vegetation near a power line or railroad track, it is difficult if not
impossible to properly protect thousands of miles of power lines or railroad
tracks. Further, where humans directly cause the start of a wildfire, they may
be strictly liable for the cost of suppressing it, regardless of the steps they
took to avoid fire risk. n159 While many private persons are judgment proof
against civil cost recovery efforts, the strict liability standard becomes
problematic for companies who are responsible for the actions of their employees
under respondeat superior.

   The second complicating factor is determining the appropriate cost of
suppression to assess the responsible party. The problem is that suppression
costs are both highly discretionary, and completely out of the control of the
responsible party. n160 Government agencies exercise absolute authority in
wildfire decision-making, and can set the cost of suppression by choosing
certain firefighting methodologies and through the timing of their actions. n161
Firefighters have chosen to let a fire burn for several weeks before deciding to
fight it. n162 In the  [*477]  interim, the fire may expand far beyond its
original size, and the suppression costs may multiple exponentially. Further,
firefighting methodologies may vary greatly in cost and efficiency, n163 but the
persons deciding which methodologies to employ are not paying the bill in
cost-recovery scenarios. n164

   B. Mixed Incentives

 Wildland holdings give rise to parties with differing objectives. For example,
a heavily forested state park might be adjacent to an environmental reserve, a
small subdivision, and/or timberlands owned by a commercial forestry operation.
Consequently, when wildfire strikes an area, the goals of affected landowners
can vary dramatically. The environmental group may want its holding to
experience wildfire, whereas the commercial forestry owner would seek to protect
his timber against wildfire, and homeowners seek to protect their homes and
personal property. n165 The conflicting  [*478]  responsibilities, motivations,
incentives, and tensions of different groups come to the fore under the
stressful circumstances of wildfire.

   On the one hand, government firefighting agencies are especially useful in
quelling these tensions. Having a unitary actor invested with full authority to
make decisions is helpful; the opposite result in a setting of diverse
landowners would almost certainly be chaos. But, decision-makers at government
firefighting agencies are also incentivized, albeit in different ways. Further,
the protections of sovereign immunity provide considerable opportunity to make
decisions concerning the destruction of private property or important ecological
interests without internalizing the cost. In other words, by making decisions
about what will happen on privately-held lands, firefighters can cause a great
deal of intentional, purposeful damage for which they cannot legally be held
responsible, or made to compensate. The result can harm the interests of
environmentalists and private landowners, who are left without recourse.

   VI. Conclusion

 This Article provides a broad overview of the most important information and
issues in wildfire law today. This background information about the key
concepts, stakeholders, and issues provides both background and a challenge to
future legal scholars, policymakers, and practitioners who will work on issues
related to the costly and ever-growing spread of wildfire. Although the central
issues of liability for cost suppression and mixed incentives were discussed
here, many other issues exist along the dimensions of environmental law, tort
liability, and economic analysis of efficient suppression resources. Increased
attention to these issues is mandated by the incredible loss of natural
resources and property lost in the ceaseless increase of wildfires experienced
over the past decade. By providing critical analysis and policy suggestions,
however, scholars can provide vital, much-needed assistance in crafting
solutions that will stem the natural disasters and alleviate the high costs
wrought upon stakeholders and the general public.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Environmental LawNatural Resources & Public LandsFederal Land
ManagementGovernmentsPublic LandsForest LandsPublic Health & Welfare LawSocial
ServicesDisabled & Elderly PersonsAgency Actions & ProceduresGeneral Overview

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  See Kate Robertson, A Forest Fire's Price Tag, Investopedia (June 8, 2010,
9:46 AM),
http://financialedge.investopedia.com/financial-edge/0610/A-Forest-Fires-Price-T
ag.aspx (noting that the size of wildfires has increased dramatically in the
past twenty years).





n2.  Bettina Boxall, Spending to fight California Wildfires Surpasses $ 1
Billion: About 1.4 Acres are Scorched in one of the Worst Fire Seasons in the
State's History, L.A. Times, Dec. 31, 2008, at C2.





n3.  Jennifer Imazeki, Assessing the Costs of K-12 Education in California
Public Schools, Stanford Univ. Inst. for Research on Educ. Policy & Practice
(March 2007), http://irepp.stanford.edu/documents/GDF/SUMMARIES/ Imazeki.pdf (
stating that "the cost-function model estimates that California school districts
need up to $ 1.7 billion more overall to achieve state API goals.").





n4.  Wildfire is relatively unstudied in legal literature. See Lauren Wishnie,
Note, Fire and Federalism: A Forest Fire is Always an Emergency, 17 N.Y.U.
Envtl. L.J. 1006, 1007 (2008) (commenting that "despite its significant
economic, environmental, and social impacts, the law has surprisingly little to
say about wildfire.") (internal citation omitted).





n5.  Perhaps because of renewed public attention to wildfire as a result of the
recent dramatic growth in the number and severity of burns annually, this area
of law is experiencing renewed attention. Recent literature addresses wildfire
policies, inter-agency dynamics, and state-federal interplay. See Jamison
Colburn, The Fire Next Time: Land Use Planning in the Wildland/Urban Interface,
28 J. Land Res. & Envtl. L. 223 (2008); Robert B. Keiter, The Law of Fire:
Reshaping Public Land Policy in an Era of Ecology and Litigation, 36 Envtl. L.
301 (2006) (exploring wildfire policies); Rebecca K. Smith, War on Wildfire: The
U.S. Forest Service's Wildland Fire Suppression Policy and Its Legal,
Scientific, and Political Context, 15 U. Balt. J. Envtl. L. 25 (2007)
(summarizing the interplay among federal agencies in wildfire suppression). The
majority of material that addresses the intersection of private interests and
wildfire focuses on the roles and incentives of private homeowners or small
landowners in traditionally forested areas. Randal O'Toole, The Perfect
Firestorm: Bringing Forest Service Wildfire Costs Under Control, 591 Pol'y
Analysis 11, 16 (2007) (providing a discussion of wildland urban interface
owners). Little mention is made of the role of institutional private landowners,
although they hold the majority of timberland. See Ross W. Gorte, Cong. Research
Serv., RL30755, Forest Fire/Wildfire Protection 1 n.3 (2008) (noting that
"despite the substantial attention given to the [Forest Service] and [Department
of the Interior] agencies, the majority of wildlands are privately owned."). For
a notable exception to the general lack of focus on the incentives of
institutional landowners in reducing the risk of wildfire,see Jonathan Yoder,
Liability, Regulation, and Endogenous Risk: The Incidence and Severity of
Escaped Prescribed Fires in the United States, 51 J.L. & Econ. 297 (2008).
Yoder's Article is the first modern piece of legal scholarship to address a form
of wildfire using a law and economics analysis. For an older study on the topic,
see also A.A. Dyer et al., The Role of Private Individuals and Firms, States,
and the Federal Government in Protection of State and Private Lands from Hazards
of Wildfire, in Special Series 1983 (Dep't. of Forest & Wood Sci. Colo. St. U.,
Ser. 26, 1983). Legal analysis of specific fire management practices has been
limited to clearing land through the use of mechanical cutting or prescription
burning prior to a fire's occurrence. See, e.g., Robert B. Keiter, Breaking
Faith with Nature: The Bush Administration and Public Land Policy, 27 J. Land
Res. & Envtl. L. 195 (2007); Evan N. Turgeon, Federal Forests, Biomass, and
Ethanol: Energy Security Sabotaged, 39 Envtl. L. Rep. News & Analysis 10140
(2009). Because of the controversies surrounding timber thinning, this subject
represents the most robust area of legal literature regarding wildfire; the
debate was revived by the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003, Pub. L. No.
108-48, 117 Stat. 1887 (codified at 16 U.S.C.§§6501-6591). I could not find a
prolonged discussion of the specific fire management practices that occur after
a wildfire begins. This paper explores the topic of backfire, which comprises a
subpart of the broad subject of ex post fire management.





n6.  Ron Wakimono, Wilderness Fire Policy?"Let It What?", in Wilderness &
Wildfire 1, 4 (Tom Walsh ed., 1989) (explaining that a wildfire is a wildland
fire that is not designated or managed as a prescribed fire, because it exceeds
specified conditions and/or does not meet stated land management objectives). In
contrast to wildfire, controlled burns, sometimes called prescription fires, are
intentionally set fires that are designed to meet land management objectives.
See id. at 50 (describing a prescribed fire as "any fire [that is] burning under
specific, pre-planned conditions and is meeting pre-determined land management
objectives."). For example, controlled burns may be used to remove slash or
control underbrush. Controlled burns are generally accepted as a tool for sound
forest management, and are widely used by public and private land managers. See
Bob Gray, Forests, Fires and Wild Things 230 (1985) (providing an example of the
Shasta-Trinity Forest, where more acreage has burned by controlled burns than by
wildfire). Controlled burns, however, can present problems, including damaging
clean air and water supplies, killing animals, and potentially slipping out of
control. See Mariel Garza, Fast Burn?Controlled Burn Policy of the US Forest
Service, Reason Mag., Nov. 1999, available at
http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1568/ is_6_31/ai_56750023/ (noting that
"there are the myriad environmental hurdles to consider [with controlled burns],
including rules about clean air and water. There's also the potential for
torching endangered animals. And contrary to their name, controlled burns aren't
all that controllable."). Bob Gray, an experienced fire expert, described a
controlled burn that became uncontrollable and burned 300 acres, including
private land and a Forest Service plantation of trees. Gray, supra at 232. To
monitor and protect against irresponsible use of controlled burns, government
agencies typically require the use of burn permits, and impose heightened
liability for escaped controlled burns. See generally Yoder, supra note 5
(providing an excellent overview of the liability rules surrounding prescription
burns and their efficacy).





n7.  Elements of Fire, http://www.smokeybear.com/elements-of-fire.asp (last
visited Sept. 23, 2010) (conveying that "the fire triangle is a simple way of
understanding the factors of fire. Each side of the triangle represents one of
the three ingredients needed to have a fire - oxygen, heat, and fuel -
demonstrating the interdependence of these ingredients in creating and
sustaining fire. When there is not enough heat generated to sustain the process,
when the fuel is exhausted, removed, or isolated, or when oxygen supply is
limited, then a side of the triangle is broken and the fire will die.").





n8.  Wildland Fire Prevention: Fuel Breaks, Fuel Reduction, & Other Tips, The
Colestin Rural Fire Dist., http://www.crfd.org/wildlandfireprevention.htm (last
visited Nov. 2, 2010) (noting that property owners can reduce wildfire risk by
eliminating slash, removing dead fuels including vegetation, branches, and
trees).





n9.  A well-recognized "fire season" occurs in which the vast majority of
wildland fires take place due to weather conditions. See Mark J. Schroeder &
Charles C. Buck, Fire Weather: A Guide for Application of Meteorological
Information to Fire Control Operations, U.S. Dep't of Agric. IV (1970),
available at http://training.nwcg.gov/documents/Fire%20Weather%20Handbo
ok_PMS_425-1.pdf (commenting that "free-burning fires are literally nourished by
weather elements, atmospheric components, and atmospheric motion.").





n10.  Enoch Bell et al., Fire Economics Assessment Report 30 (Sept. 1, 1995)
(unpublished report) (claiming that "increased human access generally increases
the frequency of wildfire ignitions - 88% of the fires from 1988-1997 were
caused by humans, with only 12% caused by lightning. While human-caused fires
can be catastrophic, they are typically in accessible areas, and thus can often
be controlled more quickly; for example, only 48% of the acres burned from
1988-1997 were in human-caused fires."). Estimates suggest that humans start
between 68% to 97% of all wildfires. See, e.g., Living With Wildfire: A
Homeowner's Guide, Rogue Valley Fire Prevention Co-Op 4 (2008), available at
http://www.co.josephine. or.us/files/wildfire2.pdf (noting that approximately
68% of all wildfires are human-caused, with lightning and other natural causes
being responsible for the rest).





n11.  See Robertson, supra note 1 (noting that the size of wildfires has
increased dramatically over the past twenty years).





n12.  See Gorte, supra note 5 (noting that "the cost of federal fire management
is high and rising. Wildfire appropriations for the FS and DOI totaled less than
$ 1billion annually prior to FY1997. For FY2003-FY2005, funding was $ 3 billion
annually."); Steve Pyne, The Wildland/Science Interface, fig. 1 (2009),
available at http://www.public.asu.edu/-spyne/GRAHAM.pdf.





n13.  Pyne, supra note 12, at 8.





n14.  Randal O'Toole, Reforming the Fire Service: An Analysis of Federal Fire
Budgets and Incentives, The Thoreau Inst. 13 (2002), available at
http://www.ti.org/firesvc.pdf (stating that "there is no doubt that forests are
different today than they were a hundred years ago").





n15.  Kevin C. Ryan, Climate Change, Fire & Natural Vegetation: Implications for
Wilderness Areas, in Wilderness & Wildfire 1, 18-21 (Tom Walsh ed., 1989)
(noting that the climate change associated with global warming will change
fires).





n16.  Matthew F. Pawa, Global Warming: The Ultimate Public Nuisance, 39 Envtl.
L. Rep. News & Analysis 10230, 10233 (2009) (stating that "more than one-half of
the most damaging fires in the United States over the past 170 years have
occurred in California, and the state leads the nation in wildfire-related
economic losses," and that "global warming will substantially increase the
wildlife damage in California by increasing the number of escaped wildfires,
increasing the area burned by wildfires, and shortening the return period
between wildfires.").





n17.  Brandon Honig, California Guard Adds Water Trucks to Firefighting
Inventory, The NAt'l Guard (Jan. 31, 2009), http://www.ng.mil/news/archives/
2009/02/020509-firefighter.aspx (noting that there were 1,800 fires burning
simultaneously in California in 2008, burning 1.3 million acres of land).





n18.  Id. (describing the allocation of manpower and resources for
firefighting).





n19.  See Keiter, supra note 5, at 303-04 (noting "an uncoordinated and
fragmented welter of organic statutory provisions, environmental protection
mandates, annual budget riders, site-specific legislation, judicial decisions,
policy documents, management plans, and diverse state statutory provisions");
Kurt M. Menning, Practical and Institutional Constraints on Adopting Wide-Scale
Prescribed Burning: Lessons from the Mountains of California, in Living on the
Edge: Economic, Institutional and Management Perspectives on Wildfire Hazard in
the Urban Interface 73, 82 (Austin Troy & Roger G. Kennedy eds., 2007) (stating
that "the sociopolitical context around fire?both prescribed and wild?is
increasingly complex."); Wishnie, supra note 4, at 1015 (noting that "wildland
fire management in the United States is beset by considerable institutional
complexity").





n20.  Gregory Vogt presents compelling first-hand accounts of a wide variety of
people who were impacted by the infamous 1989 Yellowstone wildfire. He explores
the impact of a major wildfire on an area from several different perspectives.
Gregory Vogt, Forests on Fire: The Fight to Save our Trees, 116-27 (1990).





n21.  See infra Part II.A.





n22.  See infra Part II.B.





n23.  See infra Part II.C.





n24.  For example, small private landowners may care about reducing smoke around
their residences during fires, whereas government land management agencies might
view the fire as a natural occurrence that should be allowed to continue
unchecked.





n25.  Wishnie, supra note 4, at 1008.





n26.  Betsy A. Cody, Cong. Research Serv., 95-599 ENR, Major Federal Land
Management Agencies: Managing Our Nation's Land and Resources, 1 (1995).





n27.  See id.





n28.  See, e.g., Gorte, supra note 5, at 9 (citations omitted) (noting that "in
1995, the FS estimated that thirty-nine million acres in the National Forest
System (NFS) were at high risk of catastrophic wildfire, and needed some form of
fuel treatment. More recently, the Coarse-Scale Analysis reported that fifty-one
million NFS acres were at high risk of significant ecological damage from
wildfire, and another eighty million acres were at moderate risk. The
Coarse-Scale Analysis also reported twenty-three million acres of Department of
the Interior lands at high risk and 76 million acres at moderate risk. All other
lands (calculated as the total shown in the Coarse-Scale Analysis less the NFS
and DOI lands) included 107 million acres at high risk and 314 million acres at
moderate risk of ecological damage.").





n29.  See Div. of Forestry, Alaska Dep't of Natural Res.,
http://forestry.alaska.gov/fire/ (last visited Sept. 23, 2010) (providing a
description of the interplay between state and federal land management agencies)
("fire management planning, preparedness, suppression operations, prescribed
fire, and related activities will be coordinated on an interagency basis with
the full involvement of DOF and its state, federal and local government
cooperators. The Division of Forestry, Bureau of Land Management, and the U.S.
Forest Service, fight fires within their protection areas on all land ownerships
which reduces the duplication of facilities and services. None of the agencies
in Alaska have all of the resources required to accomplish the fire protection
job on their own. The Division of Forestry has cooperative agreements with the
Departments of Agriculture and Interior, and numerous local government and
volunteer fire departments to help get the job done. The state and federal
agencies routinely utilize each other's personnel and resources to both manage
and fight fires. This is efficient and cost effective.").





n30.  The contrasting suppression goals of state and federal agencies can be
seen via the works of the Nat'l Wildfire Coordinating Grp. (NWCG). See
Memorandum from William Raage, NWCG Chair, to NWCG Committee Chairs and
Geographic Area Coordinating Group (GACG) 4 (July 8, 2010), available at
http://www.nwcg.gov/general/memos/nwcg-030-2010.pdf ( stating that "with rare
exceptions, state ... agencies support and carry out wildfire suppression
programs that provide for rapid and aggressive initial response to wildfires
with the intent of minimizing its spread. Federal agencies manage wildfires on
federal lands considerate of protecting communities and other state or private
resources.").





n31.  See Don Brunell, California Wildfires Are the Result of a Policy to "Let
Nature Take Its Course" Bonney Lake-Sumner Courier-Herald, Aug. 2, 2010,
available at http://www.pnwlocalnews.com/pierce/bch/opinion/99801134.ht ml.





n32.  U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, GAO-07-922T, Wildland Fire: Management
Improvements Could Enhance Federal Agencies' Efforts to Contain the Costs of
Fighting Fires 9-10 (2007). (noting that "the agencies have issued guidance
clarifying that land managers, not fire managers, have primary responsibility
for containing wildland fire costs").





n33.  See David Carle, Burning Questions: America's Fight with Nature's Fire
248-51 (2002) (describing agencies focus on ex post suppression, rather than ex
ante activity, such as fuel prevention or prescribed burning); Wishnie, supra
note 4, at 1009 ("fuel treatment programs often require drawn-out, expensive
analysis under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), while fire
suppression activities are exempt from analysis under NEPA's "emergency
exception.'") (citation omitted). In response to the increased number and level
of wildfires, legislation is being promoted to reduce hazardous fuels and thus
reduce the risk and spread of wildfire. California Catastrophic Wildfire
Prevention and Community Protection Act of 2009, H.R. 2899, 111th Cong. (2009).





n34.  Brock N. Meeks, Fight Against Wildfires Chronically Underfunded, MSNBC.com
(June 15, 2004, 6:51 PM), http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/5175836/. (stating that
the "the federal land agencies, and especially the Forest Service, have a blank
check to put out fires and thus have no reason to control their costs, ...")





n35.  Id.





n36.  See Melanie Stidham et al., The Role of Economic Emergency Situation
Determinations in Expediting Fire Salvage, 38 Envtl. L. Rep. News & Analysis
10741, 10742 (2008) (providing a description of the incentive to harvest federal
lands that have been burned by wildfire).





n37.  See U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, supra note 32, at 10 (noting how
"agencies have yet to establish a clear measure to evaluate the benefits and
costs of alternative firefighting strategies. Some past studies have concluded
that the absence of such a measure fundamentally weakens the agencies' ability
to provide effective oversight.").





n38.  See, e.g., A Primer: California's Wildfire Protection System, Cal. Legis.
Analyst's Office (Apr. 12, 2005), available at http://www.lao.ca.gov/2005
/fire_protection/051205_fire_protection.ht m. (providing a discussion and
diagram of state and federal responsibility areas for wildfire suppression). For
an overview of the importance of suppression agreements among agencies, see
Wildfire Protection & Suppression, Colo. State Forest Serv. Colo. State Univ.,
http://csfs.colostate.edu/pages/wf-suppression.html (last visited September 23,
2010) (commenting that "wildfire protection within Colorado cannot be
accomplished by any single agency. Cooperation and coordination between all
agencies is key to effective suppression.").





n39.  See Wildfire Protection & Suppression, supra note 38.





n40.  See Reforming the Fire Service, supra note 14, at 1 (describing a shift in
the mission of the Forest Service from the national timber program to responding
to severe fires).





n41.  Id. at 13. (conveying that "...the chief directed the agency to stop land
acquisitions, construction projects, and purchases of motor vehicles, computers,
and other items so that the money dedicated to those programs could be spent
fighting fires instead.").





n42.  These teams are referred to as incident command teams, and are tasked with
coordinating strategy and tactical decision-making in wildfire suppression. See
Montrose District Wildfire Protection and Management, Colo. State Forest Serv.
Colo. State Univ., http://csfs.colostate.edu/pages/montrose-wildfire.html (last
visited September 23, 2010) (providing a description of an incident management
team).





n43.  Forest Serv., U.S. Dep't of Agric., Fire Suppression Costs on Large Fires:
A Review of the 1994 Fire Season, 13-14 (1995).





n44.  See Gorte, supra note 5, at 6 (stating that "most observers agree that
protecting homes and other structures in the interface is an appropriate goal
for safeguarding the highest values at risk from wildfire.").





n45.  Id.





n46.  An example of summer homes being prioritized above high commercial timber
values can be found in the case of Teegarden v. United States, 42 Fed. Cl. 252
(1998) (quoting a letter from a Forest Supervisor that stated: "firefighter
safety is your first priority. Your second priority is the protection of life
and property. Mammoth Creek is a significant summer home area, and the spread of
the fire there must be prevented. Structural protection may be required. The
fire is in an area of high commercial timber values. Third priority is to keep
burned acreage to a minimum.").





n47.  Reforming the Fire Service, supra note 14, at 16 (noting that "[a] major
reason for the increasing costs of fire suppression is the growing number of
homes built near federal lands in what is called the wildland-urban
interface.").





n48.  See e.g., id. (noting that a major reason for the increasing costs of fire
suppression is the presence of homes in the wildland-urban interface).





n49.  Wishnie, supra note 4, at 1008. (observing that "fire management involves
hard choices with regard to use prioritization.").





n50.  Gorte, supra note 5, at 3 (commenting that during the 1994 fires, federal
officials observed that firefighting resources were diverted to protecting
nearby private residences and communities at a cost to federal lands and
resources); see U.S. Dep't of the Interior & U.S. Dep't of Agric., Fed. Wildland
Fire Mgmt. Policy & Program Review: Final Report (1995), available at
http://www.nwcg.gov/branches/ppm/fpc/archives/fire_polic
y/mission/1995_fed_wildland_fire_po licy_program_report.pdf.





n51.  Gorte, supra note 5, at 3.





n52.  For a detailed account of wildfire suppression prioritization decisions,
see Miller v. United States, 163 F.3d 591, 592 (9th Cir. 1998) (describing the
factual circumstances underlying the case) ("when lightning strikes the dry
forests of eastern Oregon in August, fire follows. After ninety days with no
rain and with temperatures above normal, a thunderstorm ignited several fires on
the Snow Mountain Ranger District ("SMRD") of the Ochoco National Forest on
August 6, 1990. Les Holsapple, the fire management officer for the SMRD, first
spotted the fire that damaged the Miller's property ("the Bald Butte fire")
around 7:00 p.m. In the course of that hour, several other fires were reported
on the SMRD. Within fifteen minutes, Holsapple ordered aerial fire retardants
and smokejumpers for the Bald Butte fire but was informed that retardant
aircraft had already been committed to a fire in the Deschutes National Forest
and that smokejumpers would be unable to reach the area before dark. Fire
engines and bull dozers were ordered, along with other equipment available under
equipment rental agreements. The four fire engines owned by the SMRD were all
committed to other fires in the district, and Holsapple directed Dick Smith, the
assistant Fire Management Officer who took over the initial attack on the fires,
that direct ground-based attack on the Bald Butte fire would be ineffective
given its current intensity levels and that they should find and suppress any
other small fires before those fires created a problem. At that time the Bald
Butte fire covered approximately 700-1,000 acres. The Bald Butte fire was soon
declared "escaped," and Holsapple advised the district ranger that it was unsafe
to commit resources to the fire at that time. Smith went on to lead efforts to
attack another fire on the SMRD, the Buck Springs fire. Although monitoring and
suppression planning efforts for the Bald Butte fire were ongoing, on-the-ground
fire suppression efforts did not occur until sometime on the afternoon of August
7, 1990, seventeen to twenty-three hours after the Bald Butte fire was first
sited (sic). The Bald Butte fire soon joined two other fires, for a total size
of approximately 6,000 acres. This coalescence of fires crossed onto the
Millers' property sometime on the afternoon of August 9, 1990.").





n53.  Many of the factors influencing wildfire suppression efforts have not been
formally studied, as fire science is a field grounded largely in institutional
knowledge. See infra Section III. There are, however, individual studies showing
correlations between the fire tools used and number of large fires in a
particular year. See, e.g., Norman Maclean, Young Men and Fire 24-25 (1992)
(describing that the number of large fires corresponds to the availability of
smokejumpers). Further, it has been suggested that ease of communication when
responding to exigent wildfire circumstances is beneficial to suppression
efforts. See generally Gary Craven Gray, Radio for the Fireline, A History of
Electronic Communication in the Forest Service 1905-1975 (1982).





n54.  For a description of simulated wildfire computer models, see Fire Wars:
Description of "Wildfire Simulator," NOVA Online, http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/
nova/fire/simu_text.html (last visited Sept. 23, 2010).





n55.  See, e.g., Marc Ambinder, The Fires This Time: Joe Flood on Managing New
York City, The Atlantic (May 13, 2010), available at http://www.theatlantic
.com/politics/archive/2010/05/the-fires-this-time-joe-flood-on-managing-new-york
-city/56682/ (describing skepticism towards computer models used for
firefighting).





n56.  See Montrose District Wildfire Protection and Management, supra note 42.





n57.  See Gorte, supra note 5, at i ("However, past experience with wildfires
are of limited value for building predictive models, and research on fire
behavior under various circumstances is difficult, at best. Thus, predictive
tools for fire protection and control are often based on expert opinion and
anecdotes, rather than on research evidence.").





n58.  Id.





n59.  See Gray, supra note 6, at 231 (explaining that "firefighters learn more
about fire behavior from these controlled burns than they ever could in a fire
behavior class, getting a grandstand view on the effect of wind, slope and fuel
types on fire.").





n60.  George Nickas, Preserving and Enduring Wilderness: Challenges and Threats
to the National Wilderness Preservation System, 76 Denv. U. L. Rev. 449, 457
(1999).





n61.  Wishnie, supra note 4, at 1033 (citing Stephen J. Pyne et al.,
Introduction to Wildland Fire 434 (2d ed. 1996)).





n62.  See Gorte, supra note 5, at 16 (illustrating that "one critic has observed
that emergency supplemental appropriations, to replenish funds borrowed from
other accounts to pay for firefighting, are viewed by agency employees as "free
money.'").





n63.  Id.





n64.  Pyne et al., supra note 61, at 434 (remarking that "programs with a large
number of wildfires pay for themselves in ways that successful programs of fire
prevention or prescribed burning do not.")





n65.  See Wishnie, supra note 4, at 1033.





n66.  See id. at 1009, 1033-34.





n67.  See id.





n68.  Id. at 1009-10.





n69.  See Reforming the Fire Service, supra note 14, at 10 (observing that "fire
managers do not lose their jobs for pouring massive resources into fire
suppression, or even for burning down someone's home if it is done in the course
of a backfire aimed at stopping a wildfire.").





n70.  Gorte, supra note 5, at 6 (noting that "the wildland-urban interface has
been defined as the area where combustible homes meet combustible vegetation")
(internal quotations omitted).





n71.  See id. (noting that "while this situation has always existed to some
extent, subdivisions in wildland settings appear to have grown significantly
over the past two decades.").





n72.  See id. at 5 (stating that"people have increasingly been building their
houses and subdivisions in forests and other wildlands, and this expanding
wildland-urban interface has increased the wildfire threat to people and
houses.").





n73.  See Wealth and Asset Ownership , U.S. Census Bureau, http://www.census
.gov/hhes/www/wealth/2004/wlth04-1.html (last visited Sept. 23, 2010) (providing
a breakdown of average asset holdings by household).





n74.  For a private landowner, the proportional share of damage can be
understood as the ratio of: amount of property damaged/ total amount of property
owned. For the typical wildland-urban interface property owner, the denominator
and numerator are both one, showing 100% of their property is damaged by the
fire. In contrast, it is unlikely that 100% of the acreage owned by an
institutional land owner?defined as having more than 5,000 acres?is damaged in a
single fire.





n75.  See Gorte, supra note 5, at 18 (discussing the potential effects wildfires
can have on water systems); Wishnie, supra note 4, at 1012 (noting the impact
wildfires can have on air quality).





n76.  See Gorte, supra note 5, at 18.





n77.  Vogt, supra note 20, at 115.





n78.  See Gorte, supra note 5, at 20.





n79.  Id. at 6 (remarking that "the characteristics of the structure and their
immediate surroundings are the primary determinants of whether a structure
burns. In particular, non-flammable roofs and cleared vegetation for at least
ten meters (thirty-three feet) and up to forty meters (130 feet) around the
structure is highly likely to protect the structure from wildfire, even when
neighboring structures burn.").





n80.  The Oregon Forestland-Urban Interface Fire Protection Act of 1997 permits
a state to collect up to $ 100,000 in suppression costs from a WUI
(wildland-urban interface) landowner if three criteria are met: (1) A wildland
fire originates on the owner's property, (2) the fire spreads within the
protection zone around a structure and driveway that does not meet the
[fuel-reduction] standards; and (3) Oregon Department of Forestry incurs
extraordinary costs to suppress the fire. The cost collection may be greater
than $ 100,000 if a WUI landowner is found to be negligent in the origin of the
fire. Tod Hunt, Living With Wildfire: A Homeowner's Guide: Jackson/Josephine
County Integrated Fire Plans, First Am. Title Ins. Co. of Or.,
http://www.co.josephine.or.us/files/fire_county_j cifp_booklet.pdf. (last
visited Nov. 7, 2010).





n81.  See generally, Malia Wollan, Wildfires Bring Demand for Private
Firefighters, U.S.A. Today, July 15, 2009, http://www.usatoday.com/news
/nation/2008-07-15-1368518548_x.htm.





n82.  See Gorte, supra note 5, at 6 (noting that "most observers agree that
protecting homes and other structures in the interface is an appropriate goal
for safeguarding the highest values at risk from wildfire.").





n83.  Office of Mgmt. & Budget, Exec. Office of the President, Budget of the
United States Government, Fiscal Year 2003, 66-67 (2002).





n84.  Id. at 66.





n85.  O'Toole, supra note 5 at 11.





n86.  Reforming the Fire Service, supra note 14, at 14.





n87.  Id. at 16 (quoting Gary O. Tokle, The Wildland/Urban Interface in 2025, in
Proceedings of the Symposium on Wildland Fire 2000, at 49 (James B. Davis &
Robert E. Martin eds., 1987)).





n88.  Timothy Ingalsbee, Money to Burn: The Economics of Fire and Fuels
Management, Part One: Fire Suppression, W. Fire Ecology Ctr./Amer. Land Alliance
1, 4 (2000) (quoting Richard Mangan, Fire Program Leader, U.S. Forest Serv.,
presentation at the Symposium on Fire Econ.: Planning and Policy Bottom Lines
(Apr. 6, 1999)).





n89.  Richenda Connell et al., Evaluating the Private Sector Perspective on the
Financial Risks of Climate Change, 15 Hastings W.-N.w. J. Envtl. L. & Pol'y 133,
138-39 (2009).





n90.  See Gorte, supra note 5 (noting that insurance distorts incentives away
from insurers requiring the maximum use of fire-safe materials for
homebuilders).





n91.  Kevin Ramakrishna, Subduing the Ceaseless Storm: Breaking the
Build-Destroy-Rebuild Cycle Following Major Catastrophes through Taxation and
Responsibility, 2 Alb. Gov't L. Rev. 328, 335 (2009).





n92.  Id. at 355.





n93.  Id. at 329 (stating that no national policy exists to break the
"build-destroy-rebuild cycle" created by government-sponsored homeowner's
insurance schemes associated with homes that are built in areas with a frequent
occurrence of natural disaster, including wildfires).





n94.  See Wollan, supra note 81.





n95.  See supra note 5 and accompanying text.





n96.  Gorte, supra note 5, at 1 (staying that "despite the substantial attention
given to the FS [Forest Service] and DOI [Department of the Interior] agencies,
the majority of wildlands are privately owned").





n97.  Id. at n.3.





n98.  See infra Part III.





n99.  A 1947 forestry textbook explained that forestry companies in the United
States uniformly do not carry insurance against losses due to wildfire although
the rate of loss is higher than that used in other insurable fields. Practices
are similar in other countries surveyed, with the exception of Scandinavian
nations. Herman H. Chapman & Walter H. Meyer, Forest Valuation: With Special
Emphasis on Basic Economic Principles 346-49 (1947).





n100.  See Gorte, supra note 5, at 15 (stating that "aAnother possibility is to
significantly change the traditional approach to timber sales. Stewardship
contracting, in various forms, has been tested in various national forests... .
Some observers believe that such alternative approaches could lead to
development of an industry based on small diameter wood, and thus significantly
reduce the cost of fuel management.").





n101.  See id. (describing that timber harvest and the building of straight
roads may reduce the risk of conflagration in some ways, but may increase risk
in others).





n102.  A.D. Folweiler & A.A. Brown, Fire in the Forests of the United States
(1946).





n103.  I do not consider costs other than value to the land, such as suppression
costs, and fixed business costs, which are outside the framework for just
compensation.





n104.  Webster's New World Dictionary, 1331 (3d coll. ed. 1988) (defining
"stumpage" as: "1 standing timber or its value; 2 the right to cut such
timber.").





n105.  Alix Rogstad, Recovering from Wildfire: A Guide for Arizona's Forest
Owners, Univ. of Ariz., Coop. Extension, Coll. of Agric. & Life Sci. (2002),
available at http://ag.arizona.edu/pubs/natresources/az1294/.





n106.  See id.





n107.  See generally Michael Jacobson, To Cut or Not to Cut: Tree Value and
Deciding When to Harvest Timber, Penn St., Coll. of Agric. Scis., Agric.
Research & Coop. Extension (2008), available at http://rnrext.cas.psu.edu/PDFs/
uh188.pdf. Whereas corn or almonds may lose virtually all value if allowed to
sit for a few extra months, healthy timber stands can continue to grow for years
(while waiting for an increase in prices) and appreciate in value. See id. at
2-3. Unlike other crops, timber does not have to be harvested in a particular
season. See Andrew S. Fuller, Practical Forestry 72 (1884).





n108.  Weyerhaeuser Co. v. United States, 92 F.3d 1148, 1152 (Fed. Cir. 1996)
(noting "that to have delayed salvage operations would have resulted in further
losses, for damaged trees are vulnerable to disease.").





n109.  See Gorte, supra note 5, at 18 (remarking that "e[]xtensive fire damage
to trees can significantly alter the timber supply ... through a short-term glut
from timber salvage ... .").





n110.  See, e.g., Thune v. United States, 872 F. Supp. 921, 922 (D. Wyo. 1995)
(describing a United States Forest Service controlled burn that grew out of
control and became a wildfire in the Bridger-Teton National Forest). In Thune,
the plaintiff, who ran a small business guiding hunters, maintained a base camp
where he stored his hunting gear. Id. at 923. The base camp containing the
plaintiff's capital investments in his business were entirely destroyed by the
wildfire. Id.





n111.  See, e.g., id.





n112.  See generally Bob Zybach et al., U.S. Wildfire Cost-Plus-Loss Economics
Project: The "One-Pager" Checklist, Wildland Fire Lessons Learned Center (2009),
available at http://www.wildfirelessons.net/uploads/Wildfire_Eco nomics_
LongL_pdf.pdf (stressing that the collateral damage associated with wildfires is
both statistically significant and underreported).





n113.  Id.





n114.  No. CV 08-0889-MO, 2009 WL 3756370 (D. Or. 2009).





n115.  Id. at 1.





n116.  Id.





n117.  See Folweiler, supra note 102 at 20.





n118.  In many cases damage to important commercial hardwoods is concealed and
not discoverable until cutting through the bark. Id. at 25 (noting that "fire
damage is insidious because so often the new lesions are concealed by dead
bark.").





n119.  Id. at 16.





n120.  Id. at 20.





n121.  Id. at 25.





n122.  Id. at 21 (commenting that "where frequent fires occur, the A[o] horizon
is absent because the forest litter is burned before it can be decomposed by
slow-acting micro-organisms. The absence of the A[o] horizon prevents micro and
macro-organisms from living and thus causes the surface soil to be relatively
impervious, thereby reducing percolation, and increasing runoff and attendant
erosion.") Id. at 23.





n123.  Id. at 23 (noting that where there is frequent fire among redwoods, "the
soil conditions have become so badly damaged that even planted redwood seedlings
have difficulty in surviving. It is impossible for natural redwood reproduction
to become established on sites that have been burned repeatedly.").





n124.  Id. at 21.





n125.  See id.





n126.  See id at 23.





n127.  Id. at 24 (noting that "unless a tree is injured in some way so that the
cambium layer is broken, spores of wood-rotting diseases seldom gain entrance.
When the protective bark tissue is removed by fire, spores are able to gain
entrance and commence their damaging work.").





n128.  Id.





n129.  Id. at 25.





n130.  Rogstad, supra note 105 (noting depressed value of burned trees, and that
in some areas markets may not even existed for burned timber).





n131.  Id.





n132.  Gorte, supra note 5, at 23 (noting that foresters are used as stand-in
firefighters during wildfire).





n133.  See Rogstad, supra note 105 (providing an example of the involved
mitigation measures necessary to counteract wildfire).





n134.  See Vogt, supra note 20 (describing the perspectives of area residents, a
forester, an ecologist, a business owner, a firefighter, tourists, an
environmentalist, an historian, and a park ranger in response to a major fire).





n135.  DVD: Legacy of Fire: The Story of the Tillamook Burn (Tillamook Forest
Center, Oregon Department of Forestry 2008) (documentary video showing the
regeneration efforts of community groups culminating in the successful re-growth
of 350,000 acres of forest devastated by a series of burns).





n136.  Folweiler, supra note 102, at 27 (asserting that "fires destroy timber
and affect all the wildlife which use the timber for shelter. In large fires
particularly game losses are tremendous.").





n137.  Id.





n138.  Wildlife have commercial value to land managers who sell the hunting
rights to their property. See Dean Lueck, Wildlife Law, in The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics and the Law 693-701 (Peter Newman ed., 1998).





n139.  See Rogstad, supra note 105.





n140.  Id.





n141.  Id.





n142.  Gorte, supra note 5.





n143.  See generally The True Cost of Wildfire in the Western U.S., W. Forestry
Leadership Coal. (2009), available at http://www.wflccenter.org/news_pdf/324_
pdf.pdf (providing an overview of wildfire costs beyond suppression).





n144.  Garza, supra note 6 (stating that "fires are an integral part of the
ecosystem.").





n145.  Id. (commenting that "fires ... enrich and renew the soil and get rid of
old and diseased vegetation.").





n146.  639 F.2d 700 (Ct. Cl. 1980).





n147.  Id. at 703 n.5.





n148.  Id.; see also James A. Young & Cheryl G. Young, Seeds of Woody Plants in
North America 250 (Theodore R. Dudley ed., 1992) (noting that the pinecones of
some Lodgepole pine trees only open to release seeds when heated to a
temperature that is achieved by fire).





n149.  See Jon A. Souder & Sally K. Fairfax, Arbitrary Administrators,
Capricious Bureaucrats and Prudent Trustees: Does it Matter in the Review of
Timber Salvage Sales?, 18 Pub. Land & Res. L. Rev. 165, 185 (1997) (citing as an
example the fact that salvage sales for dead trees are exempted from the
National Forest Management Act because their "biological growth rate is presumed
to be zero.").





n150.  See Marc Fink, Logging After Wildfire: Salvaging Value or Mugging a Burn
Victim?, 19 J. Envtl. L. & Litig. 193, 203 (2004) ("... in July 2003, the Forest
Service published notice of new categorical exclusions for "limited timber
harvest' including the "salvage of dead and/or dying trees' on up to 250
acres.") (citation omitted).





n151.  See Thomas N. Lippe & Kathy Bailey, Regulation of Logging on Private Land
in California under Governor Gray Davis, 31 Golden Gate U.L. Rev. 351, 364
(2001) (observing that "local ordinances that attempt to regulate the conduct of
or impose additional permit requirements on timber operations are generally
preempted by state law.").





n152.  See Rogstad, supra note 105.





n153.  One cannot hope to provide comprehensive solutions to these widespread
issues in a single article, but taking the first step of identifying the most
pressing problems will serve as a catalyst for future study.





n154.  CDF's Civil Cost Recovery Program, Cal. Dep't of Forestry and Fire Prot.
1, 2 (2004), available at http://cdfdata.fire.ca.gov/admin/fireplan/fpupload/
fpp_law_CDFs_Civil_Cost_Reco very_Program1.pdf.





n155.  Id.





n156.  Id.





n157.  See id. (providing two examples of multimillion dollar negotiated
settlements); see also Keiter, supra note 5, at 332.





n158.  Sue Russell, Catching Arsonists Red-Handed, Miller-McCune, Feb. 15, 2010,
http://www.miller-mccune.com/legal-affairs/catching-arsonists-red-handed-9062/
(noting that a small number of wildfires are intentionally-set).





n159.  See Yoder, supra note 5, 1-3 (noting strict liability regimes for
starting a wildfire).





n160.  The government controls firefighting efforts. Private individuals do not
get to make decisions about which or how many resources the government will
employ during a wildfire. For an example of how firefighting decisions are made
among agencies, but not involving private parties, see Div. of Forestry, Alaska
Dep't of Natural Res., supra note 29 (noting that "fire management planning,
preparedness, suppression operations, prescribed fire, and related activities
will be coordinated on an interagency basis with the full involvement of DOF and
its state, federal and local government cooperators. The Division of Forestry,
Bureau of Land Management, and the U.S. Forest Service, fight fires within their
protection areas on all land ownerships which reduces the duplication of
facilities and services. None of the agencies in Alaska have all of the
resources required to accomplish the fire protection job on their own. The
Division of Forestry has cooperative agreements with the Departments of
Agriculture and Interior, and numerous local government and volunteer fire
departments to help get the job done. The state and federal agencies routinely
utilize each other's personnel and resources to both manage and fight fires.
This is efficient and cost effective.").





n161.  Id.





n162.  This surprising level of discretion is attributable to the need to
prioritize among many fires, or obtain agency-oriented objectives such as
training opportunities for firefighters or vegetation management through letting
fire burn. See Memorandum, supra note 30, at 4 (stating that "fires can now be
managed for multiple objectives, which may change as conditions on the fire
change."). Some familiar with firefighting practices allege that the authority
is misused by firefighters to allow campaign fires to develop as a means of
agency-aggrandizing through attracting public attention and resources. See also
supra Part II.





n163.  Richard Mangan, a wildfire expert employed by the U.S. Forest Service is
quoted as saying, "Often we use resources because of the public and political
pressure to do something, even though it has no effect on the fire and is an
economic waste." Ingalsbee, supra note 88. In 2008, the L.A. Times published an
expose on intentional waste of resources by government firefighting agencies,
reporting that expense aircraft is often used during fire in response to
political pressure, even when it is known that the use of aircraft will not
further fire suppression goals. Julie Cart & Bettina Boxall, Air Tanker Drops in
Wildfires are Often Just for Show, L.A. Times, July 29, 2008, available at
http://www.latimes.
com/news/local/politics/cal/la-me-wildfires29-2008jul29,0,3486219.story. This is
an expense exercise: "Aviation costs amount to about one-fifth of [U.S. Forest
Service] fire-suppression spending... $ 296 million in 2007." Id.





n164.  See Div. of Forestry, Alaska Dep't of Natural Res., supra note 29.





n165.  Ideological differences in the use of land differ starkly, and become
especially problematic because the use of one land may hinder the use of
adjacent land in wildfire settings. For example, by not harvesting timber, the
environmental group creates a more natural setting, but also increases the risk
of wildfire spreading across their property to other adjacent timberlands. One
landowner fulfilling her objective directly negatively hinders the ability of
another landowner to fulfill his objective.


                              539 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                 The Daily News (Jacksonville, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            March 13, 2013 Wednesday

BRIEF: Wildfire 100 percent contained

BYLINE: The Daily News, Jacksonville, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 162 words


March 13--The wildfire that began Sunday night in the Croatan National Forest is
100 percent contained as of late Tuesday, according to the U.S. Forest Service.

Firefighters are still on the scene, working to fully extinguish the fire.

The total acreage burned was 401 acres on national forest land and 24 acres on
private land.

The wildfire is located near N.C. 24 and Nine Mile Road in the national forest.
Fire managers believe humans caused the wildfire, which is still under
investigation.

Fire managers with the U.S. Forest Service were alerted to the wildfire around
9:30 p.m. Sunday.

Nearly 20 firefighters from the U.S. Forest Service, North Carolina Forest
Service, volunteer fire departments, Department of Defense and other agencies
have worked to contain the wildfire.

No injuries or property damage have been reported.

___ (c)2013 The Daily News (Jacksonville, N.C.) Visit The Daily News
(Jacksonville, N.C.) at www.jdnews.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130313-JN-BRF-Wildfire-100-percent-contained-0313-20130313

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JN


                         Copyright 2013 The Daily News


                              540 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            November 12, 2012 Monday
                                 CHASE EDITION

U.S. endures near-record wildfire season;
9 million acres scorched is size of Mass. + Conn.

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY,

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 513 words


Scorching heat and relentless drought this year  helped spark one of the
nation's worst wildfire seasons. For only the third time on record, the total
number of acres burned from wildfires nationwide  has topped 9million in a year,
according to  the National Interagency Fire Center.

The area scorched as of  Friday -- 9,101,461 acres -- is roughly the size of
Massachusetts and Connecticut combined.

Randy Eardley, spokesman for the fire center in Boise, said that amount of
acreage  has happened just twice previously -- 2006 and 2007 -- since good
record-keeping began in 1960.

Despite the high number of acres burned, U.S. wildfire economic losses are
down, said Steve Bowen, meteorologist with global re-insurer Aon Benfield.
There's been slightly more than $1 billion in economic losses from wildfires in
the USA so far this year, Bowen said, down from about $1.5 billion in 2011.

This year's losses are generally in line with the 10-year average (2002-11) of
$1.2 billion, he said.

With more than seven weeks of fall and winter weather left this year, Eardley
said, it's unlikely the  record set in 2006, when 9.8 million acres burned, will
be broken. (In 2007, 9.3million acres were charred.)

Wildfires have killed 13 firefighters and civilians so far this year, Eardley
reports. That is more than in all of 2011 but is  below the 10-year average of
18.

Some of the worst fires were in Colorado, which endured both its most and
second-most destructive wildfires in state history in June, and in Oregon, which
had its largest fire in state history in July, the National Climatic Data Center
reports. The worst month nationally was August, when more than 3.6 million acres
burned, the highest single-month losses since 2000.

Structure losses are another measure of fire season severity. Overall, 2,125
homes  have been consumed by wildfire nationally so far this year, below the
yearly average losses of 2,600 homes. But for the 346 homeowners who lost homes
to Colorado Springs' Waldo Canyon Fire alone, 2012 has been arguably the worst
fire season ever, Eardley said.

"Good Lord  I've never seen anything like this," C.J. Moore said in July upon
returning to her Colorado Springs home, which had been reduced to ashes.  The
Waldo Canyon Fire has been the costliest U.S. wildfire this year, Bowen says.
That blaze caused roughly $500 million in  losses (most of which were insured),
and was the most destructive wildfire in state history.

"Several other western and central states saw an elevated number of wildfires as
well, which can almost certainly be correlated with the severe drought," Bowen
said.

"Given the severity of the drought and the amount of acres burned this year,
it's somewhat remarkable that we have not seen even more wildfire damage," he
said.

Eardley added that in the remote areas where wildfires burned this year, the
news isn't always bad.

"With the removal of so much fuel, we don't anticipate fires there again. The
reduced fuel areas act as fire breaks," he said, "and generally are a benefit to
fighting future fires."

Contributing: The Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              541 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Cumberland Times-News (Maryland)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            March 25, 2009 Wednesday

Warm, dry weather heightens wildfire danger: DNR offers burning tips

BYLINE: Cumberland Times News, Md.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 527 words


Mar. 25--CUMBERLAND -- Dry conditions across Maryland are elevating the risk of
fire and have already led to an increase in the number of wildfires in the
state. The Maryland Department of Natural Resources Forest Service urges caution
in any outdoor activity that could spark a wildfire.

"Current weather conditions of warmer temperatures, low humidity and high winds
can easily turn small fires into dangerous incidents that threaten lives,
property and natural resources," said State Fire Supervisor Monte Mitchell.
"Each year, DNR Forest Service staff responds to an average of 660 wildfires
that burn more than 3,600 acres of forest, fields and marshlands."

Wildfires in Maryland this year are above average with 223 incidents burning
4,652 acres.

Debris and outdoor burning remain the leading causes of wildfires in Maryland,
accounting for more than 30 percent of the wildfires in the state. Other causes
include arson, children and equipment use. Lightning, the only natural source of
fire ignition, accounts for less than 2 percent of wildfire starts in Maryland.

While outdoor debris burning is legal in most areas of the state, the Maryland
Forest Service strongly recommends safer and more environmentally friendly
alternatives such as composting or mulching of yard waste, leaves and brush, and
using larger brush or trees for firewood.

The department recommends that outdoor burning be postponed until after rainfall
of an inch or more. Even then, it should only be done on low fire-danger days.

DNR open-air burning regulations must be followed for all activities in
woodlands, within 200 feet of woodlands, and adjacent to or within an area where
flammable materials could ignite and carry fire to woodlands.

--There must be a natural or constructed fire break at least 10 feet wide
completely around the material to be burned that is free of flammable materials.

--Adequate personnel and equipment must be present to prevent the fire from
escaping.

--At least one responsible person must remain at the fire until the last spark
is out.

--Burning may only occur between 4 p.m. and 12 midnight unless the ground is
covered with snow.

"Homeowners also have a responsibility for wildfire preparedness in order to
minimize and prevent losses when a wildfire occurs," said Mit-chell.

Creating an area of at least 30 feet surrounding the home and outbuildings
serves as a safety zone around the structures. Vegetation should be controlled
and the area should be free of dead debris, leaves and flammable vegetation.

Maintaining a green space that is landscaped with fire-resistant vegetation
improves the safety zone. In addition, each household should prepare a disaster
plan.

For more information, log on to www.dnr.state.md.us/forests/ wfm.asp

To see more of the Cumberland Times News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.times-news.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, Cumberland Times News, Md.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090325-UM-Warm-dry-weather-heightens-wildfire-danger-0325

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UM


                                 Copyright 2009


                              542 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 16, 2018 Tuesday

Washington: Gardner, Cantwell Introduce Legislation to Modernize Firefighting
Technology

LENGTH: 672  words



Washington: Office of the Senator Senator Cory Gardner has issued the following
news release:

U.S. Senators Cory Gardner (R-CO) and Maria Cantwell (D-WA) introduced the
Wildfire Management Technology Advancement Act of 2017, a bill designed to bring
firefighting agencies into the 21st century.



This bill will increase firefighter safety by requiring the Forest Service and
the Department of the Interior to begin providing GPS locations for crews on
wildfires and to begin using Unmanned Aircraft Systems to scout out and map
wildfires in real-time. Wildfire Today refers to the simultaneous use of mapping
aircraft and GPS locators as the 'Holy Grail' of firefighter safety.

"Our firefighters in Colorado and around the country risk everything to protect
our communities and it is our duty to make sure they have every possible tool at
their disposal to safely fight wildfires," said Gardner. "The Center of
Excellence for Advanced Technology Aerial Firefighting in Colorado develops
cutting-edge technologies and this legislation will compliment those efforts. I
will work with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to make sure this
important, common-sense bill becomes law."

"Firefighters on the front lines and those who give their lives to protect us
deserve fair treatment from their government," Senator Cantwell said. "My
legislation would combine these two technologies [real-time fire mapping and GPS
locating] to give our firefighters more safety and security as they deal with
these unbelievable conditions."

In addition to the use of advanced technology, the Wildfire Management
Technology Advancement Act of 2017 requires that trends in firefighter injuries
be analyzed in order to target training to prevent future injuries and
fatalities.

Communities and businesses would also benefit from provisions in the Wildfire
Management Technology Advancement Act of 2017. This bill directs the Agencies to
work with NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab and the Department of the Interior's
National Labs, e.g., the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, to better
predict the areas that will most likely experience large wildfires during fire
season. These forecasts will allow for agencies to more strategically stage
resources before fires occur. In addition, this legislation requires smoke
forecasters be assigned to all large wildfires to provide the most accurate
information to those impacted by a wildfire.

Finally, this bill includes provisions to streamline firefighting response.
Cost-share funding is authorized for at-risk communities to install and operate
next-generation reverse-911 systems, potentially speeding up evacuations and
saving lives. This legislation also authorizes disaster agencies to make use of
NASA's tools to speed-up the installation of post-fire, erosion-prevention
measures.

The Wildfire Management Technology Advancement Act of 2017 has received support
from national firefighter organizations:

"Wildland firefighters need the support of Congress to get federal agencies to
utilize the best available science and most advanced technology in federal fire
management. The past two decades have seen millions of tax dollars invested in
research and development of high-tech tools that can accurately map, monitor,
and model wildfire spread. Senator Cantwell's proposed legislation will enable
us to reap the benefits of those investments to improve the safety and success
of crews managing wildfires," said Timothy Ingalsbee, executive director of
Firefighters United for Safety, Ethics, and Ecology.

"Wildfires are having an increasing impact on public and firefighter safety,"
said Lorraine Carli, Vice President of Outreach and Advocacy for the National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA). "Legislative support for technologies that
streamline firefighting response and improve safety conditions for first
responders and residents alike is critical as this threat grows. This bill will
help get key scientific research and knowledge applied where it will make a
significant difference."

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              543 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 22, 2017 Friday

Washington: Following Devastating Wildfires in Utah, Hatch Pushes for Funding
for Fire Prevention and Treatment

LENGTH: 684  words



Washington: Office of the Senator Orrin Hatch has issued the following news
release:
In the wake of historic wildfires in Utah, Oregon, Idaho, and across the West,
U.S. Sens. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, Ron Wyden, D-Ore., Mike Crapo, R-Idaho, Dianne
Feinstein, D-Calif., Jim Risch, R-Idaho, Maria Cantwell, D-Wash., Jeff Merkley,
D-Ore., Cory Gardner, R-Colo., and Michael Bennet, D-Colo., introduced
legislation that would protect desperately needed funding for fire prevention
and treat wildfires as the natural disasters they are.



 The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act of 2017 would end the destructive cycle of
borrowing from fire prevention accounts to put out fires and stop the erosion of
the Forest Service's budget by reforming the way the federal government funds
wildfires.

 "Wildfires continue to decimate Western communities, ruining sources of
drinking water, destroying property, and even claiming lives. Wildfires have all
the qualities of a natural disaster, and it's time that the federal government
treat them as such," Hatch said. "This critical legislation gives much-needed
relief to the Forest Service by putting an end to funding requirements that make
it all but impossible for the agency to bear the increased costs of wildfire
suppression. Ultimately, our bipartisan proposal will leave the Forest Service
better prepared to fight forest fires and better equipped to prevent them from
happening in the first place. It is imperative that we to return to a more
balanced approach to forest management, not just fire management. I am confident
that this bill will help foster safer, healthier forests in Utah and across the
West for years to come."

 "Oregonians and westerners are battling another record-breaking fire year. The
threat of catastrophic wildfires is growing, yet the federal government
continues to conduct 'business as usual' when it comes to fighting fires in
Oregon and the West," Wyden said. "More communities are put in danger and fire
prevention work gets left undone because of a backwards fire budgeting system.
It's past time for Congress to make it a top priority to end fire borrowing,
stop the erosion of the Forest Service becoming the 'Fire Service' and start
treating wildfires like the natural disasters they are."

 Unlike for other natural disasters, where agencies can draw from an emergency
fund to pay for disaster response, the U.S. Forest Service and Interior
Department do not have access to disaster funds and are forced to "fire borrow"
- or steal money from fire prevention and other important programs already
funded in their agencies to pay to put out fires.

 Currently, federal agencies calculate wildfire suppression budgets based on the
average costs of wildfire suppression over the past 10 years. But as fire
seasons grow longer and wildfires have become more expensive to fight, Congress
is forced to appropriate more funding to an outdated budgeting system that
almost always underestimates the actual cost of fighting fires.

 The updated bipartisan Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would fund wildfires as
natural disasters and protect the agencies' fire prevention budgets by putting a
freeze on the rising budget costs of the 10-year average. It would end "fire
borrowing" by allowing the agencies to fund any fire suppression spending needed
above the frozen average through disaster funding just like other agencies can
access disaster funding for tornadoes, hurricanes and floods.

 Making disaster funding available after the appropriated fire suppression funds
are spent would allow the Forest Service to use its fire prevention funding for
its intended purpose - completing hazardous fuels reduction projects that have
been shown to help break the cycle of increasingly dangerous and costly fires.

 The U.S. Department of Agriculture announced last week that this year has been
the single most expensive fire year on record, with fire suppression activities
totaling more than $2 billion. Addressing the current, problematic system of
wildfire funding is part of a larger need to stabilize and update emergency
spending for all natural disasters.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              544 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Himalayan Times

                              May 2, 2017 Tuesday

No wildfire casualty reported so far this year

BYLINE: Himalayan News Service

LENGTH: 435  words


Kathmandu, May 2: Although April is generally the peak month for forest fires in
the country, no casualties have been reported in forest fires this summer so
far.

Coordinator of the Regional South Asia Wildland Fire Network Sundar Sharma said
climatic conditions this year was not favourable for wildfires. Although 2015
was also predicted to be free of forest fires, three people died and two were
injured in a wildfire that year.

"Pre-monsoon rains have prevented forest fires this year,"  Sharma told The
Himalayan Times, "The lack of needed moisture and continuing precipitation has
prevented wildfires."

Sharma expressed his happiness and suggested to the government to mark this year
as 'zero wildfire casualty year' if this continued for the next month.

"Forest fires cause a lot of destruction of both life and property in Nepal, but
this has been a relief," he said. Sharma opined that awareness raising
programmes related to forest fires could have also contributed to the prevention
of this disaster this year.

The Regional South Asia Wildland Fire Network had recorded 82 human casualties
in wildfires in the last one decade.

Forest fires typically occur during the period from mid-February to May in
Nepal. In April 25, 2009, 420 incidents of forest fires were recorded in a
single day, the highest recorded wildfire incidents in a day.

With the onset of dry and windy season which usually begins as early as February
and until June, various places across the country, especially the Tarai
districts that witness rise in temperatures during dry months, report cases of
wildfire each year.

According to Sharma, since 2009 the government has come up with some positive
interventions to address the growing threat of wildfires in forests and
communities, including the formulation of Forest Policy released this year that
has integrated policies to minimise the risks and prepare communities to combat
wildfires.

In 2010, the Forest Fire Management Strategy was endorsed which focuses on
involving local communities and concerned stakeholders to mitigate the risk of
wildfires in both community and public forests.

The objectives of the strategy are to   develop   and   strengthen   necessary
policy   and   institution   for   forest   fire management; to  mobilise  local
communities,  civil societies,  government,  and  non-government organisations
in the prevention and control of forest fires; to  develop  communication  and
information  management  system  for  forest  fire  disaster mitigation; and to
incorporate wise use of fires for ecosystem management and for livelihoods of
the local people.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2017 Himalayan Times, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              545 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                           December 7, 2016 Wednesday
                                  Main Edition

CONGRESS MAY BE NEARING DECISION ON WILDFIRE FUNDS Two proposals involve
thinning forests

BYLINE: Crystal Duan Correspondent

SECTION: A; Pg. 006

LENGTH: 449 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON - After months of suggesting different ways the federal government
could do a better job of helping fight wildfires, Congress may approve two of
them before going home  for the year.

The two potential changes are to thin at-risk forests so they are less likely to
experience catastrophic burns and to designate wildfires as natural disasters
with money set aside to fight them. Both are part of discussions between the
House and Senate on a compromise to an energy bill Congress hopes to pass before
it ends this month.

Sen. Maria Cantwell, D-Wash., who originally proposed the forest thinning
program as separate legislation that never got a debate, said she hopes it will
wind up in the final compromise of the Energy Bill.

Her original bill called for scientists to assess forests and selectively burn
trees that pose a threat. In many cases, fires don't penetrate managed areas
where this is done.

"When it comes to wildfire policy, my focus is on helping better prepare our
at-risk communities," Cantwell said. "And I want to ensure adequate resources
are available, not just to fight fires, but to do prevention work."

She and Sen. Mike Crapo, R-Idaho, are among those who had separate wildfire
fighting bills that were not formally debated but could make it into the final
compromise. They want to streamline the way the federal government fights
wildfires by giving the U.S. Forest Service money directly if their money runs
out, rather than requiring the agency to pull it from other programs.

"We have got to perform the management that will reduce catastrophic fires,"
Crapo said. "And make sure resources for that management, and to fight fires,
are available."

The Senate energy bill has no formal wildfire fighting provisions. The House
version, however, has a provision sponsored by Rep. Bruce Westerman, R-Ark.,
that would designate wildfires as natural disasters. That would mean the
president could authorize federal funds to be used by agencies to fight fires.
Rather than forcing the agencies to raid other programs to pay for things like
reforestation, a separate account for wildfire suppression would be established.

In 2015 alone, wildfires burned more than 1 million acres and destroyed more
than 145 homes in Washington. Fifty percent of the Forest Service budget is
currently devoted to firefighting, Sen. Cantwell said in a hearing last summer
about wildfires.

Under current policy, the Federal Emergency Management Agency does not consider
wildfires disasters in the same category as hurricanes or earthquakes because of
a fire's volatile nature.

If the House and Senate agree to a compromise bill, Congress could pass it
before Congress adjourns  Dec. 16.

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2016 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                              546 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                High River Times

                             March 21, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire risk increases; Dry conditions prevalent in Foothills

BYLINE: Paul Krajewski, High River Times

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 538  words


Firefighters are urging MD of Foothills residents to remain vigilant when it
comes to fire safety and awareness as dry conditions have increased the
potential for wildfires.

"We haven't had a lot of moisture ... over the winter," said Jim Smith, fire
chief for the Foothills Fire Department (FFD). "Once the snow clears away and
the temperatures warm up, we could see some large fires until we get some actual
moisture, such as rain."

A recent report from Alberta Agriculture and Forestry indicated dry conditions
are prevalent across the region.

Smith said snow is good for the ground, but does little to bring moisture to
wild land fuels, which include trees, brush and grass.

Wildfires are dependent on ambient air temperature, wind speeds, precipitation
and moisture content in the fuels, so as the snow melts away, revealing grass
and other fuels, the possibility of wildfire increases, he added.

Last year, Alberta experienced 1,338 wildfires that burned more than 611,000
hectares, according to a Government of Alberta press release.

Protecting residents is the number one priority for the government, Oneil
Carlier, minister of agriculture and forestry, stated in the Feb. 17 release.

"That's why we legislated March 1 as the start of fire season, recognizing that
recent trends show wildfires are starting earlier in the spring," he added. "The
wildfire that burned into Fort McMurray last year serves as a reminder of how
important it is for us to be ready to respond to wildfires at a moment's
notice."

Although the potential for wildfires similar to last year's Wood Buffalo Region
inferno are possible, Smith said it all depends on the conditions.

"If it's clear, dry and windy, that's a bad thing for us, but if it's rainy,
moist and not a lot of wind, we're good," he said, adding the risk, although
delayed, is approaching fast. "Because this has been an odd year, we'll probably
see fires start to materialize by the end of March and start of April."

Smith said the FFD has begun wild land training with all current and incoming
firefighters, increased communication with provincial wildfire monitors and are
ensuring all equipment is fully operational and ready to be deployed.

The FFD, with its 160 firefighters at its disposal in regional detachments, are
focused on high ignition areas along railway tracks, highways and highuse areas,
such as parks and pathways.

"The biggest issue is man-made fires and the second is lightning," he explained.
"We won't see a lot of lightning strikes until April or May, but right now, it's
man-made stuff to start with."

Residents are urged to call 911, or 310-FIRE (3473), immediately upon witnessing
a wildfire, fully extinguish all fires and make sure vehicle exhausts,
especially for offroad units, are clean from potentially combustible debris,
such as dried grass and brush.

For more information on wildfires, visit alberta.wildfire.ca, albertafireban.ca
or email Smith at jim.smith@mdfoothills.com Smith said the FFD are always
interested in recruiting more volunteers and are currently looking for personnel
to fill positions in Blackie, Cayley and Longview. Interested applicants are
encouraged to contact the fire department at info@foothillsfiredepartment.ca or
403-603-3571.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 High River Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              547 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 16, 2018 Tuesday

Washington: Inhofe Talks Tax and Wildfire Relief Bill on the Radio

LENGTH: 357  words



Washington: Office of the Senator Jim Inhofe has issued the following news
release:

 U.S. Sen. Jim Inhofe (R-Okla.) spoke on the radio last week about major topics
including tax reform, missile defense and his newly introduced legislation, the
Wildfire Regulatory Relief Act, which addresses the unique concerns farmers,
ranchers and rural communities face after a wildfire.



Sen. Inhofe and Trent England of KZLS Radio in Oklahoma City talked tax reform,
missile defense and the Wildfire Regulatory Relief Act.
On how tax reform is benefitting the country:
"This is--I think--going down as the largest tax reduction in history ... It's
an exciting thing. Everyone is going to benefit from it."
Listen to the full segment here.
 KSPI Jan. 11

Sen. Inhofe and Bill Van Ness of KSPI Radio in Stillwater talked the Wildfire
Regulatory Relief Act and the tax overhaul.
On the major tax overhaul:
"I have to say, it was the tenacity of our president to be able get this thing
through. Nobody thought we could have a major tax reduction and reform as we did
and that we just passed ... Already, you are seeing people celebrating."
Listen to the full segment here.
KNED Jan. 11


Sen. Inhofe and Chris Bradley of KNED Radio in McAlester talked tax reform, the
Enhancing Veterans Care Act  and the Wildfire Regulatory Relief Act.
On the Wildfire Regulatory Relief Act:
"You might remember the horrible wildfires we had out there ... We looked at
what happened and how we could improve it and we are introducing today... a bill
today that does four things ..."
Listen to the full segment here.
KGWA Jan. 11


Sen. Inhofe and Alan Clepper of KGWA Radio in Enid talked tax reform and the
Wildfire Regulatory Relief Act.
On Oklahoma wildfire devastation and new legislation:
"We all remember. You're far enough out west there, you remember what happened
during the wildfires we had out west of you. I was out there three times in my
plane and, you know, trying to console the farmers. It was horrible--what was
going on ... What we did was looked to see what could be done so that we could
give more relief in the case that we had another disaster like that."

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              548 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             Southern Highland News

                             May 3, 2017 Wednesday
                           Print & Internet Editions

Winning streak continues for Magic | PHOTOS

SECTION: SPORT; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 454 words


The Moss Vale Magic have made it six wins in a row with a tough 69-60 win over
the Camden Valley Wildfire at Westfields Sports High School in Fairfield on
April 29.

Despite sitting in 12th position on the ladder the Wildfire stepped it up on
their home court in front of a loud and parochial crowd.

Wildfire pushed the competition leaders all night and made the Magic work very
hard for their win.

It was a tight first quarter as both teams struggled to find their shooting
touch.

Camden used their size advantage to get physical with the Magic. The Highlands
team matched the energy and Rhys Pryor put three first points on the board in
the opening three minutes.

The Magic were having an off-night with their outside shooting which allowed the
Wildfire to pack in a tight 2-3 zone defence and play the game at their tempo.
This seemed to pay off for Wildfire with scored locked 13-13 at quarter time.

The Magic took control in the second quarter. Billy Campbell managed nine points
while Carter Reeves and Alex Davenport chipped in with four points each.

Connor Wroe was the man of the quarter for the Magic who stood up to Camden to
match their aggression and physicality. Wroe was strong on the boards and
grabbed rebounds at both ends of the floor to score six points himself.

The Magic outscored the Wildfire in the second half with a 38-31 advantage at
the break.

The Magic got out to an 11 point lead in the third quarter.

Josh Watts took seven points in the quarter and Wroe continued to dominate the
rebounding contests.

Brad Frost stopped numerous attacking raids from the Wildfire and with some
outstanding defensive plays the Magic went to the final break with a comfortable
53-43 lead.

The Wildfire came out strong in the last quarter urged on by their vocal home
crowd and showed a lot of tenacity.

With seven minutes to play Wildfire found plenty of momentum and came back
within six points of the Magic.

The Magic were able to remain calm however and quell the challenge from the
Wildfire with some strong defence.

Josh Watts and Billy Campbell hit back to back three point shots down to come
away with a valuable 69-60 win.

Magic coach Kev Campbell was relieved to get the win on the road and paid
tribute to the Wildfire after the match.

"Hats off to the Wildfire and their coaching staff, we did not know much about
them before the game, however its hard to believe they are in 12th spot after
the way they played tonight," he said.

"They are a big, strong and physical team who play hard and never give up. We
struggled to score from the free throw line tonight ans also from beyond the arc
and it wasn't until the last quarter when we hit a three point shot so all
things considered I am more than happy to get the win."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              549 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Williams Lake Tribune Advisor

                             July 29, 2017 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Bowron Lake reopened for public use

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 212 words


Due to cooler temperatures and lower fire danger ratings in the northeastern
portion of the Cariboo Fire Centre, BC Parks - in consultation with the BC
Wildfire Service - reopened Bowron Lake Provincial Park for public use on July
28, 2017.

The level of wildfire activity can change quickly, however, so BC Parks and the
BC Wildfire Service will continue to assess the situation to help protect public
safety. Should the need arise, provincial park closures may be enacted
throughout the summer.

BC Parks and the BC Wildfire Service are asking the public to remain vigilant
and help prevent human-caused wildfires. To report a wildfire or open burning
violation, call *5555 on a cellphone or 1 800 663-5555 toll-free.

A campfire ban remains in effect throughout British Columbia. For details on
current open burning prohibitions, please visit: www.gov.bc.ca/wildfirebans

For more information about Bowron Lake Provincial Park, please visit the BC
Parks website at: www.bcparks.ca

For the latest information on wildfire activity, conditions and prohibitions,
please visit the BC Wildfire Service website at: www.bcwildfire.ca

You can also follow the latest wildfire news on:

Twitter at: http://twitter.com/BCGovFireInfo

Facebook at: http://facebook.com/BCForestFireInfo (facebook.com.)

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              550 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Clearwater Times (N. Thompson)

                             July 20, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Wind will increase fire activity throughout the Interior

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 311 words


BC Wildfire Service

KAMLOOPS - A major wind event is forecast to hit the Cariboo and southern
British Columbia today, bringing gusts of up to 70 kilometres per hour to some
areas.

These winds are expected to persist well into Sunday.

Given the current wildfire situation throughout the Interior, the BC Wildfire
Service anticipates that this weather system will lead to a substantial increase
in wildfire activity throughout the region.

This wind could cause significant growth of current wildfires and new fires may
burn and spread aggressively. Firefighting crews have spent the last few days
preparing for this wind event, but containment efforts will be challenged by hot
and dry conditions and gusting winds.

Given the proximity of existing wildfires to communities, infrastructure and
transportation corridors, people throughout the Cariboo region and the southern
Interior should be prepared for potential evacuations.

Provincial parks and recreation sites in the Cariboo are already closed to the
public. The BC Wildfire Service urges everyone to also stay out of the
backcountry in the affected areas, given the potential for extreme fire
behaviour.

For up-to-date information on current evacuation alerts and evacuation orders,
check your local government's website or the Emergency Management BC website at:
www.emergencyinfobc.gov.bc.ca

For the most recent information on highway conditions and road closures, check:
www.DriveBC.ca (http://www.drivebc.ca/)

To report a wildfire or open burning violation, call 1 800 663-5555 toll-free or
*5555 on a cell phone. For the latest information on current wildfire activity,
burning restrictions, road closures and air quality advisories, visit:
http://www.bcwildfire.ca

Learn More:

You can follow the latest B.C. wildfire news:

* On Twitter: http://twitter.com/BCGovFireInfo

* On Facebook: http://facebook.com/BCForestFireInfo

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              551 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              March 2, 2018 Friday

Wolf Administration Urges Caution to Prevent Wildfires

LENGTH: 472  words



Harrisburg: Office of the Governor, The State of Pennsylvania has issued the
following news release:


Today, Department of Conservation and Natural Resources Secretary Cindy Adams
Dunn called upon Pennsylvania residents to exercise wildfire prevention
vigilance throughout a three-month period when major fires are most likely
across the state's forests and brush lands.


"Yes, we have had seemingly non-stop rains recently across much of the state,
but past springs have shown it just takes a few days of sun and wind to allow
brush and forest fire danger to develop quickly," Dunn said. "A mere spark by a
careless person can touch off a devastating forest blaze during dry periods when
conditions enable wildfires to spread quickly. Most of the reported fires year
after year are linked to people; people cause 98 percent of wildfires."
DCNR statistics show nearly 85 percent of Pennsylvania's wildfires occur in
March, April, and May, before the greening of state woodlands and brushy areas.
Named for rapid spread through dormant, dry vegetation, under windy conditions,
wildfires often scorch 7,000 or more acres of state and private woodlands.
March marks the start of a "sometimes very dangerous three months," Dunn said.
"That is why Governor Tom Wolf this year has proclaimed March 4-10 as Wildfire
Prevention Week (PDF).
In 2017, Pennsylvania experienced a relatively mild fire season, with 531
reported wildfires affecting 1,644 acres. In 2016, however, Bureau of Forestry
personnel and volunteer firefighters battled more than 850 reported field,
brush, and forest fires that scorched more than 12,000 acres across the state.

"When state residents and forest visitors are careless with burning trash,
campfires, and smoking, volunteer firefighters often pay the price, answering
call after call in spring woodlands that are ripe for damaging, life-threatening
wildfires," Dunn said. "Common sense limits the threat of wildfires."
Anglers, campers, and other state forest visitors are reminded open fires are
prohibited on state forestland from March 1 to May 25, and when the fire danger
is listed as high, very high, or extreme, unless authorized by district
foresters.
Communities in heavily wooded areas are urged to follow wildfire prevention and
suppression methods of the Pennsylvania Firewise Community Program to safeguard
life and property.
DCNR's Bureau of Forestry is responsible for prevention and suppression of
wildfires on the 17 million acres of state and private woodlands and brush
lands. The bureau maintains a fire-detection system, and works with fire wardens
and volunteer fire departments to ensure they are trained in the latest advances
in fire prevention and suppression.

 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              552 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              India Insurance News

                      February 9, 2015 Monday 6:30 AM EST

National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day Launched in Canada

LENGTH: 1003  words


Feb. 9 -- Canada-based The Co-operators issued the following news release:

In collaboration with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), the
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR), and The Co-operators,
FireSmart Canada today announced the launch of the first ever National Wildfire
Community Preparedness Day in Canada scheduled for May 2, 2015.

During Wildfire Community Preparedness Day, communities across Canada are
encouraged to participate in local mitigation projects to help reduce the risk
of wildfire damage to their homes and neighbourhoods.

Groups and individuals are encouraged to apply for a stipend towards their local
event.

In addition, one community will be chosen as the media launch site for the
initiative. For a list of contests rules and project ideas, visit
(firesmartcanada.ca).

According to Kelly Johnston, Executive Director of Partners in Protection, "
wildfires have always been a natural process in Canada's forests, however, a
changing climate, increasing large fire activity, and increasing development
trends, create a serious threat throughout Canada - putting neighbourhoods,
communities, the public, and firefighter safety at risk every year. Due to these
circumstances,  it is becoming the norm for these fires to quickly overwhelm
fire suppression resources and increase annual suppression costs to exceed
hundreds of millions of dollars. Unless Canadian communities take action, this
problem will only become worse. Empowering community members to develop their
own local solutions to reduce wildfire risk is essential for more communities
throughout Canada to become FireSmart."

"As a co-operative and an insurer, we're in the business of managing risk and
protecting our communities", noted Kathy Bardswick, President and CEO of The
Co-operators. "Proper risk management requires a partnership in which insurance
companies, emergency responders, property owners and others each play a crucial
role.  That's why we're excited to support the National Wildfire Community
Preparedness Day, through which a variety of people and organizations will work
in communities across the country to reduce their exposure to the devastating
effects of wildfires."

"Fire research predicts an alarming increase over the next 20 or 30 years in the
risk of property damage in the wildland-urban interface, including risk of homes
destroyed by fire. Fortunately, most of these losses are preventable if property
owners and communities take the time to prepare", said Paul Kovacs, Executive
Director of the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction at Western University.

"NFPA's Wildland Fire Operations Division is dedicated to helping protect people
and property in communities at risk from wildfire through advocacy, outreach and
education" said Shayne Mintz, Canadian Regional Director of the NFPA. "Fire
science research has shown that community engagement and individual action ahead
of time can reduce property loss and human suffering from wildfires. As the
founder of Wildfire Community Preparedness in the USA, the NFPA is excited to
help bring this initiative to Canada!"

Projects on May 2 can range from a short time commitment up to an entire day and
can be undertaken by individuals, families or groups. Potential projects include
hosting a chipping day, distributing wildfire safety information to neighbours,
organizing brush clean-up and more. Residents of all ages are invited to
participate in the effort.

Moreover, for communities officially recognized through the FireSmart
Communities Recognition Program, participating on national Wildfire Preparedness
Day can count towards their 2015 "FireSmart Day" event.

To learn more about the first National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day in
Canada, and about the recognition program, please see the attached backgrounder
or visit (www.firesmartcanada.ca).

About FireSmart Canada

FireSmart Canada (FireSmart) is the go-to national program committed to helping
Canadians reduce their wildfire risk and become fire adapted through
community-based solutions. FireSmart is administered by Partners in Protection;
a non-profit coalition of federal, provincial, first nations', private industry
and municipal fire, emergency and land management experts. Through publications,
programs, outreach training, and workshops, FireSmart provides tools for
Canadians to become pro-active in reducing the risk of wildfire to their homes
and communities. FireSmart programs and products are supported through
membership and ongoing active support from organizations such as the Canadian
Interagency Forest Fire Centre, the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction,
the National Fire Protection Association and The Co-operators. For more
information on FireSmart visit (www.firesmartcanada.ca) .

About the National Fire Protection Association:

NFPA is a worldwide leader in fire, electrical, building, and life safety. The
mission of the international nonprofit organization founded in 1896 is to reduce
the worldwide burden of fire and other hazards on the quality of life by
providing and advocating consensus codes and standards, research, training, and
education. NFPA develops more than 300 codes and standards to minimize the
possibility and effects of fire and other hazards. All NFPA codes and standards
can be viewed at no cost at (www.nfpa.org).

About the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction:

Established in 1998 by Canada's property and casualty insurers, ICLR is an
independent, not-for-profit research institute based in Toronto and at the
University of Western Ontario in London, Canada. ICLR is a centre of excellence
for disaster loss prevention research and education. ICLR's research staff is
internationally recognized for pioneering work in a number of fields including
wind and seismic engineering, atmospheric sciences, water resources engineering
and economics. Multi-disciplined research is a foundation for ICLR's work to
build communities more resilient to disasters. Visit (www.iclr.org).

Source: The Co-operators

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2015 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              553 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Coaldale Sunny South News

                             April 4, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire protection strengthened with new rules

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 363  words


According to a recent media release, Albertans are reminded to take precautions
to prevent forest fires, as new wildfire protection regulations took effect Mar.
31.

Agriculture and Forestry Minister Oneil Carlier discussed the enhancements to
wildfire protection legislation and regulations with participants at the Forest
Industries Career Day 2017 in Whitecourt.

"Last fall, we passed important legislation to help deter unsafe behaviour and
give our wildland firefighters more tools to keep Albertans and their
communities safe. These strengthened regulations send a clear message we all
share a responsibility to help prevent wildfires." said Carlier.

Enhancements to the Forest and Prairie Protection Act regulations include: * New
penalties for infractions such as leaving a campfire unattended or burning
without a permit * Restrictions on the use of fireworks or exploding targets in
the Forest Protection Area of Alberta without written permission from a forest
officer * Improvements to flammable debris disposal and other industry-based
requirements Individuals who knowingly contravene the Forest and Prairie
Protection Act by starting a wildfire can be fined up to $100,000 or face
imprisonment for up to two years. Industrial users who knowingly contravene the
Act and start a wildfire can be fined up to $1 million. Corporations may also
face penalties of up to $10,000 per offence per day for less severe
industrial-based violations of the Act and regulations.

Effective May 1, officers will be authorized to issue tickets for
contraventions, like leaving a campfire unattended.

Depending on the infraction, individual fines for specific violations could
result in tickets ranging from between $172 and $575.

Activities that interfere with the fighting of a wildfire, such as the
unauthorized use of drones near a wildfire, are considered more severe offences
and will result in an automatic court appearance.

In 2016, Alberta wildfire crews fought more than 1,300 fires that consumed more
than 600,000 hectares.

About 70 per cent of wildfires over the last five years have been linked to
human activity.

If you see a wildfire, please report it toll-free at 310-FIRE (3473).

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 Coaldale Sunny South News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              554 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Mail Tribune (Medford, Oregon)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            August 5, 2015 Wednesday

Walden pushes for FEMA help with wildfires

BYLINE: Mark Freeman, Mail Tribune, Medford, Ore.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 749 words


Aug. 05--Treating wildfires like other natural disasters and streamlining
federal processes to expedite thinning and salvage logging will help Southern
Oregon better deal with forest health and wildfires on federal lands "ripe for
explosion," U.S. Rep. Greg Walden said Wednesday.

With the smoky haze from a nearby forest fire as a backdrop at the Forest
Service tanker base in Medford, Walden stumped for a bill that he said would
more effectively put federal funds toward helping forests withstand wildfire and
expand coffers to pay for it when they do burn.

Among many things, the Resilient Federal Forests Act of 2015 would allow the
Federal Emergency Management Agency to help fund wildfire expenses so the Forest
Service doesn't have to cannibalize other portions of its budget to douse
flames.

Current law allows FEMA responses for hurricanes and floods but not wildfire
suppression.

"Why is a fire created by nature, by lightning, not an equal emergency to a
tornado or a flood?" Walden said. "It is."

FEMA does provide funding for fires on private and state lands, but not on
federal lands, leaving that expense to come out of the budgets of the Forest
Service and Bureau of Land Management.

County commissioners from Jackson and Josephine counties and others joined
Walden at a press conference at the Medford airport's federal tanker base to
urge the Senate to pass the bill, known as HR 2647, when the Senate reconvenes
this fall.

Most of them chided a slow-to-react federal bureaucracy hampered by lawsuits
from conservation groups as contributing to wildfire woes that are progressively
getting worse. They also noted the government spends four times more money on
wildfire suppression than on thinning projects that could help curb those fires.

Jackson County Commissioner Doug Breidenthal said the "status-quo of inaction
has exacerbated catastrophic wildfire conditions." That, he said, has created
"our new normal" of summers plagued by wildfire smoke that the Forest Service
estimates harms lungs with the carcinogenic equivalent of a two-pack-a-day
cigarette habit.

"Our community, our loved ones, pay the price for this mismanagement and
politics going on now," Breidenthal said.

The bill would require anyone who files suit in federal court challenging
logging or other projects planned under the bill to post bonds covering the
Forest Service's defense costs should the government prevail. Not doing so,
Walden said, helps lead to frivolous suits at taxpayer expense, and
litigious-minded environmental groups "should also have some skin in the game."

It also would restrict legal challenges to projects and restrict legal costs the
government would have to pay challengers who win suits against the government.

The bill includes a provision that would streamline smaller salvage-logging
projects to help pay for a proposed reforestation rate of 75 percent on Forest
Service lands burned by fire. Current Forest Service estimates are that 3
percent of its lands burned by wildfire get replanted.

Some of the bill's opponents have taken issue with Walden and the bill's
supporters for linking wildfire suppression to new policies they say will harm
forest health.

KS Wild Executive Director Joseph Vaile said the FEMA angle for funding
firefighting costs is "long overdue," but said calling for logging without
careful consideration of the science of post-fire restoration "will make matters
worse."

"Protecting homes and communities while thinning overly stocked forests with
good science and community input is the way to go," Vaile said.

While the drought and record-breaking heat that have contributed to wildfire
seasons are a reality, "it is unfortunate that Walden has voted against battling
climate change at nearly every turn, and consistently votes in favor of more
fossil fuel development," Vaile said. "Climate change models show that we will
be seeing more fires in our region in the coming decades."

Walden and other congressmen have pushed similar bills in recent years that have
come out of the House only to die in the Senate.

Walden acknowledged that "it's not my first rodeo on forestry," but said he
thinks this bill has a better chance in the Senate in part because it's a
smaller version of past efforts.

Reach reporter Mark Freeman at 541-776-4470 or mfreeman@mailtribune.com Follow
him at www.twitter.com/MTwriterFreeman.

___ (c)2015 the Mail Tribune (Medford, Ore.) Visit the Mail Tribune (Medford,
Ore.) at www.mailtribune.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150805-ME-Walden-pushes-for-FEMA-help-with-wildfires-0805-20150805

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ME


                          Copyright 2015 Mail Tribune


                              555 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Journal (Newcastle, UK)

                            March 24, 2012 Saturday

Tackling A Burning Issue

BYLINE: David Black

SECTION: A; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 397 words


FIREFIGHTING experts from  Europe and the USA came to the North East yesterday
to find the most effective ways of tackling moorland and forest fires.

Fifty wildfire specialists from 11 different countries took part in the special
training exercise in Breamish Valley.

Part of the week-long European Forest Fire Networks (EUROFINET) project, it was
hosted by the Northumberland Fire and Rescue Service.

The week-long workshop is part of a two-year initiative to share best practice
and expertise in dealing with potentially devastating wildfires.

It involved fire officers, wildfire experts, forestry officials and academics
from the UK, Greece, France, Italy, Spain, Poland, Denmark, Slovakia, Portugal,
Holland and the USA.

Yesterday's exercise was based around the Linhope Estate fire pond, a specialist
resource created in the National Park to provide water for helicopters and high
velocity fire appliance pumps tackling wildfires in the surrounding  area.

The idea yesterday was to develop a realistic wildfire scenario encountered by
firefighters across the globe, and demonstrate the use of Northumberland's high
volume pump equipment and mobile command unit in handling it.

Two volunteer mountain rescue teams also demonstrated the specialist
communication systems that they bring to wildfire incidents.

And fire service officers outlined a number of wildfire suppression tools and
techniques developed in the county.

One of these is an innovative system which helps firefighters and fire officers
to predict the likely behaviour and spread of a wildfire.

Many of these techniques   are now being adopted by other services around the
UK.

This week's get-together is the penultimate in a series of seven workshops held
across Europe as part of EUFOFINET.

Yesterday Northumberland chief fire officer Alex Bennett said: "This event,
which has focused on good practice in fighting and suppressing wildfires, has
been extremely useful.

"Working with international partners has allowed us to review our practices,
hone our skills and share expertise to ensure that we are equipped and trained
to tackle wildfires in the best possible way.

"We will now be sharing what  we've learned with fire services across the UK."

EUFOFINET involves firefighting partners working on five separate wildfire
themes, which also include prevention and detection, mapping risks and the
restoration of burned land.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2012 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              556 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                            December 11, 2017 Monday

Fitch: California Fires Add to 2017 Insurer Catastrophe Losses

LENGTH: 627 words



New York: Based on recent assessments, no US (re)insurance companies in our
rated universe are expected to be downgraded as a result of losses from the
California wildfires alone, Fitch Ratings says. However, for a number of
companies the impact of wildfire losses adds to substantial catastrophe losses
reported in third-quarter 2017. Adding the California wildfires to hurricanes
Harvey, Irma and Maria will make 2017 one of the costliest catastrophe loss
years in US history, with insured losses reaching $70 billion-$100 billion
according to various estimates. In some instances, insurers could ultimately
report aggregate 2017 catastrophe losses at levels that strain capital and
pressure ratings.



 The California wildfires of October 2017 will be the costliest wildfire loss in
U.S. history. The latest insured loss estimate from Aon Benfield is $8 billion,
but the overall economic losses are considerably greater. The wildfire spread
over 245,000 acres, with Napa, Sonoma, Mendocino, Lake, Solano, Butte and Yuba
counties seeing the worst damage. The most up-to-date information reports 43
fatalities and 185 injuries with nearly 9,300 structures damaged and most
(8,560) destroyed. To date, the California Department of Insurance reported
19,000 residential, commercial and auto claims have been filed, with payouts
exceeding $3.3 billion.

 The expected loss from the October wildfires will eclipse past California
wildfires by several fold. In comparison, the 1991 Oakland Hills wildfire
reported a $2.7 billion loss (inflation adjusted through 2016) from 25 deaths
and 2,900 structures destroyed. Last year's wildfire in Fort McMurray was
Canada's largest wildfire, spreading across 1.15 million acres, destroying
approximately 2,400 homes and buildings and generating $3.7 billion in insured
losses.

 The majority of insured losses from the fires are expected to be in the
personal lines segments, as a significant number of the structures destroyed
were residential properties. High winds pushed fires into urban areas that were
considered to be lower risk for wildfires and consequently wide swaths of homes
across numerous communities were affected. Of the current reported insured
losses paid by the top-15 property writers in California, over 94% have been for
residential property.

 Commercial insured losses will include property, business interruption (BI) and
crop business. BI losses will take longer to determine and settle with insurers
but are expected to remain a moderate portion of total insured losses. Ten of
the 1,200 California wineries were reported destroyed or heavily damaged.
According to the Wine Institute, 90% of the year's grapes had already been
harvested at the time of the fires.

 Fitch expects a large majority of the insured losses to be retained by primary
insurers. The percentage of losses ceded to the reinsurance market will likely
be considerably less than the portion ceded from recent hurricane events.
Hurricane Irma also had a large flood loss component that increases the
percentage of losses incurred by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and
commercial insurers.

 A number of large property/casualty insurers have publicly discussed estimates
of their net losses related to the wildfires and the associated impact on
fourth-quarter earnings. The Travelers Companies, Inc. provided a range of $525
million to $675 million before tax ($340 million to $440 million after tax).
American International Group, Inc. reported in its third-quarter earnings call
that it expected fire losses of approximately $500 million. The Allstate
Corporation reported October 2017 estimated catastrophe losses of $516 million
before tax ($335 million after tax), with California wildfires accounting for
90% of this total.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              557 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                               Waterloo Chronicle

                           October 27, 2010 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Waterloo Wildfire prepared for new season

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 485  words


The Waterloo Wildfire are preparing for their seventh season in the 18-team
National Ringette League with a lot of optimism following a sixth-place finish
at the NRL Championship in Saskatoon last year.

The team hopes to raise the bar this year and make it into the three-team medal
round in this year's NRL championship in Cambridge in late March and early
April.

Despite losing three players from last year's team, including co-captain and
Team Canada veteran Stefanie McArdle (on temporary leave), the Wildfire have
three new faces in the lineup who they hope will more than make up for those
departed.

First draft pick Heather Statham, a second-year student at the University of
Waterloo who hails from Nepean and played for the St. Clements Belle AAs last
year, will take over on defense. She's joined by Tawni Constantin of Burlington
who played last season with the Whitby Wild.

Brianna Thompson, a Pembroke native and the Wildfire's No. 2 pick in this year's
draft, will play forward as she works on a master's degree at McMaster after
four years of playing ringette in Nova Scotia.

Waterloo native Shelagh Rouse, a Conestoga College student, in her fourth season
with the Wildfire, will centre the team's top line with forwards Jodie Hannen
and fourth-year Laurier student Bryanna Kelly, who finished eighth in the nation
last season with 70 points in 31 regular season games.

"Rouse is the kind of player who can bring fans out of their seats," the
Wildfire's head coach Doug Miners said.

Miners is taking over the reins of the team from Robin Mahy, who is now in
charge of Team Ontario as they prepare for the Canada Winter Games in Halifax in
February.

Miners has coached in Ontario's Western Region of ringette for many years, most
recently with the Stratford Belle AAs. He "will demand a real toughness and
dedication from every player on the team," the Wildfire's general manager Gerry
Kraemer said.

Kelly, newly appointed as cocaptain, will share those duties with returning
co-captains Amanda Somerville, a fourth-year centre, and Lindsey Vivian, in her
sixth season with the Wildfire.

Also returning are forwards Shelly Kraemer and Tara Gross, both for their
seventh season, and the only players from the original 2004-05 NRL Wildfire
team.

The Wildfire will not open their home season officially until Dec. 4 due in part
to the league being shut down for three weeks in late October and early November
for the World Championships in Finland.

The Wildfire also had a game originally scheduled for Oct. 30 in Waterloo moved
to the Pyramid Rec Centre in St. Marys on Nov. 20 at 8 p. m. It will be held as
a fundraiser for former Wildfire defenceman, Erin Voss, who is battling a brain
tumour.

Various levels of Wildfire sponsorship are available for this season and more
information can be obtained by contacting Kraemer at 519-888-7205 or e-mailing
<a href="mailto:gdkraemer@rogers.com">gdkraemer@rogers.com

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              558 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                             May 28, 2015 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Little progress made on preventing wildfires: report; Much more needs to be done
to remove fuel around homes and businesses, says Forest Practices Board

BYLINE: Bethany Lindsay, Vancouver Sun

SECTION: WESTCOAST NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 566 words


B.C. hasn't made much progress in recent years on preventing catastrophic
wildfires close to homes and businesses, according to a report.

In 2010, the Forest Practices Board called on the B.C. and municipal governments
to support efforts to remove fuel such as prescribed burns, regular tree pruning
and brush removal. A followup report from the board, released Wednesday,
suggests little meaningful work has been done since then.

"Less than 10 per cent of hazardous forest fuels have been treated - at enormous
cost to government - and few property owners have taken the steps to protect
themselves from wildfire," board chairman Tim Ryan said.

The board was not able to say which regions are the most at risk of the
so-called urban interface wildfires because of inadequate fuel removal. In the
past five years, the provincial government has provided an additional $30.5
million toward a wildfire prevention program, but the board says the problem is
so big the funding is just a drop in the bucket.

"B.C. has been lucky it hasn't had any catastrophic urban interface fires since
Kelowna in 2003, but that has been luck and nothing more," Ryan said.

In all, the province has provided $67 million since 2004 to reduce the risk of
interface fires. A total of 284 community wildfire protection plans have been
completed and another 33 are in progress.

"The funding is targeted to the high-risk interface areas. In addition to that
work ... we put out 90 permits this year for prescribed burns in areas of high
wildfire risk," Forests Minister Steve Thomson said. "There's ongoing efforts
across the landscape to help mitigate that risk." He said wildfire prevention
has to be a joint effort by the province, local governments and First Nations.
The board also highlighted the role of the forestry industry and the importance
of personal responsibility from homeowners. One of the few bright spots
mentioned in the report is Anarchist Mountain, a community near Osoyoos. After
two homes were destroyed in a 2003 wildfire sparked by a vehicle brake
malfunction, a group of homeowners began thinking about how they could prevent
future disasters.

"We're all retired and semiretired and we just wanted to make sure that we still
have a home,"said Denis Thomson, chairman of a committee that administers the
federal FireSmart program in the community.

Formed in 2013, the committee inspects properties and provides advice to
homeowners, gives information on fuel removal strategies, and holds community
events to demonstrate wildfire prevention techniques. "Once one person starts
cleaning up their yard, it kind of cascades. Everybody sees it happen and then
the next guy does it and the next guy," Thomson said.

The Forest Practices Board report's authors point out that with the wildfire
season just beginning, B.C. already has one massive blaze near Prince George,
where the Little Bobtail Lake fire burned through 25,000 hectares before it was
brought under control this week.

In recent days, cool, rainy weather across many parts of B.C. have helped dampen
the risk of more fires, but in Alberta, 63 wildfires were burning as of
Wednesday morning. The B.C. government is sending 88 firefighters and two
fixed-wing aircraft to help battle those blazes.

With files from Rob Shaw, Vancouver Sun blindsay@vancouversun.com
Twitter.com/bethanylindsay !@COPYRIGHT=© 2015 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: / The Little Bobtail Lake fire was brought under control this week.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 The Vancouver Sun
                              All Rights Reserved


                              559 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       Eureka Times-Standard (California)

                           September 29, 2017 Friday

Study: smoke health effects unclear;
UC Davis review says more research needed on chemical releases

BYLINE: Will Houston; whouston@times-standard.com @Will_S_Houston on Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 461 words

ABSTRACT

UC Davis study says that not enough is known about the health impacts of
wildfire smoke.

FULL TEXT


Research on the health impacts of wildfire smoke in areas where fire-suppression
chemicals and pesticides are used is lacking, according to a recently published
review by UC Davis graduate students.

The reviewpublished in the international scientific journal "Current Topics in
Toxicology"found most studies on wildfire smoke focus on a limited number of
chemicals and particles rather than focusing on the interaction between several
components in the smoke.

"When forests and farmlands catch fire, the chemicals applied to them burn, too,
and potentially travel much longer distances than where they were first used,"
review author and UC Davis graduate student Sarah Carrattsaid in a statement.
"As areas at-risk for wildfires and where pesticides are applied overlap with
areas where people live and breathe, it becomes increasingly important to
characterize the content of wildfire smoke."

The studyincludes a map of the stateoverlaying areas of increased wildfire risk
and areas where pesticides have been used. Humboldt County has several areas of
overlap, according to the map.

UC Davis pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine professor Jarold Lastwas
one of the instructors of the graduate students' summer class that would
eventually result to the review's creation.

"We know wildfire smoke is made up of small particles, gases and vapor and that
it is more toxic than other smoke, but we don't know what makes it so toxic,"
Last, who is the review's senior author, said in statement. "It's possible that
what distinguishes it are the chemicals humans add to the environment, but
researchers haven't paid enough attention to this yet."

The review found that wildfires have been increasing nationwide, with 82 percent
of the U.S. wildfires occurring in California in 2016. The greatest increase in
wildfires throughout the planet has occurred in Northern California, according
to the review.

The study found that the amount of flame retardant used in California increases
from about 3 million gallons to 7 million gallons between 2012 and 2015. In the
same time frame, the amount of pesticides used in California increased from 186
millions pounds to 194 million pounds, the study states.

While the review states it recognizes the necessary uses of fire suppression
chemicals and pesticides, it states that these chemicals may need more
restrictions or oversight.

"Ultimately, the benefits of applying these chemicals must be weighed against
their drawbacks in order to protect the public from the immediate threat of fire
while minimizing exposure to compounds with unknown human health effects," the
review states.

Will Houston can be reached at 707-441-0504.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 Times - Standard
                              All Rights Reserved


                              560 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                             March 8, 2005 Tuesday
                                Georgia Edition

Rangers seek clues in Ware wildfire;
Saturday blaze largest of 10 in South Georgia

BYLINE: Teresa Stepzinski, The Times-Union

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 577 words


State forest rangers are investigating the cause of a weekend wildfire that
burned about 65 acres in northern Ware County.

The Saturday blaze in woods and on timber plantation land along Georgia 158
between Waycross and Douglas was the largest among 10 South Georgia wildfires
during the weekend, said Buck Wynn, district forester for the Georgia Forestry
Commission regional office in Waycross.

No injuries were reported. Nor were any structures reported damaged.

Forestry rangers Monday returned to the scene of the wildfire near Georgia 158
to sift through the charred debris, seeking clues to the cause of the fire.

Wynn said neighboring landowners with permits had been doing prescribed
controlled burns earlier in the week.

"Strong winds Saturday probably got the embers stirred up from those old
permitted burns," he said. "One of those embers could have jumped the fire break
and started the wildfire. But we won't know what happened until the
investigation is done."

The wildfire was reported about 12:35 p.m. Saturday. Ware County firefighters,
along with forest rangers from Ware and Coffee County, used tractor-plows to
battle the blaze, said ranger Danny Rowe from the Ware County forestry
commission office.

The fire was under control about 3:15 p.m., with mop-up operations commencing
about 4:30 p.m., Rowe said.

"Fire season has been up and down like a roller coaster ride for us so far,"
Wynn said. "It picked up about three weeks ago . . . We've averaged about 20
wildfires a weekend a couple weeks back and then it quieted down."

About 1,730 wildfires have burned 5,430 acres throughout Georgia from Jan. 1
through Monday, commission data showed.

Wildfires last year burned about 35,125 acres statewide. At least 2,000 of those
9,000 blazes resulted from "non-permitted burns," which is an outdoor fire
without a commission burning permit, said Ken Stewart,forestry commission
director.

Stewart also said those wildfires cost more than "half a million dollars in
suppression costs and needless loss of property and timber."

Because of dry weather, the fire danger rating ranged from high to very high in
South Georgia, according to data from the forestry commission and National
Weather Service.

Counties with very high fire danger ratings are all or portions of Appling,
Bacon, Brantley, Charlton, Clinch, Echols, Pierce, Ware and Wayne.

By law, residents must obtain a permit from the forestry commission before
conducting most types of outdoor burning.

Burning without a permit is a misdemeanor punishable by fines up to $1,000,
under state law.

In addition, the commission is authorized to collect "suppression costs" to pay
for firefighting expenses incurred battling a wildfire that resulted from a
non-permitted burn.

"If it's a permitted burn that got away, then you're OK, and won't be charged
suppression costs," Wynn said.

The increase in the number of wildfires and rising related costs of manpower and
equipment to fight those blazes, he said, has prompted the commission to seek
suppression costs from people responsible for a non-permitted burn resulting in
a wildfire.

"This is a fire prevention tool," he said. "It's not intended as a punishment
for people."

teresa.stepzinski@jacksonville.com, (912) 264-0405

HITTING HOME

OUTDOOR BURNING PERMITS

For more information about obtaining an outdoor burning permit or about
wildfires in Georgia, call the state Forestry Commission toll-free at
1-800-GATREES or visit the commission Web site, www.gatrees.org.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2005 The Florida Times-Union


                              561 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Williams Lake Tribune Advisor

                             August 18, 2017 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Strong variable winds this weekend expected to increase wildfire activity

BYLINE: Gaeil Farrar

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 382 words


A cold front bringing strong and variable winds, with gusts up to 60 kilometres
per hour is

expected to move through the Cariboo Fire Centre on Friday, Aug. 18 and into the
weekend, reports Cariboo Fire Centre information officer Natasha Broznitsky this
afternoon.

There is also a risk of lightning throughout the fire centre.

A shift from prevailing southwesterly winds to westerly and northwesterly winds
is also expected.

Given the current wildfire situation in the Cariboo Fire Centre, the BC Wildfire
Service anticipates that this weather system will lead to a substantial increase
in wildfire activity throughout the region.

This wind event could cause existing fires to grow significantly and any new
fires may burn aggressively and spread quickly. Firefighting crews have spent
the last few days preparing for these expected conditions, but containment
efforts will be challenged by this wind activity.

A shift in wind direction presents challenges to fire suppression efforts and
increases risks to firefighters. Wind coming from a different direction can push
wildfires into unburned fuels and trigger volatile fire behaviour.

Although a small amount of rain is expected in the Cariboo Fire Centre over the
next couple of days, the amount of rainfall will vary by region and will not be
substantial. Rain can help decrease fire behaviour temporarily, but its benefits
can be short-lived if hot and windy conditions return.

The BC Wildfire Service's priorities in the Cariboo Fire Centre this weekend are
ensuring the safety of first responders and the public, protecting
transportation corridors and conducting aggressive initial attacks on any new
fires.

The BC Wildfire Service is urging members of the public to remain vigilant. To
report a wildfire or an open burning violation, please call 1 800 663-5555 or
*5555 on a cellphone.

For up-to-date information on current wildfire activity, burning restrictions,
road closures and air quality advisories, call 1 888 3-FOREST, or visit:
www.bcwildfire.ca

You can follow the latest wildfire news on:

Twitter at: http://twitter.com/BCGovFireInfo

Facebook at: http://facebook.com/BCForestFireInfo

Ministry of Forests, Lands, Natural Resource Operations and Rural Development,
BC Wildfire Service

Connect with the Province of B.C. at: www.gov.bc.ca/connect

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              562 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Anniston Star (Alabama)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             March 25, 2016 Friday

Cheaha wildfire grows to 867 acres; crews have it 70 percent contained

BYLINE: Daniel Gaddy, The Anniston Star, Ala.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 522 words


March 25--DELTA -- Thursday's showers helped suppress a wildfire that had grown
to 867 acres in the Cheaha Wilderness area of the Talladega National Forest, but
U.S. Forest Service officials say there's still days of work to be done.

"It's gonna slow things down and give us some time to get in there and mop
things up," incident commander trainee Blake Morris said of the precipitation.

The Forest Service on Thursday had more than 70 people to help contain the blaze
-- that includes two out-of-state hotshot crews specializing in wildfire
suppression.

Crews choked off the fire's fuel sources using leaf blowers, chainsaws and
controlled burn techniques. According to Morris, federal laws prohibit
firefighters from using heavy equipment inside a wildlife area, but they were
using dozers at the perimeter Thursday.

Morris said most of those crews will work to contain the blaze, named the Caney
Head Wildfire, at least until the first of next week. How long exactly will
depend on the weather.

A news release from the federal agency said the blaze was 70 percent contained
Thursday evening.

Service officials announced Thursday evening that all hiking trails in the
wilderness were open except for Odum Scout Trail, High Falls Trailhead along
with National Forest Service Road 650 and Nubbin Creek Trail from the junction
of Cave Creek Trail to the Odum Scout Trail.

Investigators have yet to find the source of the fire, according to the release.

According to a news release, visitors first reported the wildfire Sunday, and it
had grown to 867 acres by Thursday evening, from 540 acres in the morning.

Residents of Anniston could smell smoke in the air much of the day Thursday.
Michael Garrison, meteorologist with the National Weather Service office in
Calera, said it's probable that smoke came from Clay County's wildfire, given
recent wind speeds.

The Shinbone Valley Volunteer Fire Department and the Clay County Rescue Squad
on Thursday afternoon helped locate an 18-year-old hiker who had gotten lost
from her group after being disoriented by smoke from the wildfire.

Shinbone Valley firefighters were pulling into their station by 1:45 p.m., as
the last of the afternoon's showers dissipated.

Fire Chief Sam Morrow said if the rain was going to put out the wildfire, "It's
going to have to get a lot harder than that."

Clay County commissioner Wayne Watts said community officials were keeping in
touch with the Forest Service about the wildfire.

"We're definitely concerned with anything that could get on private property,"
he said.

Watts said smoke from the Caney Head Wildfire had settled in areas like Shinbone
Valley, making it hard for many residents to breathe.

Commissioner Roy Johnson, whose district includes the Cheaha Wilderness area,
said the community was grateful for all the people working to contain the blaze.

"We thank all the volunteers and the professionals," he said. "I appreciate them
because any time when you're dealing with wildfires there's danger there."

___ (c)2016 The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.) Visit The Anniston Star
(Anniston, Ala.) at www.annistonstar.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency,
LLC.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160325-AO-Cheaha-wildfire
-grows-to-867-acres-crews-have-it-70-percent-contained-0325-20160325

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AO


                        Copyright 2016 The Anniston Star


                              563 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Ashland Daily Tidings, Ore.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 17, 2014 Thursday

Wildfire risk zone could cover all of Ashland

BYLINE: Vickie Aldous, Ashland Daily Tidings, Ore.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 541 words


April 17--Ashland Fire & Rescue is proposing that all of Ashland be classified
as a wildfire hazard zone -- not just the forested hills high above Siskiyou
Boulevard.

The Oak Knoll neighborhood fire that destroyed 11 homes near Exit 14 in 2010
occurred in Ashland's lower elevations, not in the official Wildfire Hazard
Zone, fire officials pointed out.

AFR recently divided the town into 16 zones and found that 14 are as dangerous
or more dangerous than the Oak Knoll area in terms of wildfire risk.

The fire department used Oregon Department of Forestry criteria to rank the
areas based on vegetation, topography and weather.

"The largest structure loss fire in Ashland history, the Oak Knoll Fire,
occurred in a zone with a score of eight," fire officials said in a city of
Ashland 2014 Wildfire Hazard Zone Evaluation report.

Compared to the Oak Knoll area's score of eight, the hills around Southern
Oregon University, the Asante Ashland Community Hospital area, the Terrace
Street neighborhood east of Lithia Park and the North Mountain Avenue area all
scored a 10.

The Strawberry Lane area west of Lithia Park scored an 11, while a reservoir
area off upper Granite Street scored a 12 and ranked as the most dangerous area.

The current Wildfire Hazard Zone covers the reservoir area, but doesn't cover
all portions of the other areas ranked as more dangerous than the Oak Knoll
neighborhood.

The North Mountain Avenue area is below Siskiyou Boulevard and completely
outside the hazard zone, despite the risk of grass fires there.

Forestry Division Chief Chris Chambers said including the whole town in the
Wildfire Hazard Zone would allow the city to ban flammable wood roofs for new
home construction.

Flammable wood roofs are allowed on new homes outside the zone.

"Wood shake roofs are absolutely the worst thing," Chambers said, noting wooden
roofs contributed to the destruction of homes from the Oak Knoll fire.

The city could also regulate landscaping in some cases.

Vegetation such as junipers, cypress trees, blackberries and arbor vitae is
allowed outside the Wildfire Hazard Zone, even though it can cause fires to
spread quickly, according to the 2014 Wildfire Hazard Zone Evaluation report.

Flammable vegetation -- especially cypress trees and shrubbery-- was also a
factor in the Oak Knoll fire's destructiveness.

The fire started in tall, dry grass and weeds in the Mistletoe Road area before
jumping Interstate 5 and engulfing Oak Knoll homes.

The Mistletoe Road area scored nine points in the recent fire risk analysis.

Chambers said embers can travel a half mile or more.

Expanding the Wildfire Hazard Zone would allow more property owners to qualify
for fuels reduction grants, fire officials said.

The proposed Wildfire Hazard Zone must first be reviewed by the Ashland Planning
Commission before going to the City Council for approval.

The Oregon Department of Forestry and the U.S. Forest Service support including
the entire city in the zone.

Staff reporter Vickie Aldous can be reached at 541-776-4486 or
valdous@mailtribune.com Follow her at www.twitter.com/VickieAldous.

___ (c)2014 The Ashland Daily Tidings (Ashland, Ore.) Visit The Ashland Daily
Tidings (Ashland, Ore.) at www.dailytidings.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140417-1AS-Wildfire-risk-zone-could-cover-all-of-Ashland-0417-20140417

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1AS


                      Copyright 2014 Ashland Daily Tidings


                              564 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 24, 2018 Saturday

Washington: Udall Secures Major Breakthrough for Wildfire Funding in Omnibus
Appropriations Bill

LENGTH: 632  words



Washington: Office of the Senator Tom Udall has issued the following news
release:

Today, U.S. Senator Tom Udall, ranking Democrat on the Appropriations
Subcommittee for Interior, Environment and Related Agencies, announced that he
has secured a 10-year fix for wildfire funding as part of the fiscal year 2018
omnibus funding bill made released today.


The agreement will ensure reliable funding for fighting catastrophic wildfires
for the next 10 years, starting in 2020. It ends the practice known as "fire
borrowing" -- in which the Forest Service and Interior Department are forced to
borrow from non-fire activities, including prevention, to pay for fire
suppression. The bill includes $1.946 billion in FY2018 for fire suppression,
which is $500 million more than the 10-year average and the president's budget.
With carryover balances, this total provides for the forecasted costs estimated
by the agencies for fire suppression. Beginning in 2020, it also increases the
funding cap for wildfire -- starting at $2.25 billion in FY2020 and rising to
$2.95 billion in FY2027 -- and frees up the rest of the Forest Service budget to
focus on forest stewardship, wildfire prevention, public access and recreation,
and other core responsibilities. The combined provisions shore up funding for
fighting wildfires for the next decade.
"Finding a solution to the wildfire funding crisis has been a priority of mine
for many years. So I am extremely pleased that we were able to get this done,
despite the partisan division in Washington. This is an urgently needed solution
for New Mexico and other Southwestern states as they begin yet another fire
season and another year of drought," Udall said. "This agreement ends the cycle
of 'fire borrowing' for 10 years -- and our communities, our forests and the
watersheds that sustain our communities will benefit."
"We have been underfunding emergency firefighting for too many years, fueling a
destructive cycle in which the Forest Service has to tap funding for programs to
prevent wildfires tomorrow, in order to fight severe fires today," Udall
continued. "Wildfires are as devastating to communities in the West as
hurricanes are in the East. They should be treated like the natural disasters
they are -- without shortchanging communities by taking funds from other
important programs at the Forest Service or Interior Department. This agreement
provides certainty so that when a community faces a major wildfire disaster,
we'll have the funds to fight it. And it means that when the fire is out, we can
rehabilitate the forest and protect watersheds and communities from further
damage."
Details of the agreement are as follows:
Wildfire Funding Fix
 The omnibus appropriations bill creates a new cap adjustment for wildfire. The
proposal freezes the 10-year average at the FY 2015 level ($1.395 billion),
which provides the Forest Service with certainty in its discretionary funding
for programs other than firefighting so that more agency resources can be spent
on management and restoration. The provision ramps up the amount available for
firefighting in the new fire cap from $2.25 billion to $2.95 billion from FY2020
to FY2027, to keep up with the projected increases in the cost of fighting
wildfire and to end the annual disruption of fire borrowing.
Disaster Cap Adjustment (FY19 - FY21)
 The omnibus wildfire deal also includes a disaster cap adjustment fix to keep
pace with the growing cost of natural disasters, which are linked to climate
change. The disaster cap adjustment gives FEMA, DOT, HUD, USACE, SBA, USDA and
other agencies access to increased disaster funding. In FY2019 the cap
adjustment adds an additional $4.59 billion in available disaster funds, in
FY2020 an increase of $5.72 billion, and in FY2021 $6.38 billion.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              565 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 6, 2017 Sunday

Washington: Murkowski: Fire Season Highlights Need for Legislative Solution for
Wildfire Funding and Forest Management Reforms

LENGTH: 619  words



Washington: Office of the Senator Lisa Murkowski has issued the following news
release:

U.S. Sen. Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, today chaired a hearing to conduct oversight
of the nation's wildfire management programs and the use of emerging
technologies to mitigate wildfire risk. She also reiterated her call for
Congress to pass legislation that both ends fire borrowing and makes
long-overdue forest management reforms.


"Wildfires continue to be a growing crisis and are destroying lands across our
country," Murkowski said. "As of August 1, nearly 39,000 fires had burned almost
5.5 million acres of land. For comparison's sake, that's an area nearly the size
of New Hampshire."
Among the witnesses who testified at today's hearing was Chris Maisch, the State
Forester for the Alaska Department of Natural Resources, who also spoke on
behalf of the National Association of State Foresters.
"Alaskans, in particular, know how devastating wildfires can be," Murkowski
said. "More than 300 fires have so far burned about 630,000 acres this season
alone. That's below normal, but still significant. Just two years ago, more than
five million acres burned in my home state. And we know what needs to be
done--we need more fuel treatments and fuel breaks to reduce fire risk to our
communities and firefighters."
Murkowski spoke about the hard work the committee has done to craft bipartisan
legislation to address the consequences of wildfire. Last Congress, Murkowski,
Ranking Member Maria Cantwell, D-Wash., and Sens. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., Jim Risch,
R-Idaho, and Mike Crapo, R-Idaho put forward a discussion draft called the "
Wildfire Budgeting, Response, and Forest Management Act."

"What we need is a comprehensive solution that addresses both wildfire budgeting
and forest management," Murkowski reiterated. "We need to tackle both of those,
at once, because we know the wildfire problem is not just a budgeting
problem--it's also a management problem."
The draft proposal would have permanently ended the destructive practice of fire
borrowing, removed hurdles to put more preventative measures in place to reduce
the risk of wildfires, authorized programs to fire-adapt vulnerable communities,
and improved forest management in Alaska and across the nation.
"Today's hearing focused on treatments to change wildfire behavior and the use
of technologies such as drones, GPS trackers, and fire risk mapping to make
firefighting safer and more effective," Murkowski concluded. "Our goal in this
Congress is to pass a good bill that will address all of these issues because
there is a lot more that we can do, from budgeting to new technologies to better
management practices, to save communities and protect landscapes."
In May, Murkowski ensured that the FY 2017 omnibus appropriations bill funded
our nation's wildfire suppression efforts by providing the full 10-year average
and includes additional emergency funds that will be available in the event of a
catastrophic fire season. The omnibus also increased funding for preventative
measures that can be taken in advance of wildfire season, such as hazardous
fuels reduction and mitigation. Outside of the appropriations process, Murkowski
has led the Senate's effort to enact stand-alone wildfire budgeting and forestry
management legislation based on her recognition of the need for long-term fixes.

Murkowski is chairman of the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
and the Interior-EPA Appropriations Subcommittee. An archived video and
testimony from today's hearing are available on the committee's website. Click
here and here to view both rounds of her questions for witnesses.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              566 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 18, 2014 Tuesday

Washington: AR Gov. Beebe's Weekly Address: Firewise Stateside

LENGTH: 559  words

DATELINE: Washington


The Southern Governors' Association has issued the following news release:

Already this year, wildfire activity is surging in Arkansas. And because of
unusually low humidity levels, we continue to be at higher risk of these
unpredictable and dangerous blazes. Fortunately, our communities and local fire
departments work hard to mitigate and prevent wildfires. In fact, the National
Fire Protection Agency recently named Arkansas the number-one Firewise state in
the country for 2013. We are proud of this recognition, but our vigilance must
continue to increase for the upcoming fire season.

If the first two months of 2014 are any indication, prevention will be key this
year to avoiding widespread devastation. In January and February, Arkansas had
more than double the 10-year normal average for wildfires. Altogether, they
burned more than 7,000 acres of forests and grasslands across the State. And now
we're in March, typically a low humidity month with a greater risk for increased
wildfire activity.

Communities can protect themselves by joining the Arkansas Firewise program
through the Arkansas Forestry Commission. The program works with fire
departments and civic groups on mitigation projects and community education. Any
group can request an Arkansas Firewise Team presentation to address
area-specific wildfire hazards and complete on-site wildfire risk assessments.

By educating more Arkansans and communities about wildfire safety, we can
decrease the damage these blazes inflict. In many cases, we may also be able to
prevent their occurrence entirely. That's because humans are the leading cause
of wildfires. In fact, landowners burning trash or dead vegetation started more
than 40 percent of the wildfires in 2013. And, even worse than these accidental
fires, we know that more than a quarter of all wildfires are tied to arson.

In dry conditions, it's extremely easy for small fires to get out of hand. The
northwestern third of Arkansas is currently categorized as "abnormally dry" by
the U.S. Drought Monitor. Nearly three dozen Arkansas counties are in "moderate
danger" of wildfires, according the Forestry Commission.

By complying with burn bans and following other fire precautions, we're also
doing our best to help our firefighters. These brave men and women, many of them
volunteers, work extremely hard and risk their lives for our protection. We were
reminded of this earlier in the year when Jake Harrell, a pilot for the Arkansas
Forestry Commission, died in a plane crash while scouting for fires in
Montgomery County. Jake had been flying fire detection routes for the Forestry
Commission since 2005. Always the consummate professional, Jake was proud of the
vital role he played in protecting our citizens and our natural heritage.

Over the past few summers, many states have been devastated by out-of-control
wildfires. The potential danger will be high again this year, including in
Arkansas. Please do you part to help prevent fires by going online for more
information at arkansasfirewise.com and arkansasforestry.org. Everyone's safety
improves, including firefighters and emergency responders, when neighborhoods
become Firewise communities. Working together, we can prevent brush fires, grass
fires and forest fires from becoming major disasters.

For more information please visit: http://www.southerngovernors.orga

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              567 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 3, 2017 Friday

Washington: Reps. Huffman & Thompson Offer a Better Way to Equip Communities for
Future Wildfires

LENGTH: 661  words



Washington: Office of the MP Jared Huffman has issued the following news
release:

 In face of the wildfires that devastated Northern California, Reps. Jared
Huffman (D-San Rafael) and Mike Thompson (D- St. Helena) offered a
comprehensive, common-sense amendment to better equip federal and state forestry
and wildfire agencies against the continuing threat of wildfires.


The Huffman-Thompson amendment is a substitute to H.R. 2936, the Resilient
Federal Forests Act, which the House of Representatives will be considering
later this week.
"In the wake of the wildfire crisis in Northern California, we must get serious
about preparing state and federal agencies for future wildfires," said Rep.
Huffman. "Unfortunately, the bill that the House will consider this week is not
that solution. It does little to address fire risk, and a lot to weaken
environmental protections and limit public review of federal agency actions. We
can do better than yet another partisan bill that we know will fail in the
Senate. That's why I am working with Rep. Thompson to offer a substitute
amendment that takes a complete approach to federal and state forest management
by freeing up Forest Service funds in the short term, and reducing fire risk for
our communities over the long term. We need collaborative strategies to reduce
fire risk, treat at-risk forests, and help communities prepare."
"This amendment fixes the longstanding budgetary issues that have forced land
management agencies to exhaust their budgets on fire suppression, preventing
them from investing in fire prevention," Rep. Thompson said. "By making the
appropriate investments in fire prevention now, we can save money, property and
lives in the long run, and help prevent future disaster likes the tragic fires
in California."
The Huffman-Thompson Amendment would directly address several key wildfire
policies by:
    Incorporating language from the bipartisan Wildfire Disaster Funding Act,
H.R. 2862, that fixes the "fire borrowing" issue once and for all. Today, the
Forest Service is spending so much time and money on increasingly expensive
wildfire suppression that the budget to address future wildfire threats is
constrained;
     Including language from bipartisan Wildland Fires Act, S. 1991, that
reduces fire risk in the long-term by funding at-risk communities to prepare for
wildfires, treating the top 1% most-at-risk federal forests over the next years,
and authorizing agencies to conduct fire preparedness programs;
     Addressing hazardous vegetation management adjacent to electrical
transmission lines along rights-of-way on federal lands; and
     Allowing states to apply for Hazard Migration Grants for wildfire
prevention and mitigation efforts, an idea proposed in the bipartisan Wildfire
Prevention Act, H.R.1183
Although Huffman and Thompson do support some elements of H.R. 2936, including
the provisions addressing the long-standing issue of "fire borrowing," the
legislation as a whole primarily serves to weaken environmental standards and
limit public participation in the review of federal agency actions. It provides
the Forest Service with significantly expanded exemptions from public review
laws, waives endangered species consultation requirements if the Forest Service
asserts they are not necessary, prevents citizens from recovering attorney's
fees even when they prevail over the federal government in court, and gives
Regional Foresters the power to waive stream protection guidelines. The bill
also expands current exemptions in the National Environmental Policy Act to
potentially allow up to 10,000-acre clearcutting projects without public
consideration. H.R. 2936 also introduces a backdoor way to undermine National
Monuments designated by President Obama.
The Huffman-Thompson amendment was submitted to the House Rules Committee
yesterday. That committee will meet today to determine which amendments will
proceed to consideration on the House floor.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              568 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                              European Union News

                            February 23, 2018 Friday

Help combat threat of wildfires

LENGTH: 406 words



London: Northern Ireland has issued the following news release:
The Department of Agriculture Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) and the
Department of Justice (DoJ) are seeking the views of the public and stakeholders
on how to reduce the threat of wildfires in the countryside.


In 2017 Northern Ireland Fire & Rescue Service (NIFRS) attended 2,231 gorse
fires. In the majority of cases these fires were started deliberately.
Launching the consultation 'Reducing Wildfires in the Countryside(external link
opens in a new window / tab)' Chief Executive of the Northern Ireland
Environment Agency (NIEA) David Small said: "Wildfires put the safety of
firefighters, the public and property at risk. They also have a devastating
impact on local wildlife. Several important nature conservation sites, including
Areas of Special Scientific Interest (ASSI), were impacted by the 2017 wildfires
, with significant damage occurring to habitats and species. In addition
fighting wildfires is resource intensive and could potentially impact upon the
ability of the fire service to respond to other serious incidents.
"The NI Wildfire Stakeholders Group, which consists of representatives from
government agencies, environmental Non-Government Organisations (ENGOs) and
landowners, considers that the best way forward to tackle the issue of wildfires
in NI is to have an agreed and co-ordinated strategic approach which we can all
jointly work towards. This will help to identify and prioritise key initiatives
to help reduce the number of wildfires in the countryside and to reduce the
impacts on the environment and communities when such incidents occur.
"This public engagement is a vital exercise as it will raise awareness and help
inform the development of this strategic approach, and I would encourage people
to respond so that we can reduce this threat together."
Anthony Harbinson, Director of Safer Communities at the Department of Justice
said: "Anyone involved in illegally setting wildfires in the countryside is
breaking the law. They risk not only their own safety, but that of others. They
also present a very real risk to property and threaten wildlife.
"I commend those involved in the work of Project 'Strategically Addressing
Wildfire Arson' (SAWA) and I would encourage everyone with a genuine interest in
protecting our environment to engage with this consultation. Working together we
can make a positive difference."

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              569 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                              European Union News

                           February 22, 2018 Thursday

Help combat threat of wildfires

LENGTH: 406 words



London: Northern Ireland has issued the following news release:
The Department of Agriculture Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) and the
Department of Justice (DoJ) are seeking the views of the public and stakeholders
on how to reduce the threat of wildfires in the countryside.


In 2017 Northern Ireland Fire & Rescue Service (NIFRS) attended 2,231 gorse
fires. In the majority of cases these fires were started deliberately.
Launching the consultation 'Reducing Wildfires in the Countryside(external link
opens in a new window / tab)' Chief Executive of the Northern Ireland
Environment Agency (NIEA) David Small said: "Wildfires put the safety of
firefighters, the public and property at risk. They also have a devastating
impact on local wildlife. Several important nature conservation sites, including
Areas of Special Scientific Interest (ASSI), were impacted by the 2017 wildfires
, with significant damage occurring to habitats and species. In addition
fighting wildfires is resource intensive and could potentially impact upon the
ability of the fire service to respond to other serious incidents.
"The NI Wildfire Stakeholders Group, which consists of representatives from
government agencies, environmental Non-Government Organisations (ENGOs) and
landowners, considers that the best way forward to tackle the issue of wildfires
in NI is to have an agreed and co-ordinated strategic approach which we can all
jointly work towards. This will help to identify and prioritise key initiatives
to help reduce the number of wildfires in the countryside and to reduce the
impacts on the environment and communities when such incidents occur.
"This public engagement is a vital exercise as it will raise awareness and help
inform the development of this strategic approach, and I would encourage people
to respond so that we can reduce this threat together."
Anthony Harbinson, Director of Safer Communities at the Department of Justice
said: "Anyone involved in illegally setting wildfires in the countryside is
breaking the law. They risk not only their own safety, but that of others. They
also present a very real risk to property and threaten wildlife.
"I commend those involved in the work of Project 'Strategically Addressing
Wildfire Arson' (SAWA) and I would encourage everyone with a genuine interest in
protecting our environment to engage with this consultation. Working together we
can make a positive difference."

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              570 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                              European Union News

                          February 21, 2018 Wednesday

Help combat threat of wildfires

LENGTH: 406 words



London: Northern Ireland has issued the following news release:
The Department of Agriculture Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) and the
Department of Justice (DoJ) are seeking the views of the public and stakeholders
on how to reduce the threat of wildfires in the countryside.


In 2017 Northern Ireland Fire & Rescue Service (NIFRS) attended 2,231 gorse
fires. In the majority of cases these fires were started deliberately.
Launching the consultation 'Reducing Wildfires in the Countryside(external link
opens in a new window / tab)' Chief Executive of the Northern Ireland
Environment Agency (NIEA) David Small said: "Wildfires put the safety of
firefighters, the public and property at risk. They also have a devastating
impact on local wildlife. Several important nature conservation sites, including
Areas of Special Scientific Interest (ASSI), were impacted by the 2017 wildfires
, with significant damage occurring to habitats and species. In addition
fighting wildfires is resource intensive and could potentially impact upon the
ability of the fire service to respond to other serious incidents.
"The NI Wildfire Stakeholders Group, which consists of representatives from
government agencies, environmental Non-Government Organisations (ENGOs) and
landowners, considers that the best way forward to tackle the issue of wildfires
in NI is to have an agreed and co-ordinated strategic approach which we can all
jointly work towards. This will help to identify and prioritise key initiatives
to help reduce the number of wildfires in the countryside and to reduce the
impacts on the environment and communities when such incidents occur.
"This public engagement is a vital exercise as it will raise awareness and help
inform the development of this strategic approach, and I would encourage people
to respond so that we can reduce this threat together."
Anthony Harbinson, Director of Safer Communities at the Department of Justice
said: "Anyone involved in illegally setting wildfires in the countryside is
breaking the law. They risk not only their own safety, but that of others. They
also present a very real risk to property and threaten wildlife.
"I commend those involved in the work of Project 'Strategically Addressing
Wildfire Arson' (SAWA) and I would encourage everyone with a genuine interest in
protecting our environment to engage with this consultation. Working together we
can make a positive difference."

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              571 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                Forfar Dispatch

                             March 23, 2014 Sunday

Wildfire warning for Angus area

LENGTH: 557  words


Angus firefighters have called on the public to back a campaign to cut down on
the risk of wildfires in the countryside.

With the peak period for incidents approaching, the Scottish Fire and Rescue
Service (SFRS) is raising awareness to tackle the problem across the area.

Last year firefighters were called to deal with hundreds of wildfire/grassfire
incidents across Scotland and the demand on SFRS resources was significant. The
service is keen to work with land managers, tourists and communities to help cut
the number fires in a bid to protect the countryside and its residents.

Craig Thomson, group manager for Angus, said: "Scottish Fire and Rescue Service
is urging people to join Scotland's Fight Against Fire' and we are asking
communities, tourists and visitors to be aware of the heightened risk of
wildfire at this time of year.

"We want people to act responsibly in a countryside environment, such as
properly disposing of smoking materials, to prevent these fires happening in the
first place."

Mr Thomson added that local land managers are being asked to ensure that they do
not carry out burning outwith the pemitted season and to ensure that suitable
fire plans are in place during their land management operations.

He said: "When wildfires occur they impact greatly on rural areas and can cause
substantial environmental and economic damage.

"Wildfires also pose a threat to communities and by raising awareness we are
aiming to reduce the risk."

There is a number of things land managers can do to help prevent wildfires,
including adhering strictly to the Muirburn Code which applies to the controlled
burning of heather within the permitted season.

The fire service has historically worked with land managers to provide advice
around their fire plans in an attempt to reduce the number of wildfires and Mr
Thomson said that work is set to continue.

He added: "The assistance of local land owners and managers, as well as members
of the public, was very much appreciated last year. In particular I would like
to thank local employers who released our retained and community response crew
members to deal with these incidents.

"Their continued support is key to maintaining the safety of our local
communities."

Many wildland fires are started deliberately or are due to careless, reckless or
irresponsible behaviour. Members of the public are asked, if they see someone
acting suspiciously, recklessly or irresponsibly in the countryside, to contact
Police Scotland on 101 or pass information anonymously to Scotland Crimestoppers
on 0800 555 111.

Garry Burnett, Scottish Wildfire Project manager, said: "I am very much focused
on delivering a preventative agenda within the wildfire environment. The
reduction in wildfire incidents will not only benefit public safety but will
reduce significant demand on our firefighting personnel.

"As the first Scottish Wildfire Project manager, I am determined to reduce this
type of incident utilising strong external and internal partner relationships
and relying on those collaborations to reduce risk."

Further information is available on the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service website
www.firescotland.gov.ukwhich also has a link to the Muirburn Code. The Scottish
Outdoor Access Code which can be found at
http://www.outdooraccess-scotland.com/outdoors-responsibly/access-code-and-advic
e/soac/

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAFD


                       Copyright 2014 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              572 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                               Kirriemuir Herald

                             March 23, 2014 Sunday

Wildfire warning for Angus area

LENGTH: 557  words


Angus firefighters have called on the public to back a campaign to cut down on
the risk of wildfires in the countryside.

With the peak period for incidents approaching, the Scottish Fire and Rescue
Service (SFRS) is raising awareness to tackle the problem across the area.

Last year firefighters were called to deal with hundreds of wildfire/grassfire
incidents across Scotland and the demand on SFRS resources was significant. The
service is keen to work with land managers, tourists and communities to help cut
the number fires in a bid to protect the countryside and its residents.

Craig Thomson, group manager for Angus, said: "Scottish Fire and Rescue Service
is urging people to join Scotland's Fight Against Fire' and we are asking
communities, tourists and visitors to be aware of the heightened risk of
wildfire at this time of year.

"We want people to act responsibly in a countryside environment, such as
properly disposing of smoking materials, to prevent these fires happening in the
first place."

Mr Thomson added that local land managers are being asked to ensure that they do
not carry out burning outwith the pemitted season and to ensure that suitable
fire plans are in place during their land management operations.

He said: "When wildfires occur they impact greatly on rural areas and can cause
substantial environmental and economic damage.

"Wildfires also pose a threat to communities and by raising awareness we are
aiming to reduce the risk."

There is a number of things land managers can do to help prevent wildfires,
including adhering strictly to the Muirburn Code which applies to the controlled
burning of heather within the permitted season.

The fire service has historically worked with land managers to provide advice
around their fire plans in an attempt to reduce the number of wildfires and Mr
Thomson said that work is set to continue.

He added: "The assistance of local land owners and managers, as well as members
of the public, was very much appreciated last year. In particular I would like
to thank local employers who released our retained and community response crew
members to deal with these incidents.

"Their continued support is key to maintaining the safety of our local
communities."

Many wildland fires are started deliberately or are due to careless, reckless or
irresponsible behaviour. Members of the public are asked, if they see someone
acting suspiciously, recklessly or irresponsibly in the countryside, to contact
Police Scotland on 101 or pass information anonymously to Scotland Crimestoppers
on 0800 555 111.

Garry Burnett, Scottish Wildfire Project manager, said: "I am very much focused
on delivering a preventative agenda within the wildfire environment. The
reduction in wildfire incidents will not only benefit public safety but will
reduce significant demand on our firefighting personnel.

"As the first Scottish Wildfire Project manager, I am determined to reduce this
type of incident utilising strong external and internal partner relationships
and relying on those collaborations to reduce risk."

Further information is available on the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service website
www.firescotland.gov.ukwhich also has a link to the Muirburn Code. The Scottish
Outdoor Access Code which can be found at
http://www.outdooraccess-scotland.com/outdoors-responsibly/access-code-and-advic
e/soac/

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAKH


                       Copyright 2014 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              573 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                 Rossland News

                             July 13, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

RosslandÃ¢â[#x201a]¬â[#x201e]¢s FireSmart program holds workshop for Black Bear
residents

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 843 words


Residents in Rossland's Black Bear neighbourhood are tackling wildfire risk on
their properties headlong as the wildfire danger climbs into the hot, dry days
of summer.

Over 20 residents attended a two-hour FireSmart Awareness Workshop offered by
Rossland's FireSmart Communities Program on Sunday, July 9.

Residents learned to assess the wildfire hazard to their Black Bear
neighbourhood homes and reduce that hazard by eliminating ignition opportunities
on their structures and outbuildings and removing or reducing vegetation with a
high ignition hazard where it is located close to homes.

The FireSmart Awareness Workshop is one of several events that the Black Bear
residents are undertaking in their neighbourhood to reduce wildfire hazard and
become a recognized FireSmart Community under the FireSmart Communities Program.

Earlier this year, a few Black Bear homeowners - led by Black Bear resident
Anthony Bell - formed a FireSmart Board and developed a FireSmart Plan under the
provincially funded FireSmart Canada Community Recognition Program. This
FireSmart Plan focuses resident efforts to reduce fire hazard on their
individual properties.

Bell and several other Rossland residents attended a FireSmart Community
Champion workshop in the spring, receiving training in FireSmart basics about
how to reduce wildfire hazard in their areas.

Bell was enthusiastic about the training.

"There were Community Champions - as the program calls us - from three Rossland
neighbourhoods; Iron Colt and McLeod Avenue East are also participating in the
program. In half a day we learned how to assess and reduce the wildfire hazards
to our homes as well as how to follow the national FireSmart Communities program
to achieve recognition status," Bell said.

That training was delivered by Don Mortimer, a consultant with FireSmart Canada
and Rossland resident. Mortimer works across Canada and has trained over 700
fire professionals to work as Local FireSmart Representatives with the wildfire
vulnerable neighbourhoods in their respective communities.

Mortimer works with the City of Rossland FireSmart Program and functions as the
Local FireSmart Representative for the three active FireSmart boards in the
Rossland neighbourhoods.

"We're working with priority neighbourhoods on the City perimeter right now but
will add other neighbourhoods where residents express an interest and a wildfire
risk does indeed exist," said Mortimer.

Mortimer is pleased but not surprised with the Rossland response to the
FireSmart Communities Program.

"Rossland has a decade-long involvement with FireSmart initiatives and the City
has had a Community Wildfire Protection Plan since 2007 - everyone has noticed
the steady progress with wildfire hazard reduction by forest thinning on
strategically located City and Crown lands within and around the City."

Mortimer is excited with the FireSmart Communities Program potential to take
those FireSmart hazard mitigation from public land onto private properties.

"This program is run by the residents themselves, taking priority actions on
simple steps to reduce the wildfire hazard on their homes and in their yards -
they work with a fire professional like myself who recommends specific actions
and gets them started. Progressively, by staging annual FireSmart Events like
the FireSmart Awareness Workshop Black Bear is holding on Sunday, the
neighbourhood reduces wildfire risk and ultimately achieves national recognition
under the FireSmart Communities Program," Mortimer said.

Looking forward, Mortimer sees a strong future for the FireSmart Communities
initiative as wildfires become more frequent and intense in response to the
effects of climate change on forest conditions.

"Fort McMurray is a tragic example of how wildfires can impact forested
communities. There, a community of 90,000 lost 10 per cent of its structures and
incurred a loss that ranges from 3.6 to 5 billion dollars depending on who's
counting. It will happen again, and soon. The saddest thing about that incident
is that it could have been so easily prevented by compliance with FireSmart
guidelines," Mortimer said.

Post-fire investigations at Fort McMurray are showing that FireSmart structures
survived overwhelmingly, with 81 per cent, and a conclusion that if structures
on the perimeter of the town at the interface with the forest had been
FireSmart, much of the fire-spread from one building to another that led to the
vast majority of structure loss in Fort McMurray could have been prevented.

The FireSmart Awareness Workshop provided residents with information from the
FireSmart Homeowners Manual - a comprehensive booklet on reducing the potential
impacts of wildfire on your home. The booklet was developed by FireSmart Canada
and BC Wildfire Service and is available at Rossland City Hall or can be
downloaded online at
http://www.bcwildfire.ca/prevention/docs/homeowner-firesmart.pdf

Anyone with questions or interest in the Rossland FireSmart Communities Program
can contact Don Mortimer, City of Rossland FireSmart Program at
dmortimer@telus.net .

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              574 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 23, 2016 Thursday

Washington: Murkowski: We Must Provide Firefighting Resources, End Fire
Borrowing, and Improve Forest Management

LENGTH: 702 words



 Washington, DC: U.S. Senate Committee on Energy & Resources has issued the
following press release:



 U.S. Sen. Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, today received testimony on a bipartisan
discussion draft entitled the "Wildfire Budgeting, Response and Forest
Management Act", which would address the serious challenges of wildfire funding
and forest management.  Murkowski released the draft bill on May 25, 2016 with
Ranking Member Maria Cantwell, D-Wash., and Sens. Ron Wyden, D-Ore.; Jim Risch,
R-Idaho; and Mike Crapo, R-Idaho.





 "People across the country are realizing that wildfires are a growing crisis.
Alaskans, in particular, know how devastating wildfires can be. About half of
the 10 million acres that burned last year were in my home state, and we have
already seen over 200 more fires this season alone," Murkowski said. "We have a
real and growing problem on our hands, and resolving it will require a
comprehensive approach that addresses both wildfire funding and forest
management."



 Murkowski urged her colleagues to support the draft bill, which would provide
substantial resources for wildfire suppression, permanently end the destructive
practice of fire borrowing, increase preventative measures to reduce the risk of
wildfires, authorize programs to fire-adapt vulnerable communities, and improve
forest management in Alaska and across the nation.



 "The wildfire problem is not just a budget problem - it's also a management
problem," Murkowski said. "Healthy, resilient forests are fire-resistant
forests. And yet, despite knowing the value of fuel reduction treatments in
mitigating wildfire risks, increasing firefighter safety, and restoring the
health of our forests, active management is still often met with a series of
discouraging and near insurmountable obstacles."



 Murkowski, chairman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, also
called out witnesses from the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the U.S.
Department of the Interior on their attempts to undercut the Senate's bipartisan
efforts to provide a long-term solution to the wildfire budgeting issues
plaguing the U.S. Forest Service.



 "The administration claims that it will use the hundreds of millions of dollars
in funding that it wants to move off-budget for forest restoration and other
measures that allow you to get ahead of the problem," Murkowski said.
"Regrettably, however, the President's budget request for the Forest Service
simply doesn't bear this out. The bottom line is that the administration is
saying one thing and doing another."



 Murkowski included $1.6 billion for wildfire suppression in last year's
omnibus, which is $600 million above the average cost over the past ten years,
and may be enough to prevent fire borrowing in FY 2016. Last week, Murkowski
reported her FY 2017 Interior-Environment Appropriations bill to the full Senate
with a fix for fire borrowing and similar funding for wildfire suppression and
preventative measures such as hazardous fuels reductions. Outside of the
appropriations process, Murkowski has led the Senate's effort to enact
stand-alone wildfire budgeting and forestry management legislation based on her
recognition of the need for long-term fixes.



 Murkowski also spoke in strong support of a provision that she included to
ensure that the Forest Service conducts a full inventory of young-growth timber
in the Tongass National Forest in Southeast Alaska.



 "This inventory needs to be real, and not just something that looks good on
paper, because jobs and livelihoods are at stake," Murkowski said. "The Forest
Service needs to do what's right and undertake what the Tongass Advisory
Committee called for in its recommendations - a comprehensive, stand-level
inventory to address the uncertainties that exist in the supply, volume, and
timing of the availability of young-growth to support a transition."



 Click HERE to view the discussion draft and HERE to view a summary of it.



 Murkowski concluded today's hearing by reinforcing her commitment to advance
the bipartisan discussion draft to the Senate floor as quickly as possible.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              575 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 31, 2015 Tuesday

STATEMENT BY SENATORS JOHN McCAIN, JEFF FLAKE & JOHN BARRASSO APPLAUDING
WILDFIRE PREVENTION REFORMS IN BUDGET RESOLUTION

LENGTH: 370  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator John McCain, U.S Government has issued the following news
release:

U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ), Jeff Flake (R-AZ) and John Barrasso (R-WY)
released the following statement today applauding the wildfire prevention
reforms included in the Senate Budget Resolution for Fiscal Year 2016:

"We commend Budget Committee Chairman Mike Enzi for reporting and passing a
Budget Resolution that calls on Congress to address funding shortfalls in Forest
Service's suppression budget but also promotes wildfire prevention using
industry-led forest thinning and forest stewardship contracts.

"We believe that thinning our forests is one of the best ways to control the
ballooning costs of fighting wildfires. We also believe that the Forest Service
and the U.S. Department of the Interior should have the funding they need to
fight wildfires. The provision on wildfires in the Budget Resolution is largely
based on the FLAME Act Amendments, legislation we recently reintroduced in
Congress and that Chairman Enzi has supported. We're pleased that our approach
is reflected in the Senate Budget Resolution.

"We also want to commend our colleagues, Senators Ron Wyden and Mike Crapo, for
offering a different amendment that focuses solely on boosting suppression
funding, and thank Senator Wyden for modifying his amendment to state that
Congress may establish additional criteria for how wildfires access FEMA's
Disaster Relief Fund. By merging elements of our proposals, we can improve the
federal government's wildfire suppression and prevention budgets in a fiscally
responsible manner. We look forward to continuing our work to advance mutually
agreeable wildfire prevention and suppression legislation beyond the Budget
Resolution.

"As catastrophic wildfires grow in frequency and intensity across the West, it
is critical that we do everything we can to prevent them from spreading in the
first place. The Senate Budget Resolution calls for a common-sense, fiscally
responsible approach to addressing the growing threat of wildfires and
protecting fire-prone communities across the country."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              576 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Bakersfield Californian

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 21, 2014 Saturday

Summer, with wildfires as wild card, brings ozone concerns

BYLINE: Steven Mayer, The Bakersfield Californian

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 549 words


June 21--Brace yourself, Bakersfield.

Saturday is officially the first day of summer, and the change of seasons will
undoubtedly bring significant shifts in weather and air quality.

This is how it works: Longer, hotter days in the valley bring more stagnant air
and a corresponding buildup of ground-level ozone, the main component of smog.

But last summer was the cleanest summer on record. So we should be in good shape
this summer, too. Right?

Not necessarily.

Officials at the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District are worried
that another factor they can't control could skew air quality readings -- in the
wrong direction.

Wildfires.

"Due to this extreme drought, there's the potential for a crazy wildfire
season," said Samir Sheikh, the district's deputy air pollution control officer.

"We're already seeing wildfires earlier than usual this year," he said.

According to Cal Fire statistics, in the period from Jan. 1 through June 14, the
state documented 2,324 wildfires, a 60 percent increase over a five-year average
of 1,447 fires during the same time interval.

There are provisions in the federal Clean Air Act allowing for "exceptional
events," including wildfires, Sheikh said. That means the district and its
residents should not be penalized if wildfires are shown to spike readings at
air monitoring stations.

"But that doesn't avert the public health impact," Sheikh said. And protecting
public health is the priority.

For those who care about what they are breathing, the focus in the summer always
shifts away from particulate pollution -- the buildup of the typically
wintertime problem of tiny dust and soot particles -- to ozone pollution, the
scourge of Bakersfield's summers.

Ozone, a corrosive gas harmful to human health, is formed when sunlight bakes
the mixture of nitrogen oxides, known as NOx, and volatile organic compounds.

These pollutants are plentiful in the valley, and motor vehicles are -- by far
-- the largest contributors, Sheikh said.

The cars we drive, the trucks transporting goods on our highways, the tractors
in the fields and the recreational off-road vehicles are responsible for more
than 80 percent of the valley's NOx emissions.

That ratio represents a role-reversal from the 1970s and 1980s when stationary
sources, including the oil and gas industries, were the biggest contributors to
the formation of summertime smog.

"That's not a coincidence," Sheikh said of the reversal. "It's the result of
billions of dollars industry has invested to reduce emissions."

On Thursday afternoon, the air district's monitoring station near Arvin recorded
an ozone reading of 90 parts per billion, considered to be in the orange
"unhealthy for sensitive groups" category, but not in the red "unhealthy"
category.

If you drive, Sheikh said, you can make a difference by driving less, turning
off your engine instead of idling and avoiding driving during the peak afternoon
period.

Rebates are available for those who replace their gas lawn mower with an
electric model. To learn about these and other incentives, go to
http://valleyair.org.

Brace yourself, Bakersfield. Summer is here.

___ (c)2014 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) Visit The
Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) at www.bakersfield.com Distributed
by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140621-BK-Summer-with-wildfires
-as-wild-card-brings-ozone-concerns-0621-20140621

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BK


                   Copyright 2014 The Bakersfield Californian


                              577 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                  Farming Life

                            February 26, 2018 Monday

Views sought on how to avoid threat of wildfires

LENGTH: 309  words


The Department of Agriculture Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) and the
Department of Justice (DoJ) are seeking the views of the public and stakeholders
on how to reduce the threat of wildfires in the countryside.

In 2017, Northern Ireland Fire & Rescue Service (NIFRS) attended 2,231 gorse
fires. In the majority of cases these fires were started deliberately.

Launching the consultation Reducing Wildfires in the Countryside', Chief
Executive of the Northern Ireland Environment Agency (NIEA) David Small said: "
Wildfires put the safety of firefighters, the public and property at risk. They
also have a devastating impact on local wildlife. Several important nature
conservation sites, including Areas of Special Scientific Interest (ASSI), were
impacted by the 2017 wildfires with significant damage occurring to habitats and
species.

"The NI Wildfire Stakeholders Group, which consists of representatives from
government agencies, environmental Non-Government Organisations (ENGOs) and
landowners, considers that the best way forward to tackle the issue of wildfires
in NI is to have an agreed and co-ordinated strategic approach which we can all
jointly work towards. This will help to identify and prioritise key initiatives
to help reduce the number of wildfires in the countryside and to reduce the
impacts on the environment and communities when such incidents occur.

"This public engagement is a vital exercise as it will raise awareness and help
inform the development of this strategic approach, and I would encourage people
to respond so that we can reduce this threat together."

Reducing Wildfires in the Countryside' is currently open for responses until
Friday 16 March 2018 on the nidirect Citizen Space webpage:

http://consultations.nidirect.gov.uk/daera-environment-marine-fisheries/reducing
-wildfires-in-the-countryside/consult_view

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: INFL


                       Copyright 2018 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              578 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             Saratoga News, Calif.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           February 20, 2014 Thursday

Saratoga identified among communities at risk for wildfires

BYLINE: Khalida Sarwari, Saratoga News, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 346 words


Feb. 20--Saratoga is one of 14 communities in Santa Clara County that has been
identified as being at risk for wildfires. With California entering its third
year of drought conditions, the fire season has been extended well into winter,
putting hillside areas in the city at further risk for wildfire.

The city of Saratoga, along with the Santa Clara County FireSafe Council and the
Saratoga Fire Protection District, are holding a meeting Feb. 25 on new services
that will be provided to residents in parts of Saratoga that are prone to
wildfire.

Property owners in the Saratoga Wildland Urban Interface Area, the western and
southern hillside portion of Saratoga that is particularly susceptible to
wildfire, are invited to come and learn more about protecting their property and
their community from wildfire.

Residents will also have an opportunity to learn more about services provided
through the city's collaboration with the FireSafe Council and the Saratoga Fire
Protection District, such as chipping of materials cleared from defensible
space.

The three entities came together last year to provide hazardous fuel reduction
services and wildfire awareness education to property owners in both the city of
Saratoga and the Saratoga Fire Protection District. Consequently, property
owners in the urban interface area are now required to establish defensible
space by clearing brush and grass around permanent structures and roads or
driveways used for evacuation purposes. This practice is believed to help slow
or stop the spread of wildfire and thereby reduce property damage and loss of
life during fires. To assist property owners in creating and maintaining
defensible space, the city provides free clearing and chipping services.

The Feb. 25 meeting will be held at 6 p.m. at the Saratoga Fire Department,
14380 Saratoga Ave., Saratoga.

For more information, visit sccfiresafe.org/communities/saratoga-area.

___ (c)2014 the Saratoga News (San Jose, Calif.) Visit the Saratoga News (San
Jose, Calif.) at www.mercurynews.com/saratoga Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140220-1SN-Saratoga-identified-among-communities-at-risk-for-wildfires
-0220-20140220

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1SN


                                 Copyright 2014


                              579 of 987 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright (c) 2013 The Regents of the University of
                                   California
                             Ecology Law Quarterly

                                      2013

                             Ecology Law Quarterly

                              40 Ecology L.Q. 623

LENGTH: 25998 words

ARTICLE: Perverse Incentives: The Case of Wildfire Smoke Regulation

NAME: Kirsten H. Engel*

BIO: Copyright © 2013 Regents of the University of California.

* Professor of Law, University of Arizona College of Law. The author wishes to
especially thank Dan Duerr, who analyzed the air pollution data presented in
this Article, and also Adam Babich, Christopher Robertson, Andrew Reeves, Janice
Peterson (U.S. Forest Service), Mark Evangelista (U.S. EPA), Tom Moore (Western
Regional Air Partnership), and the many other current and former state and
federal officials who offered their time and perspectives on this topic through
interviews and emails. Caylin Goldey Barter and Brian Tedder provided excellent
research assistance. I am grateful for the feedback I received at a joint
University of Chicago/University of Arizona symposium on the law and economics
of wildfire policy. Financial and research support provided by the University of
Queensland TC Beirne College of Law and the University of Arizona's Law College
Association were critical in facilitating the completion of this manuscript.

We welcome responses to this Article. If you are interested in submitting a
response for our online companion journal, Ecology Law Currents, please contact
ecologylawcurrents@boalt.org. Responses to articles may be viewed at our
website, http://www.boalt.org/elq

HIGHLIGHT:

   Wildfire is on the rise. The United States is witnessing a spectacular
increase in acres lost to catastrophic wildfires, a phenomenon fed by the
generally hotter and dryer conditions associated with climate change. In
addition to losses in lives, property, and natural resources, wildfires
contribute thousands of tons of air pollution each year. Ironically, one of the
most effective tools to reduce the incidence and severity of unplanned wildfires
is fire. Prescribed, or controlled, burning reduces the buildup of vegetation
resulting from years of wildfire-suppression policy. At present, the number of
acres subject to prescribed burns falls far short of the optimal number needed
to restore natural ecosystems and reduce damages from unplanned wildfires.
Air-pollution law and policy is an important factor contributing to the
under-provision of prescribed fire that has so far escaped in-depth treatment in
the law and policy literature. After setting forth the relevant air quality
framework, this Article argues that decisions regarding planned wildfire are
marred by an anachronistic and inaccurate distinction between "natural" and
"anthropogenic" fire. Rationalizing that unplanned wildfires are "natural," the
federal government excludes pollutants from such fires from air quality
compliance calculations at the same time it encourages states to vigorously
control pollutants from "anthropogenic," prescribed fires. The result
contributes to an undervaluation of necessary, planned wildfire. Wildfire air
pollution policy is also hindered by governance structures that place air
quality and resource agencies at odds with each other, and by state nuisance
authorities that enable narrow local interests to shut down prescribed fire, all
of which trump the broader public interest in reduced wildfire risk and
healthier forests. This Article suggests several solutions to remove these
distortions, including adopting a default rule whereby all wildfire smoke, of
whatever origin, "counts" for purposes of air quality compliance. Together with
adopting mechanisms to require air pollution and resource agencies to both
participate in planned burning decisions and de-emphasize the influence of
nuisance standards, this "smoke is smoke" rule will ensure that the air
pollution policy better reflects the true costs and benefits of prescribed fire.



 TEXT:
 [*625]

   Introduction

 Throughout history, differential treatment of similar outcomes according to
whether the cause is natural or man-made has posed profound dilemmas for the
law. This dilemma is particularly true where the harm is the result of either
human or natural causes. On the one hand, no one wants to excuse human
culpability because it mimics or intermingles with natural causes. There is an
understandable urge to isolate the human-caused from the naturally caused and to
control (or blame) only the former. n1 But doing so often proves difficult, as
does ignoring the harm wrought by what is reputedly "natural." Law has evolved
toward eliminating the legal significance of the natural versus human origins of
particular acts. n2 Modern environmental law generally follows this trend - for
the most part, it dispenses with the distinction between natural and human-made
and addresses the harmful impacts of particular activities upon the environment,
regardless of whether their cause is natural, man-made, or some combination of
the two. n3

    [*626]  An important exception to this trend is the regulation of air
pollution from wildfires. Caught in the middle of this definitional tension are
controlled (or "prescribed") burning and the use of wildfire for resource
benefits (collectively referred to as "planned wildfire"). Planned wildfire is a
potent source of air pollution. Each year, prescribed fires contribute 818,000
tons of particulates, n4 700,000 of which are considered fine particulate
matter, n5 an air pollutant associated with severe health effects. Prescribed
fires are also a plentiful source of smog, hazardous air pollutants like
benzene, methyl chloride and polycyclic organic matter, and the greenhouse gases
methane and carbon dioxide. n6 Therefore, prescribed fire is an important air
pollution regulatory target. Superficially, at least, reducing prescribed fire
smoke means cleaner air.

   Or does it? Prescribed fire is a proven method for reducing the severity of
catastrophic, "unplanned" wildfires n7 and hence the number of premature deaths
and incidences of cardiac and respiratory disease associated with catastrophic
wildfires. n8 Together with ongoing management (rather than suppression) of
wildfires for resource benefits, prescribed fire eliminates the buildup of
vegetation and enhances the fire resiliency of forest ecosystems. This approach
reduces the smoke from unplanned wildfires, arguably a greater net  [*627]
environmental menace than prescribed-fire smoke. Overall, scientific studies
suggest that, as compared to wildfires, prescribed fires produce smaller smoke
plumes, pollute urban airsheds less frequently, and thus may result in lower
population exposures to smoke-related pollution. n9

   Prescribed fire is therefore something of a "good" environmental "bad." It
pollutes while at the same time reducing pollution. Studies demonstrating the
effectiveness of prescribed fire in reducing the risk of catastrophic wildfires
suggest that we would be better off with more prescribed fire and fewer
catastrophic wildfires. Therefore, prescribed fire is an environmental "bad"
that we should want more of. Nevertheless, the number of acres subject to
prescribed burning falls far below that which land managers believe necessary to
meet the objectives of wildfire hazard reduction and ecosystem management and
restoration. n10 Today, an estimated 1.25 billion acres are at risk of
ecological damage from wildfire in the United States due to excessive fuel
levels; of this figure, 181 million acres are considered to be at high risk. n11
An aggressive increase in the use of prescribed fire, together with other fuel
treatment methods, could reduce this risk.

   The role of air pollution policy in contributing to the growing health and
environmental threat from wildfire smoke has received essentially no attention
in the legal literature. n12 This Article is an attempt to repair this gap. In
particular, I discuss three aspects of air quality policy that either explicitly
or implicitly discourage the use of prescribed fire. The first concerns the
potential  [*628]  to exclude air pollution measurements attributable to
unplanned wildfires from air quality compliance calculations. n13 Reasoning that
unplanned wildfires are "natural" events, EPA frequently grants state requests
to exclude air pollution readings attributable to wildfires when determining a
state's compliance with national air quality standards. At the same time,
reasoning that they are man-made sources of pollution, states vigorously
regulate the ignition of prescribed fires under state smoke management plans.
The exemption of smoke from unplanned wildfires at the same time that prescribed
fire is strictly regulated undercuts a primary environmental benefit of
prescribed fire: its capacity to reduce wildfire smoke emissions. Second, the
governance regime for air quality decision-making invites strategic behavior and
the suboptimal use of planned wildfire by allocating the burning and air
pollution regulation decisions to different government agencies who, more likely
than not, also work at different levels of government. Finally, because
prescribed fire imposes large upfront costs to nearby communities and only
diffuse long-term benefits to those same communities, the practice in many
states provides the public with a de facto veto over prescribed fire. n14

   This Article offers several recommendations designed to eliminate these
regulatory distortions so that air quality-related decisions better reflect the
value of planned wildfire in reducing smoke from catastrophic wildfires. First,
I suggest that regulators abandon the unhelpful and inaccurate regulatory
distinctions between "natural" and "anthropogenic" fire that currently
undermines the incentive to use prescribed fire to reduce the incidence and
severity of wildfires. Instead of excluding wildfire smoke from the compliance
and planning aspects of the air quality regulatory framework under the mistaken
pretense that such smoke is "natural", I suggest that policymakers adopt
precisely the opposite tact. In the absence of a demonstration that state or
tribal governments are taking affirmative measures to encourage prescribed fire
or other land management actions that reduce the incidence and severity of
wildfire, the pollution from wildfires should "count" in determining compliance
with air quality standards. Including smoke from wildfires in the air quality
framework will provide air quality regulators with incentives to consider the
potential for prescribed fire to reduce the risk of unplanned fire and thus to
make intelligent trade-offs between more certain, but lower risks attributable
to prescribed fire and less certain, but higher risks attributable to
uncontrollable wildfire. Finally, I recommend revisions to the governance of air
quality decisions related to wildfire smoke.

   Considering the health and environmental threats posed by wildfire are only
growing, understanding and addressing the contribution that air pollution law
and policy make to the insufficient use of prescribed fire demands increased
attention. The past decade has witnessed a spectacular rise in the  [*629]
number and severity of wildfires. n15 Fire experts predict a continuing upward
trend with the total annual acreage burned in the United States increasing from
more than 9 million acres today n16 to between 10 and 12 million acres in the
next decade. n17 More and larger fires mean more smoke, and more smoke means
more deaths and instances of smoke-related disease. The fires of recent memory
are consistent with this trend. In the summer of 2012 alone, wildfires in
Wyoming, Utah and Colorado sent flames and smoke across Colorado's Front Range.
In the course of burning 26 square miles near Colorado Springs, the "Waldo
Canyon" fire damaged or destroyed 350 homes, and prompted over 30,000 persons to
evacuate their homes. n18

   The remainder of this Article proceeds in three parts. Part I provides a
background on the legacy of wildfire suppression and the use of fire to improve
ecosystem health and reduce the risk of future catastrophic wildfires. n19 Part
II explains the dilemma of planned wildfire - how it constitutes a "good"
environmental "bad" and accordingly, how air pollution policy is structured in a
manner so as to discourage the use of planned wildfire. n20 Finally, Part III
proposes revisions to air quality regulation to remove the distortions
contributing to the insufficient use of planned wildfire to fight unplanned
wildfire. n21

   I. Background

   A. A Short History of Wildfire Suppression Policy

 Wide-scale wildfire suppression was official U.S. policy for most of the past
century. Beginning in the early 1900s and extending through the 1970s, federal
agencies, led by the U.S. Forest Service, aggressively suppressed all wildfires,
effectively removing wildfire from forest ecosystems. As early as 1886,
officials instituted an all-out human-caused wildfire suppression policy in
Yellowstone National Park, tempered only by shortages in the staffing  [*630]
necessary to suppress all fires. n22 This policy was extended to Sequoia,
General Grant (now incorporated into Sequoia-Kings Canyon National Park), and
Yosemite national parks in the 1890s, and its application to federally owned
forest lands was a primary mission of the Forest Service when it was established
in 1905. n23 While the role of fire in forests continued to be the subject of
debate within some circles, with some commentators advocating "light burning" to
reduce forest fuel loads, n24 the large wildfires in 1910 renewed the Forest
Service's commitment to a suppression-only policy and the role of the Forest
Service as the chief fire-suppression agency. n25 A 1908 appropriations bill,
which enabled the Forest Service to receive advances in firefighting funds,
provided the Forest Service with the budgetary flexibility it needed to
aggressively pursue wildfire suppression. n26

   The federal government's suppression-driven policy dominated the first half
of the twentieth century. In 1926, the Forest Service developed its "Ten Acre"
policy - "all wildfires should be controlled before they reached 10 acres in
size." n27 By 1935, the Forest Service added its "10 a.m. policy," which
mandated that fires exceeding ten acres should be placed under control before 10
a.m. the following morning. n28 Both policies were justified in the belief that
wildfires should be stopped when they were small so as to avoid the costs of
suppressing a large and destructive wildfire. n29 By this time, the Forest
Service had developed the most effective wildfire-fighting capacity in the
world. n30 Following World War II, the availability of heavy construction
equipment, smoke jumpers, and aerial tankers reinforced the illusion that a
suppression-only policy could be successful. n31 In 1968, a national advertising
agency documented that "Smokey Bear," whose slogan entreated the public to take
care not to start a forest fire, was the most popular symbol in the United
States and better known than the president. n32

   It was not until the 1960s that the Forest Service began to reconsider its
all-out suppression policy. In 1972, under the Forest Service's "Wilderness
[*631]  Prescribed Natural Fire Program," some wildfires were allowed to burn.
n33 In 1978, the Service's "10 a.m. policy" was abandoned in its entirety. n34
The National Fire Management Analysis System, a computerized fire management
system created in 1979, was the result of a new protocol that the Forest Service
conduct a cost-benefit analysis for all pre-suppression budget requests, such as
the purchase of a new fire engine or other suppression equipment. n35

   A better understanding of the tremendous financial costs of the
all-suppression policy and attention to the growing number of studies pointing
to the ecological and wildfire risk-reduction benefits of low-intensity fires
eventually led land managers to reduce their reliance upon suppression as the
sole strategy for reducing wildfire risk. n36 Nevertheless, even today
suppression continues to be the dominant governmental response to wildfire.
Currently, the Forest Service suppresses over 90 percent of all wildfire
ignitions. n37 The total federal agency budget for wildfire suppression rose
from $ 276 million in 1999 to $ 1.4 billion in 2011, though it more recently
dropped back somewhat in 2012 to $ 809.3 million. n38 Further, for the past
decade, agency expenditures on wildfire suppression have exceeded these
appropriated amounts. n39 This outcome is possible because provisions in the
Department of Interior appropriation acts authorize the Department and the
Forest Service "to borrow unobligated funds from other accounts to cover the
costs of emergency firefighting." n40

   B. The Escalating Wildfire Risk

 The all-out suppression policy has been unmasked as a failure. Rather than
protecting lives, property, and timber resources, wildfire suppression has
contributed to an increase in the incidence and severity of catastrophic
wildfires due to the buildup of dead wood and brush. n41 In addition, excluding
fire from  [*632]  the ecosystems in which it historically played a role alters
ecosystems in profound ways by decreasing biodiversity of plants and animals and
changing the tree species composition such that it reflects a decreased number
of fire-tolerant species and an increase in the density, biomass, and number of
woody species. n42

   Data confirms an escalating wildfire risk in our nation's forests. In the
past four decades, the incidence of wildfires has risen four-fold, and the total
number of acres burned has increased six-fold in the Western United States
alone. n43 Despite recent improvements in wildfire policy, such as incorporating
fire into management regimes, the wildfire problem appears to be getting worse.
Since 2000, the total annual acreage burned by wildfires each year has exceeded
3 million acres, and in six of those thirteen years, the acreage has exceeded 8
million acres. n44 In comparison, from 1983 to 1999, the total annual acreage
burned generally hovered between 1 and 2 million acres. n45 Notably, the
estimated annual acreage burned by wildfires is expected to increase up to 10 to
12 million acres within the next decade. n46 Experts believe that wildfire
activity will escalate n47 and occur in areas, such as the Midwestern, Eastern
and Southeastern parts of the country, that are generally strangers to such
events. n48

   Some scientists believe that climate change is contributing to the upward
trend in the incidence and severity of wildfires. n49 Climate change is expected
to worsen the effects of extended droughts in various parts of the United
States, especially the Southwest and Southeastern regions. n50 The warming and
drying effects of climate change will increase the amount of time during the
year in which weather conditions are ripe for wildfires. n51 Studies show that
climate change will cause wetter and warmer winters followed by a faster
snowmelt in the West. n52 These changes potentially lengthen the fire season by
up to a month or more on each end. n53 An increase in wildfires also has a
feedback effect upon  [*633]  climate change, since wildfires contribute an
estimated 213 million metric tons of carbon dioxide per year in the continental
United States, n54 or the equivalent of the annual carbon dioxide emissions of
sixty coal-fired power plants or 44 million automobiles. n55

   C. Health Risks from Wildfire Smoke

 Emerging evidence demonstrates that wildfire smoke is comprised of toxic
elements harmful to human health and in amounts similar to anthropogenic sources
regulated under air and water pollution statutes. The major pollutants of
concern from wildfires are particulate matter - both coarse (PM<10>) and fine
(PM[in'2.5']) - and ozone precursors. n56 Fine particulate matter, responsible
for roughly 80 to 90 percent of particulate matter from wildfires, n57 is
considered the most hazardous, as it can be inhaled deep into the lungs and has
been associated with increased mortality, heart disease, and the exacerbation of
chronic diseases such as asthma. n58 Ozone, which forms "smog" or haze, is not
directly emitted by wildfires but forms when combustion products, namely nitrous
oxides and volatile organic compounds emitted by burning vegetation, are exposed
to sunlight. n59 Forest fires are a source of ozone precursors that contribute
to elevated ozone levels. n60 While concentrations of pollutants from wildfires
are greatest near the location of the fire, impacts can be measured thousands of
miles away. n61

    [*634]  Every year, wildfires contribute large quantities of harmful air
pollution to the country's air. In 2008, wildfires emitted almost 1 million tons
of fine (PM[in'2.5']) particulate matter. n62 This total exceeds the total
amount of fine particulate matter emitted from all fuel-combustion sources and
is three times the amount emitted by the electricity sector. n63 Wildfires also
cause the formation of ozone by releasing volatile organic compounds embedded in
vegetation. In 2008, wildfires emitted 420 million pounds of volatile organic
compounds to the atmosphere, n64 twice the total contributed by all
fuel-combustion sources combined. n65 Wildfire pollution is not distributed
evenly, with the Western United States bearing the brunt of these pollution
loads. For example, in 2008, three states (California, Nevada and Arizona)
contributed approximately 600,000 tons of fine particulate matter, or half of
the U.S. total, n66 while the New England states and the Southeastern states
each contributed only 160,000 tons. n67

   In addition, the fine particulate matter emitted by wildfires contains
hundreds of different compounds, many of them toxic. n68 In fact, one study
claims that wildfire particulate-matter emissions in concentrations present in
California's Central Valley during a wildfire outbreak in 2008 were ten times
more damaging to lung function than similar concentrations of particulate matter
found in urban ambient air. n69 The study, based upon animal lung bioassays,
reflects the significant inflammatory response triggered in the lung  [*635]  by
the toxic components of wildfire smoke. n70 These toxic constituents include
acrolein, formaldehyde, 1,3-butadiene, benzene, and acetaldehyde. n71

   In smaller quantities, wildfires are responsible for the emission of hundreds
of other pollutants, many of them toxic. n72 For example, a recent study traces
isocyanic acid to wildfire smoke. n73 Isocyanates are toxic at high
concentrations; indeed, the death toll in Bhopal, India in 1984, when thousands
died after exposure to isocyanic acid from a Union Carbide pesticide factory,
highlights the possibility. n74 Scientists contend that the impacts of
isocyanates upon the health of firefighters and populations adjoining wildfires
could be significant. n75 Furthermore, studies document wildfire as a source of
particulate-bound mercury in levels comparable to what is found in industrial
emissions. n76 Wildfires recirculate metals from anthropogenic sources absorbed
by vegetation; for example, an analysis of the ash from a 2009 California
wildfire traced lead found in the ash to leaded gasoline used in Southern
California from the 1960s to the 1980s. n77

   D. Non-Suppression Methods of Minimizing Wildfire Risk

 Suppression continues to be the dominant governmental response to the wildfire
risk. Nevertheless, federal wildfire policy also emphasizes non-suppression
alternatives to wildfire management. These alternatives consist of mechanical
treatments to remove built up vegetation, prescribed fire, and the management of
unplanned wildfire for resource benefits. To place these methods in perspective,
the U.S. Forest Service and the Department of Interior together treat
approximately 4.6 million acres of forest each year. Of this total, over half,
or 2.6 million acres, are treated with prescribed fire, 1.5 million acres with
mechanical treatment, and approximately 475,000 with other treatment  [*636]
methods. n78 Thus, prescribed fire continues to be the dominant treatment
method.

   1. Mechanized Treatments

 Mechanical treatments consist of the harvesting of timber and the removal of
trees and brush, often referred to simply as "thinning." n79 Such treatment may
be done alone, but is much more effective when paired with prescribed fire. n80

   In 2003, mechanical treatments were given a boost when Congress passed the
Healthy Forest Restoration Act (HFRA), n81 establishing a streamlined process
for the environmental review, public involvement, and judicial review of
mechanical treatment proposals under the National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA). Additionally, the Forest Service and the Department of Interior
established a categorical exclusion from NEPA for timber sales up to 1000 acres
and prescribed fire operations up to 4500 acres. Both the HFRA and the NEPA
exclusion have come under criticism. For example, opponents charged that the
HFRA was a veiled mechanism to provide private logging companies with access to
protected timber stands, n82 and in 2007, a federal appeals court ruled the
categorical exclusion violated NEPA. n83

   Removing small trees and brush can be an effective method of reducing
wildfire risk n84 and is an important fuel treatment option in the
"wildland-urban interface" n85 where prescribed fire may pose safety risks n86
or where the amount  [*637]  of fuel reduction needed exceeds the number of
available days for which meteorological conditions render prescribed burning
feasible. n87

   However, mechanical treatments are not always feasible in all locations. Many
forested areas are not accessible by road or by the heavy equipment needed to
carry out forest thinning. n88 In addition, mechanical thinning alone may not
adequately reduce wildfire risk, though it can be very effective when combined
with prescribed fire. n89 For these reasons, as well as the special air
pollution law and policy issues raised by prescribed fire, this Article focuses
on prescribed fire. n90

   2. Prescribed Fire

 Prescribed fire, also called "controlled burning," is an intentionally ignited
fire designed to achieve the results that would naturally occur if wildfires
were allowed to burn unsuppressed. n91 In 2011, an estimated total of 20.2
million acres were subject to prescribed fire in the United States, n92
including 2 million acres held by the federal government. n93 This amount has
remained relatively constant over the past ten years, varying between 2 and 3
million acres per year. n94 More than half (61 percent) of the acreage subject
to prescribed fire are agricultural crops, while the remaining 39 percent, or
7.8 million acres, are devoted to commercial timber operations. n95 Within the
forestry sector, the great majority of acreage burned is located in the
Southeast, where prescribed fire is a popular tool used by private silviculture
operators to maximize timber  [*638]  yields. n96 The American West, where
prescribed fire is carried out primarily by federal land managers on public
lands, occupies a smaller proportion (13 percent) of overall acreage burned. n97

   Prescribed fire reduces the incidence and severity of wildfires by decreasing
fuel quantity and the likelihood that the wildfire will travel through a forest.
n98 Prescribed fires are generally set to burn at low levels and are designed to
remove fallen branches, kill small trees and shrubs, and scorch lower limbs to
reduce the vertical continuity of the forest so that fires are prevented from
reaching the top branches. n99 Breaking up the forest's vertical continuity
minimizes the risk of "crown" fires, or the most destructive type of wildfires
in which flames reach into the uppermost canopy of trees, torching the leaves
and needles and spreading quickly from tree to tree through the canopy layer.
n100 Studies demonstrate that prescribed fire substantially decreases the
potential and actual fire intensity in Western forests in the United States n101
and in European pine stands by mimicking the periodic fires that once occurred
on a regular cycle in many forest ecosystems prior to the adoption of more
drastic fire-suppression policies. n102 As stated by a forest fire expert,
"either wait for the big one, or burn fuels under moderate conditions where the
fire behavior can be controlled." n103

    [*639]  Not only does prescribed fire reduce the number and severity of
wildfires, but it also minimizes the quantity of smoke produced per acre.
Wildfires typically burn during hotter, drier conditions than those usually
planned for prescribed fires, resulting in the more complete consumption of
forest fuels and, therefore, more pollution emissions. n104 Wildfires often
occur during times when the air is stagnated, trapping smoke close to the ground
where it is less likely to be carried away by higher-altitude transport winds.
n105 In contrast, prescribed fires can be planned for conditions when smoke
emissions can be minimized. n106 Emissions from prescribed fires also can be
minimized by adopting smoke-reduction techniques, choosing optimal dispersion
conditions for burning, and increasing the combustion efficiency of the fire.
n107

   Prescribed fire has important ecosystem benefits, many of them the same as
those accompanying wildfire. Prescribed fire is associated with higher levels of
nutrients in soil. n108 For some species, fire assists - and in some instances
is necessary for - a tree to release its seeds. For instance, lodgepole pine
trees produce "seratonous," or resin-filled, cones that remain dormant until
fire melts the resin and the seeds are released from the cone. n109 The fire
also burns leaf litter on the ground, creating rich and well-drained soil
conditions for the new seeds to grow. n110

   Yet, prescribed fire also has environmental drawbacks, as it too is a
significant source of air pollution. In 2008, prescribed fires emitted over 1.5
million tons of particulate matter nationally (823,701 tons of PM<10> and
700,000 tons of PM[in'2.5']). n111 Similarly, in 2008, prescribed fires emitted
420 million pounds of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) nationally, n112 more
than all industrial sources combined. n113

[*640]

   3. Unplanned Wildfire Managed for Resource Benefits

 A third nonsuppression method of minimizing wildfire risk is to manage an
unplanned wildfire to achieve many of the same resource benefits of a prescribed
fire: a reduced fuel load and fire resiliency. The idea is to exploit the
opportunity to reap these benefits presented by the happenstance of the ignition
of an unplanned wildfire occurring in a location for which burning vegetation
for resource benefits is an approved land use in the applicable land and
resource management plan or fire management plan. n114 Under this management
response, an unplanned wildfire is treated much like a prescribed fire, only the
authorization for this response is made by land managers after the fire is
already ignited as opposed prior to that time, as with prescribed fire.

   While federal land managers have permitted this management response for many
years, prior to 2009 it was given a special name, "wildland fire use fire." n115
In addition, its use was impeded by several restrictions federal land managers
placed upon its use, the most significant of which was that the entire fire
could be managed according only to a single response: the entire fire must be
surpressed or be managed for resource benefits. n116 Moreover, federal fire
response guidelines dictated that whatever that response might be - suppression
or management for resource benefits - it could not change over the lifetime of
the fire; once chosen, that response controlled management of the fire during
the life of the fire. n117

   In 2009, finding this framework both confusing n118 and unduly restrictive,
n119 federal wildland fire managers adopted a revised policy  [*641]  framework
to facilitate the management of unplanned wildfires for resource benefits. n120
Under the revised framework, a fire is either planned (as in a prescribed fire)
or unplanned, and both can be managed for resource benefits. n121 Moreover, a
single fire could now be concurrently managed for more than one objective at a
time (e.g., suppression and resource benefits) and those objectives could change
as the fire moves across the landscape. n122 The new policy simplified the
terminology for wildfires as well by eliminating the confusing category of
"wildland fire use fire." n123 Since 2009, there are only wildland fires
(unplanned or prescribed) that are managed for resource benefits, and wildland
fires that are managed for suppression. n124

   The change in policy followed two influential governmental reports that
criticized federal land managers for their underutilization of unplanned
wildfires for resource benefits. n125 The 2006 Department of Agriculture audit
report criticized land-management agencies for policies that predisposed the
agencies to implement costly suppression responses to unplanned wildfires rather
than, where appropriate and consistent with land-management plans, manage the
fires to benefit the ecosystem and reduce accumulated fuel. n126

   Management of unplanned wildfires for resource benefits can be a
cost-effective means of obtaining some of the same resource benefits provided by
prescribed burning. It can also result in less predictable impacts on air
quality. n127 Whereas federal fire managers can schedule a prescribed burn so as
to minimize air-quality impacts, delay is not an option with respect to
unplanned wildfires, placing fire managers in the situation of choosing either
to reap the resource benefits of an unplanned wildfire under perhaps less-than-
[*642]  optimal conditions, or suppress the fire and forego the opportunity to
reap such benefits.

   II. The Dilemma: Prescribed Fire as a "Good" Environmental "Bad"

 Because prescribed fire is a significant source of air pollution in its own
right, it may be described as an environmental "bad." Nevertheless, because it
is effective in reducing the even-larger quantities of air pollution generated
by unplanned wildfires, it is also an environmental "good." Prescribed fire
reduces the incidence and severity of wildfires, regenerates native vegetation
and habitats, and strengthens the fire resiliency of ecosystems. Consequently,
prescribed fire might best be described as a "good" environmental "bad": it
pollutes at the same time it combats wildfire smoke, an even-larger "bad."

   The complex relationship between wildfire and air pollution should perhaps
not be surprising. Many interventions into the environment display this
Janus-faced quality. Take, for example, nuclear energy. Deriving electricity
from nuclear fission avoids the emission of greenhouse gases produced through
the burning of fossil fuels and hence might be considered a "good" for the
environment. n128 On the other hand, nuclear power creates radioactive waste
that must be isolated from human societies and allowed to decay for thousands of
years. n129 Even recycling, long the rallying cry of environmentalists, has its
dark side. Recycling conserves natural resources and reduces waste, but it also
excuses rampant consumption of disposal goods, as demonstrated by the dominance
of packaging interests as its largest proponents and financial backers. n130
This dualism with respect to the benefits of human interventions in the natural
environment might be explained by the very complexity of ecosystems.
Increasingly, biologists are given to understand ecosystems as nonlinear,
dynamic systems where distributions follow "power laws" as opposed to the
bell-curve distributions. n131

   What does all this mean for our preferred policy with respect to "good"
"environmental bads"? Above all, it would tend to support a careful, nuanced
approach so as to avoid over-deterrence of a "good" activity due to its "bad"
properties and thereby eliminate the "bad's" propensity to do "good."
Unfortunately, with respect to the "good-bad" of prescribed fire, air pollution
policy shows no such care. As a result of the combination of federal and state
[*643]  air pollution policies, prescribed fire has not yet reached the optimal
levels needed to reduce wildfire-generated air pollution.

   Many experts opine that the amount of prescribed fire currently being
performed in the United States is considerably below levels needed to maintain
healthy ecosystems. n132 A recent study reports that federal agencies uniformly
failed to conduct prescribed burning on the number of acres that they had
themselves stated was necessary to meet the management objectives of their
prescribed fire programs. n133 According to this study, between 2006 and 2008,
the U.S. Forest Service treated just 32 percent of its needed area, the Bureau
of Land Management just 14 percent, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service just 74
percent, the National Park Service just 70 percent, the California Department of
Forestry and Fire Protection just 78 percent, and the California Department of
Parks and Recreation just 0.8 percent. n134 For the past decade, federal land
managers have sought a several-fold increase in prescribed burns to sustain
ecosystems. n135 Regardless of the benchmark, estimates of acreage that federal
land managers believe should be subjected to prescribed burns for ecosystem
management far surpass current levels. n136

   The inadequacy of current levels of prescribed fire is underscored by other
studies suggesting that expanding prescribed burns, in conjunction with
mechanical thinning and other fuel treatment methods, would significantly reduce
wildfire risk. Recently, the National Forest Service estimated that 65 to 82
million acres of National Forest System lands are in need of fuels and forest
health treatments (which would include prescribed burning), a total of 42
percent of the entire system of National Forest lands. n137 Another recent
Forest Service study, focused specifically on the need for more prescribed
burning in Colorado, recommended a drastic increase: from the 17,900 acres
actually subject to prescribed burning within the state in 2010 to 1 million
acres per year. n138

   Yet another approach to determining the degree to which the current amount of
prescribed burning falls short of what would be considered optimal from a
resource perspective is to estimate the difference between acres burned  [*644]
annually today and the number burned prior to widespread human settlement.
Looking at select "ecoprovinces" in the United States, one study finds that
historical burn rates vary from, at the low end, more than two times current
rates, n139 to, at the high end, more than 1000 times current rates. n140
Comparing the number of acres subject to prescribed burns to the number of acres
currently considered to be at risk of ecological damage due to wildfire also
shows current prescribed burning rates to be insufficient. n141 This approach
estimates that 181 million acres of federal lands are at "high risk." n142 Yet
over the past ten years, between just 2 and 3 million acres of forests under
federal control are subject to prescribed burning. n143 Presumably, expanding
the use of prescribed fire would reduce the magnitude of the wildfire risk
facing these forests.

   Air pollution policy is only one of several factors that serve to explain the
insufficient use of prescribed fire. Several of these other impediments, in no
way undermined in the present Article, have been studied in detail. n144 For
example, the cost of prescribed fire can be significant, with one study
estimating a mean cost of $ 78.13 per acre for management-ignited prescribed
burns. n145 This mean figure obscures significant regional variation, from $
223.38 per acre in the Pacific Southwest Region to just $ 22.80 in the Southern
Region. n146 These differences are attributable to the number of acres burned
and the cost of labor (generally, the greater the acres burned, the lower the
cost per acre). n147 Variations are similarly found across federal lands
depending upon the agency conducting the prescribed burns. n148 However,
prescribed burns are dramatically less expensive than wildfire suppression. n149
Hence, the cheaper cost of prescribed burns relative to wildfire suppression
suggests that noneconomic incentives are at work.

   Another explanation for suboptimal prescribed-burn levels is the priority
placed upon funding suppression efforts when budgets for wildfire response are
[*645]  tight. Federal land managers must cover the costs of resource protection
measures, such as prescribed burning, out of their operating budgets, but paying
for wildfire suppression efforts has first priority upon these funds. n150 While
fire-suppression efforts are better funded than ecosystem restoration and
management efforts, n151 recent years have witnessed dramatic increase in
fire-suppression costs and the inadequate funding of suppression efforts. n152
Thus, when the Forest Service in 2012 ran out of money to cover the costs of
fighting forest fires, it took money out of its other programs to cover these
costs. Those other programs included those aimed at removing forestry fuel
build-up so as to reduce the risk of more forest fires. n153

   Yet another disincentive to prescribed burns is the risk that the fire may
escape and threaten loss of life, property, or natural resources. n154 The
consequences of escaped prescribed fires can be deadly. In March 2012, a
fifty-acre prescribed fire in Colorado burned out of control, resulting in the
tragic deaths of three persons, the loss of twenty-three homes, and the
unintentional destruction of 4140 acres. n155 One analysis suggests that changes
in federal policy with respect to prescribed fire now expose federal land
managers to personal liability for damages associated with prescribed fires that
later escape. n156 Concern over such liability may over-deter land managers and
depress the current rates of prescribed fire.

   All of these factors that serve to discourage prescribed fire are accentuated
in the "wildland-urban" interface. Conducting prescribed fire in the
wildland-urban interface presents special challenges. Given the proximate dense
population, the health dangers from prescribed fire smoke are greatest in this
[*646]  area, as are the consequences should prescribed fire escape. The
consequences of smoke in the wildland-urban interface include resident anxiety
over fire risks; nuisances in the form of flying and settling ash and disrupted
traffic flow; and the more serious public health and safety issues related to
smoke inhalation, including the aggravation of existing respiratory ailments and
traffic accidents related to reduced visibility. n157 State and public land
managers, with the resources and expertise to conduct prescribed burns, do not
have jurisdiction over much of the wildlife-urban interface, as almost 90
percent of the wildland-urban interface is privately owned. n158 The federal
government manages only about 7 percent of the wildland-urban interface. n159 It
is perhaps not surprising, therefore, that a recent study found that only 3
percent of the fuel treatments conducted in the Western United States by federal
land managers between 2004 and 2008 has occurred in the wildland-urban interface
and only another 8 percent in the 2.5 kilometer buffer around the interface.
n160

   The significance of air pollution policy vis-a-vis these other factors in
deterring prescribed fire eludes easy estimation. Nevertheless, air pollution
policy is a sufficiently important factor that federal and state land managers
have identified it as a major barrier to conducting prescribed fires. n161 Its
notable absence from the legal and policy literatures underscores the importance
of additional analysis. Below, I explain how air pollution policy provides
perverse incentives to federal land managers to not engage in prescribed
burning.

   A. Air Quality Compliance: Distortion Through Regulatory Exclusion

 The differential regulatory treatment accorded air pollution generated by
wildfires (unplanned fires) versus prescribed fires (planned fires) presents a
potentially significant distortion in regulatory policy. In brief, while states
may ask federal regulators to exclude wildfire smoke pollution from regulatory
limits, smoke pollution from prescribed fire is tightly regulated. A likely
[*647]  (though not empirically documented) consequence of this differential
treatment is a suboptimal level of prescribed fire. This is because the
scientifically documented capacity of prescribed fire to reduce pollution from
unplanned and often-catastrophic wildfires has little regulatory significance,
since air quality officials can essentially ignore the wildfire pollution
readings. In other words, the regulatory scheme is such that air pollution
regulation (though not necessarily other social and financial structures) fails
to provide air quality officials with an incentive to reduce levels of smoke
from unplanned wildfires through, for example, encouraging the greater use of
prescribed fire. This irrational scheme of incentives plays out in three air
pollution regulatory "arenas": (i) compliance determinations designed to protect
health and welfare; (ii) visibility protection programs; and (iii) state-level
smoke management programs. Below, I first outline the basic regulatory scheme
for each arena and then explain the manner in which pollution from unplanned
wildfires enjoys more lenient treatment than that generated by prescribed fires.

   1. Regulatory Background

   a. Federal Air Quality Regulation

   (1) The Clean Air Act's National Ambient Air Quality Compliance Program

 The first arena where wildfire smoke pollution enjoys more lenient treatment
than prescribed-fire smoke pollution is the regulatory apparatus for state
compliance with the federal Clean Air Act's national health-based ambient air
quality standards (NAAQS). n162 This lenient treatment results from the EPA's
"exceptional events" policy, which is explained below following an overview of
the NAAQS compliance framework.

   Pursuant to the Clean Air Act, EPA has established health-based ambient
standards for six common pollutants, including fine and coarse particulate
matter and ozone. n163 With respect to each of these pollutants, EPA classifies
each air quality control region in the United States (a state is divided into
several air quality control regions) as in attainment or nonattainment with the
standard. To determine this compliance status, EPA uses a formula to determine
whether, based upon actual on-the-ground air quality readings, each geographic
region within each state either meets or does not meet the standard or is
"unclassifiable" because it is impossible to tell whether it meets the standard.
n164 Where on-the-ground measurements result in a determination that  [*648]
the air quality of a given area does not demonstrate compliance with the
standard, the agency designates the area as a "nonattainment area" for that
particular pollutant. n165 Under the Clean Air Act and EPA's implementing
regulations, a nonattainment classification triggers the applicability of a host
of stringent requirements applicable to a variety of mostly large sources of the
same pollutant. n166 Such requirements are designed to reduce pollutant levels
to attainment levels. n167 Moreover, their very existence operates as a powerful
incentive for state air quality regulators, as well as the owners and operators
of large sources of the subject air pollutant, to keep pollution levels low.

   The incentive for keeping pollution levels low that is inherent in the Clean
Air Act area designation process exists even where on-the-ground air quality
levels measure below the applicable national standard. Due to regulatory limits
upon the degradation of even healthy air, n168 owners or operators of sources of
a pollutant for which the on-the-ground air quality measurements demonstrate
attainment with the standards also possess an incentive to keep emissions low.
Their failure to do so, and the subsequent degradation of healthy air quality
beyond the permitted "increments," subjects sources of that pollutant located
within the area to a different suite of mandatory emissions controls. n169

   An important characteristic of the pollution-reducing incentive system
incorporated into the Clean Air Act provisions just discussed is that they
reflect (or at least are supposed to reflect) real life air quality on the
ground. Whether a given geographic region is, for regulatory purposes, in
attainment or nonattainment, or in attainment but close to the line triggering
the status of nonattainment, is a function of the real-life readings of ambient
pollution levels and the EPA formula.

   (2) EPA's Exceptional Events Policy

 EPA's policy for what are known as "exceptional events" n170 represents a
departure from this "real world" grounding of the air quality compliance
determinations. The more-lenient treatment afforded unplanned versus  [*649]
prescribed fire in turn results from the application of the EPA's exceptional
events policy to wildfire smoke.

   Since the 1980s, EPA has had in place policies that allow for the exclusion
of data demonstrating an exceedance of a NAAQS due to a natural event or to a
human-caused, but "exceptional," event. n171 EPA's current exceptional events
policy was promulgated pursuant to a 2005 amendment to the Clean Air Act. n172
In this amendment, Congress required EPA to promulgate regulations "governing
the review and handling or [sic] air quality monitoring data influenced by an
exceptional event." n173

   In general, an exceptional event is either a naturally caused event or an
unusual human-caused event. The statutory definition provides that an
"exceptional event" is



   an event that - (i) affects air quality; (ii) is not reasonably controllable
or preventable; (iii) is an event caused by human activity that is unlikely to
recur at a particular location or a natural event; and (iv) is determined by the
Administrator ... to be an exceptional event. n174

 Congress's purpose was to give relief to those states whose air quality control
regions would otherwise be considered in compliance with the NAAQS were it not
for events considered largely out of the state's control. n175 EPA's rule
incorporates wholesale the statutory definition of an exceptional event. n176
EPA has given specific examples of exceptional events, including air quality
exceedances attributable to structural fires, pollution transported from outside
the United States, terrorist attacks, high wind events, unplanned wildfires and,
where they meet specific criteria, prescribed fires. n177

   The process for excluding data influenced by an exceptional event is somewhat
convoluted. Under the rule, the first step is for a state to request that EPA
"flag" the air quality measurements for which it may wish, at a later date, to
submit a formal petition to have excluded. There are essentially no criteria
governing this process other than that the state "believe" the data to have been
influenced by an exceptional event. n178 In order for the data to actually be
excluded from the dataset used to make air quality status determinations, the
[*650]  state must follow up with a demonstration that, among other criteria,
there exists a clear causal relationship between the measurement petitioned for
exclusion and the alleged exceptional event, and there would have been no
exceedance or violation in the absence of the event. n179 The latter is known as
the "but for" test. n180 The flagged data is formally excluded when the
applicable regional EPA office concurs in the state's demonstration. n181 EPA
openly acknowledges that the relatively simple criteria may lead states to flag
many more readings than that for which they ultimately submit documentation to
support exclusion. n182 With respect to the latter, unless exclusion of the data
will make a difference in terms of the status of a given area, for example, by
preventing an attainment area from being redesignated nonattainment, or
preventing the exhaustion of an air-quality deterioration "increment," there is
no real reason for the state to go through the time and resource-intensive
process of submitting a formal demonstration for exclusion. As a result, the
number of formal demonstrations submitted by the states is likely to be far
fewer than the data would support.

   Under its current policy, EPA does not condition the exclusion of air quality
monitoring data upon the state's adoption of mitigation measures to reduce the
public health or environmental impacts of the exceptional event. This is an
about-face from the agency's prior policies under which states were required to
submit a "Natural Events Action Plan" in order to qualify for data exclusion.
n183 Importantly, a required element of such a plan with respect to particulate
emissions was measures to abate or minimize contributing controllable sources of
particulates. n184 In the case of wildfires, "steps to minimize fuel loadings in
areas vulnerable to fire" was specifically mentioned. n185 EPA's policy asserts
that "natural versus an anthropogenic fire has particular significance when
considering the impacts of wildland fires (wildfire, wildland fire use fire and
prescribed fire) on air quality and how these impacts should be regarded under
this rule." n186

   2. Wildfire Smoke Pollution

   a. Applicability of EPA's Exceptional Events Policy

 The clearest example of the differential and more lenient treatment of smoke
pollution from wildfire, as opposed to prescribed fire, is found in EPA's
[*651]  exceptional events policy. The basis for this more lenient treatment is
the determination that unplanned wildfires are "natural" whereas prescribed
fires are anthropogenic. Thus, presumably referring to the statutory criteria
for an exceptional event as one "caused by human activity," n187 EPA's policy
asserts that "natural versus an anthropogenic fire has particular significance
when considering the impacts of wildland fires (wildfire, wildland fire use fire
and prescribed fire) on air quality and how these impacts should be regarded
under this rule." n188

   In using the "natural" versus "anthropogenic" distinction to classify the
smoke from what types of fire events will qualify for exclusion as exceptional
events, however, EPA looks only at the origin of the fire, and not entirely
consistently. Thus EPA determined that unplanned wildfires managed for
suppression and those allowed to burn for resource benefits fall within the
meaning of a "natural" event subject to the policy. n189 In doing so, EPA
overlooks the inconsistencies inherent in this determination - that unplanned
wildfires can be caused by negligent human acts, such as an escaped campfire,
and that once a wildfire, ignited by a natural trigger such as lightning, is
purposefully allowed to burn for resource benefits, it could just as easily be
considered anthropogenic as natural.

   In contrast to unplanned wildfires, however, EPA's policy labels prescribed
fire as anthropogenic. n190 As a result, air pollution readings attributable to
prescribed fire smoke are ineligible for exclusion except where they meet the
additional criteria for an exceptional event of "affecting air quality," being
"unlikely to recur at a particular location" and being "not reasonably
controllable or preventable." n191

   While the question is subject to debate, EPA does not entertain the argument
that, because prescribed fire is usually designed to mimic the natural fire
cycle in a given ecosystem, prescribed fire might actually be considered
"natural." n192 The upshot of EPA's manipulation of the definition of what is
[*652]  "natural" is that wildfire-smoke-influenced air pollution measurements
whose incidence is subject to mitigation through the use of prescribed fire are
considered "natural" and hence per se excludable under EPA policy, while air
quality measurements influenced by prescribed fire itself are subject to
exclusion only upon satisfaction of a set of difficult-to-satisfy criteria.

   While complete and up-to-date data are not available, available data
indicates that, since the 2007 exceptional events policy was promulgated, EPA
has concurred in dozens of state petitions to exclude air quality readings
influenced by unplanned wildfire events. While not all of the exclusions would
seem to make a difference in terms of the compliance status of a particular air
quality control region - i.e., prevent a region from shifting from attainment to
nonattainment - it appears that some could. A more thorough analysis would be
required to pinpoint the effect of the exclusion of wildfire smoke-influenced
readings from the dataset used by EPA to compute attainment status. In contrast,
during this same time frame the agency did not concur in a single petition to
exclude a prescribed-fire-influenced air quality reading, nor does it appear
that any state petitioned to have a prescribed-fire-influenced air quality
reading excluded.

   These findings are the result of comparisons performed for this Article using
data supplied by EPA on its publicly available "Air Trends" website. n193 The
analysis n194 involved the comparison of two datasets and the resulting
differences in the air quality compliance "design values." n195 The first
dataset included all fine particulate matter (PM[in'2.5']) air quality
measurements recorded on an hourly basis between 2007 and 2012 in the fourteen
states within this five-year time period that received EPA concurrence on a
petition for the exclusion of wildfire-related data as an exceptional event.
These fourteen states were Arizona, Alabama, Arkansas, California, Georgia,
Indiana, Kentucky, Montana, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas,
Utah, and Wyoming. The second dataset was identical to the first except that it
omitted all air quality readings for fine particulate matter influenced by a
wildfire event on which the EPA concurred with the state's petition to have the
reading excluded. The number of readings requested by states for exclusion
varied widely. n196

   When the two datasets are compared, the design values are significantly
higher in the file that includes the later-excluded wildfire exceptional events
[*653]  data. EPA compares a region's design value for each criteria pollutant
to determine whether the area records a NAAQ exceedance. For each pollutant, an
exceedance threshold determines whether an area is considered attainment or
nonattainment for that pollutant. n197 In many cases, the readings that were
excluded are many times the usual level for regions in that particular location.
n198 Given the extreme nature of this jump, it has significant substantive
effects on the overall design value for a region. Although the analysis was not
sufficiently precise to pinpoint the exact number of exceedances, it did reveal
that the inclusion of the excluded data led to a substantive increase in the
design values. Because the number of exceedances determines whether an area is
in attainment or nonattainment, including the excluded data is consistent with
the conclusion that a number of areas currently considered to be in attainment
would be out of attainment were these values considered.

   b. Visibility Regulation

 In the 1977 amendments to the Clean Air Act, Congress declared "the remedying
of any existing impairment of visibility in [156 parks and wilderness] areas
which impairment results from manmade air pollution" as a national goal. n199
These 156 parks and wilderness areas include many of the United States'
best-known national parks, parks such as the Grand Canyon, Yosemite,
Yellowstone, and the Great Smoky Mountains. n200 In the late 1990s, EPA reported
that the average visual range in many parks in the Western United States is
between 100 and 150 kilometers, or about one-half to two-thirds of the visual
range that would exist without man-made air pollution, and in the East, thirty
kilometers, or about one-fifth of the visual range that would  [*654]  exist in
the absence of man-made pollution. n201 Visibility in these areas is marred by
emissions of fine particulate matter and their precursors from a variety of
sources. n202

   Under the Clean Air Act's regional haze regulatory program, states must
either submit their own plans for addressing sources within their state that
threaten visibility in national parks and wilderness areas, or join a regional
planning organization and demonstrate reasonable further progress in
implementing the organization's haze-reducing strategies. n203 In the Western
United States, the regional organization addressing regional haze issues is the
Western Regional Air Partnership, a voluntary organization formed in 1997 and
consisting of the governors of thirteen Western states as well as federal
agencies and tribal governments. n204 In addition, each state must submit
implementation plans and schedules for compliance for the installation of "best
available retrofit technology" (BART) by certain older industrial sources of
visibility-impairing pollutants, such as fine particulates, nitrogen oxides,
sulfur dioxides, and volatile organic compounds. n205 In the West, the greatest
potential for reducing sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxide emissions will come from
applying BART at power plants. n206

   Parks protected by the Clean Air Act's regional haze provisions can also be
the subject of, or impacted by, devastating wildfires. n207 As discussed above,
emissions from wildfires - natural as well as planned - are a potent source of
fine particulate matter and thus can impair visibility in protected areas. n208
Natural (unplanned) wildfires and windblown dust are considered "significant
contributors" to total light extinction on the 20 percent of the haziest days of
the year. n209

[*655]

   c. Wildfire Smoke and Visibility Regulation

 The differential treatment of air pollution from unplanned wildfire versus
prescribed fire is duplicated with respect to visibility regulation. As with the
potential for exclusion from NAAQS compliance determinations, whether a wildfire
is considered "natural" or "anthropogenic" is a key determinant in how the
fire's emissions are regulated under the regional haze regime. n210

   Under policy guidelines issued by the Western Regional Air Partnership,
regulators distinguish the visibility impairment produced by wildfires as
opposed to prescribed fires. n211 According to a Western Regional Air
Partnership guidance document, "wildfire that is suppressed by management action
is a "natural' source [of air pollution]." n212 This result holds true even when
the suppression action is limited in nature, due to safety or financial
considerations. n213 Hence, none of the Western states are under an obligation
to reduce emissions from wildfire to comply with federal visibility
requirements; much like wildfire-emissions monitoring data, wildfire smoke does
not "count" for purposes of the program for reducing regional haze. n214 This
policy dramatically reduces the effectiveness of the visibility-protection
regime since, according to one commentator, "uncontrollable emissions are a
significant portion of the total visibility impairment in the Western [national
parks and wilderness] areas." n215

   In contrast, the exemption for unplanned wildfire smoke from
visibility-impairing sources does not extend to prescribed fire. Hence
prescribed-fire emissions in the West are generally subject to the regional haze
regulatory regime. n216 This is because the Western Regional Air Partnership
Guidance considers "prescribed fire" to be "an "anthropogenic' source [of air
pollution], except where it is utilized to maintain an ecosystem that is
currently in an ecologically functional and fire resilient condition ... ." n217
Only in the latter case is prescribed fire considered a "natural" source of
pollution exempt from the mitigation mandate. n218 Therefore, only prescribed
fire that is used to "maintain" an ecosystem already in a healthy and
fire-resilient condition is considered "natural"; all other uses of prescribed
fire, including those to restore ecosystems, are anthropogenic. n219

[*656]

   3. State and Federal Regulation of Planned Wildfire Activities

 A separate regime of state and federal laws and regulations, independent of the
Clean Air Act requirements discussed above, potentially apply to prescribed
burns and the decision to continue to allow a wildfire to burn for resource
benefits. These consist of state smoke management plans, federal public lands
planning requirements, and more specialized federal environmental requirements.

   a. State and Tribal Smoke Management Plans

 Many states and tribes have in place a smoke management plan that sets forth
procedures and requirements for minimizing the smoke-related impacts of
prescribed fires and fires managed for resource benefits. n220 These plans apply
to burning activities within the state's or tribe's boundaries regardless of
whether the lands subject to burning are located on federal, state, or private
lands. n221 At least nineteen states have in place a smoke management plan. n222

   While the criteria incorporated in state smoke management plans vary, a core
component is that all plans for prescribed burning be submitted to an
authorizing agency and that that agency approve or disapprove each burn proposal
on a daily basis. n223 Several state smoke management plans are extremely
strict, imposing a host of conditions that must be satisfied prior to permitting
prescribed fire or allowing an unplanned wildfire to be managed for resource
benefits. For example, in Washington, all prescribed fire proposals with the
potential to contribute 100 or more tons of pollutants are subject to multiple
approvals. n224 One approval must be obtained from the Smoke Management Section,
which works with a smoke meteorologist to determine whether weather conditions
will enable sufficient smoke dispersion so that  [*657]  there is no
"likelihood" of smoke intrusions into designated or "sensitive" (populated)
areas, including the air space above the ground. n225 In fact, Washington denies
burn requests frequently due to the failure to meet the no-likelihood-of-smoke
intrusion criteria. n226

   The majority of the states with smoke management plans provide some remedy if
the prescribed fire is considered a nuisance. n227 Where it interferes with the
use of public lands for recreational purposes or public roads for travel,
prescribed fire smoke may be considered a nuisance. n228 Loss of visibility,
odors, and falling ash are all complaints made about prescribed fire smoke. n229

   Several states (namely Alaska, Arizona, Oregon, and Washington) use public
complaints as the basis for a determination that a nuisance exists; if a
nuisance exists, the proposed prescribed fire must be delayed or shut down. n230
For instance, Washington provides that "if the fire creates a nuisance from
smoke or flying ash, it must be extinguished." n231 The Washington law further
provides that "a nuisance exists when emissions from any open fire cause
physical discomfort or health problems to people residing in the vicinity of the
burning or physical damage to property." n232 In other states (notably Colorado,
Florida, Montana, Tennessee, and Texas), a complaint from a member of the public
may prompt a state agency to investigate, which provides the basis for any order
requiring a prescribed burn be extinguished. n233 The Forest Service  [*658]
has labeled Colorado's smoke management program a "complaint based program," and
notes that, because the state lacks quantitative information linking prescribed
fire to violations of a public health standard, state officials respond to any
smoke complaints by tightening prescribed-fire smoke permit conditions
statewide. n234

   Interestingly, states' air quality planning processes and smoke management
processes are only minimally connected. Most state smoke management plans make
compliance with the Clean Air Act a requirement of a prescribed burn
authorization. n235 Under the Clean Air Act's air quality planning process,
states develop state implementation plans in which they essentially allocate
permission to emit amounts of the pollutant among the region's sources to ensure
that that the amount will not exceed that required to stay in attainment with
the national ambient air quality standards. n236 Nevertheless, while state smoke
management plans may be incorporated into a state implementation plan, wildfires
are not a source of pollution that states plan for in advance by allocating
"room" within the SIP-mandated budget for particular NAAQ pollutants. n237

   b. Federal Land Use Planning

 Additionally, at the federal level, land managers must have in place a series
of planning tools in order for wildfire to be included among the methods
available to the land manager to accomplish various land use objectives (such as
ecosystem restoration) of a given ecosystem. Planning requirements may include
long-term authorization to use fire, but also a shorter-term "Fire Management
Plan" that describes how wild and prescribed fire will be used to meet land use
objectives. n238

   4. Conclusions

 Air pollution policy provides for different treatment of the smoke from
wildfire versus prescribed fire and wildfire managed for resource benefits.
[*659]  Under the rationale that unplanned wildfires are "natural," EPA asserts
the authority to exclude polluting emissions from such wildfires from
calculations of a state's compliance with air quality standards. Available data
demonstrates that the policy likely results in the exclusion of many air quality
standard exceedances. n239 Accordingly, this regulatory exclusion for unplanned
wildfire smoke diminishes the value of prescribed fire and wildfire managed for
resource benefits in reducing the incidence and severity of unplanned wildfires.
n240

   In addition to reducing the value of prescribed fire, air quality regulation
at the state and federal levels imposes stringent requirements, or "costs," on
prescribed fire. Reasoning that prescribed fire is "anthropogenic" as opposed to
"natural," EPA criteria render it much more difficult for states to obtain EPA's
exclusion of air quality exceedances attributable to prescribed fire. n241 Due
to state and federal smoke management planning processes, prescribed-fire
proposals must navigate a host of requirements designed to prevent any intrusion
of smoke into populated and sensitive areas. n242 Furthermore, given the
proximity to populated areas, these restrictions are especially difficult to
satisfy in forests located within the increasingly expansive wildland-urban
interface.

   With respect to visibility impairment resulting from wildfires in the Western
United States, air quality policy requires that states reduce the
visibility-impairing impacts of most prescribed fire, but not for wildfires.
n243 As with EPA's exceptional events policy, this policy removes any incentive
otherwise provided by the regional haze rules to prevent wildfires, and it
further discourages states from mitigating the wildfire risk with the use of
prescribed fire. n244 Similarly, the regional haze rule rests upon the
distinction that wildfires are "natural" while prescribed fires are
anthropogenic in origin. n245

[*660]

   B. Wildfire Governance: Distortions in Incentives

 Prescribed fire concerns two different areas of environmental management:
forestry resource management and air quality. Because different government
agencies - some of which are located at different levels of government - are
responsible for each, and each face a different set of incentives, prescribed
fire often faces inconsistent obligations. The end result is strategic behavior
and suboptimal use of prescribed fire.

   Prescribed fire is a forest management tool. It is used in order to prevent
unplanned wildfires and improve and maintain the health and ecological diversity
of species within the forest habitat. n246 Therefore, the expected proponents of
prescribed fire are land managers who appreciate the value of fire in
maintaining healthy ecosystems and staving off catastrophic wildfires. The land
manager's affiliation depends upon the ownership of the forests - whether it is
held in state, federal, or private hands. Four agencies are responsible for the
large tracts of public lands in the Western United States, where wildfire is an
ever-present risk - the Forest Service in the Department of Agriculture, and the
Bureau of Land Management, National Park Service, and Bureau of Indian Affairs
in the Department of Interior.

   On the other hand, because prescribed fire produces air pollution, it is
subject to regulation by air pollution control officials. In the United States,
implementation of air pollution control standards lies primarily within state
control. n247 Although the federal EPA is responsible for establishing national
standards and overseeing state progress in achieving those standards, it is the
states that are ultimately responsible for meeting air quality and visibility
standards. n248 In certain instances, regional governing bodies (made up of
states) establish and administer air quality policies; the Western Regional Air
Partnership is an example of such a regional governing body. n249 Similarly, in
many states, the development and implementation of state smoke management plans
is overseen entirely by state air pollution control officials. n250

   Different agencies are constrained by different incentives for
prescribed-fire pollution. Under this division of responsibility, land managers
have strong incentives to perform prescribed fires and to manage an unplanned
wildfire for resource benefits. Land managers reap benefits in the form of
reduced wildfire risk and healthier forests overall. Land managers' incentive to
avoid air pollution, while present, is considerably weaker. Whereas land
managers must deal with the ire of state air quality officials should
prescribed-fire smoke  [*661]  impact pollutant levels, this ire is a small
price when compared to the budget hit and political fallout associated with a
major wildfire, especially one that in hindsight could have been avoided with
prescribed fire.

   Conversely, the opposite incentives face state air quality control officials.
Such officials do not reap benefits from prescribed fire and wildfire managed
for resource benefits. While prescribed fire may reduce the risk of a future
wildfire, such a wildfire may also occur anyway; in any case, whether the
avoided wildfire would occur during the tenures of the air quality officials in
charge is largely unknown. The uncertainties attendant to the size and timing of
an avoided-wildfire payoff from prescribed fire and wildfire managed for
resource benefits are likely to reduce their value to air quality control
officials.

   The theoretical consequence of the different ordering of incentives facing
land managers and air quality control officials is strategic behavior.
Anticipating an abundance of denials of their prescribed-fire proposals, land
managers would be expected to "over-propose" prescribed fire; or, they will
request more prescribed fires than actually needed so as to end up with a
sufficient amount of prescribed fire after air quality officials evaluate their
proposals. On the other hand, air quality control officials could be expected to
develop overly stringent regulations for approving prescribed fires and process
proposals using overly stringent criteria so as to minimize the amount of
prescribed-fire smoke generated. Such strategic behavior theoretically is
possible because land managers and air quality control officials are housed in
different government agencies, n251 and they are often working at different
levels of government as well. With respect to the latter, with respect to large
tracts of federal public lands in the Western United States, the land manager
will be a federal official while the air quality control manager will be a state
official. n252 While it is possible that each group's strategic behavior will
"cancel out" (i.e., over-proposals of prescribed fire will be cancelled out by
applying overly-stringent air quality regulations), this cannot be assumed.

   Some empirical evidence of such strategic behavior exists, though more
research is needed to verify the existence of such behavior. Land managers are
known to request permission to burn in several different areas, knowing that the
agency only has the resources to burn in one location. n253 A land manager will
act this way to increase the chances that at least one of the requests will be
approved. n254 Indeed, records maintained by the Washington Department of
[*662]  Environmental Resources (the state agency that must approve
prescribed-fire proposals) are consistent with this practice, though other
explanations of the data are possible. n255 At the same time, conditions that
states include in smoke management plans make it all but impossible for land
managers to obtain approval of prescribed-fire projects. n256 Furthermore, the
Forest Service notes that some states use an extremely conservative approach
when forecasting the smoke impacts from prescribed fires, with the result that
the atmospheric capacity to absorb prescribed-fire smoke remains underutilized.
n257

   C. Nuisance: Distortions from NIMBY Reactions

 Air quality policy includes not only the health protections embodied in the
NAAQS and the visibility protections embodied in the regional haze rules, but
also the general prohibitions of public nuisance law. In general, a nuisance is
any activity that threatens or endangers health or welfare or which unreasonably
interferes with the use or enjoyment of property. n258 In many jurisdictions,
nuisance authorities operate as a fail-safe, enabling officials to stop even an
officially authorized activity where the conduct at issue constitutes a danger
or an annoyance to the public. n259 Nuisance regulatory bodies can create an
additional impediment to prescribed fire. In many jurisdictions, nuisance law
requires that prescribed fires be extinguished if there are public complaints
about the smoke. In at least one known instance, a state agency sought to fine
federal land managers for allegedly creating a nuisance from prescribed fire.
n260

    [*663]  In at least two instances, state or local officials have attempted
to cite or fine land managers who employ prescribed fire. n261 In one such
instance in 2009, a local air control agency in Washington state fined the
Forest Service $ 12,000 for conducting a prescribed fire that allegedly caused
detrimental emissions. n262 The local agency eventually withdrew the citation,
but one commentator notes that federal land managers can be liable for any
damages associated with prescribed fire. n263

   Enabling the public to influence when and where prescribed fire occurs with
nuisance law arguably distorts fire policy; it emphasizes the burdens of
prescribed fire over its benefits in potentially reducing the likelihood and
extent of an unplanned wildfire. All of the dynamics of the "not in my backyard"
(NIMBY) syndrome n264 are present. For residents living nearby, prescribed fire
causes smoke, a short-term but certain cost. Prescribed-fire smoke is localized;
because of the smaller smoke plume generated by prescribed fires in comparison
to wildfires, smoke from a prescribed fire will primarily affect local
communities in the vicinity. n265 At the same time, the benefits of prescribed
fire to the local communities impacted by prescribed-fire smoke are uncertain.
It is difficult to say with certainty whether wildfire would occur in the same
locality as the prescribed fire in the absence of the prescribed fire or
whether, if it did, the wildfire would make anyone worse off than they are as a
result of their exposure to the smoke of prescribed burning. Hence, local
residents are apt to overestimate the burdens of prescribed fire and
underestimate its benefits.

   Moreover, nuisance law is a "one-way ratchet" - it responds only to negative
public input. Nuisance law provides a mechanism only to those persons who
complain about prescribed-fire smoke. n266 As a consequence, nuisance law does
not reflect the sentiments of the myriad persons who may benefit from the effect
of prescribed fire in reducing future wildfire risk. Such persons presumably
include those individuals who live outside the geographic areas impacted by
prescribed fire but within locations that benefit from the  [*664]  wildfire
-risk reduction and other ecosystem benefits. Furthermore, future generations
also benefit, as the benefits of burning - whether from prescribed fire or an
unplanned wildfire that is allowed to burn for resource benefits - extend many
years into the future. n267 In fact, prescribed burning can be viewed as a
trade-off between the health and comfort of the present generation, who must put
up with the smoke from prescribed burning, for the health and comfort of future
generations. n268 Even if nuisance law were to reflect the prescribed-fire
preferences of such geographically and temporally distant persons, the diffuse
and uncertain nature of their benefit renders it highly unlikely that these
persons would be compelled (or, in the case of future generations, technically
able) to voice these preferences. n269 As a result, state nuisance law operates
as an additional hindrance to prescribed fire.

   III. Recommendations

 Currently air pollution regulation distorts incentives in a manner that biases
decisions against the use of prescribed burning to reduce the incidence and
severity of wildfires. This outcome is not beneficial. Given the escalating risk
of wildfires, officials should be vigorously using prescribed fire. The
following are recommendations designed to remove these distortions from air
quality policy.

   A. Adopt a "Smoke Is Smoke" Default Rule with Built-In Incentives

 Rather than excluding data from unplanned wildfires from air quality compliance
determinations, state and federal officials should adopt a default rule that all
wildfire smoke-related data (i.e., data from unplanned wildfire, prescribed
fire, and wildfire managed for resource benefits) "counts" for purposes of air
quality compliance. Only through the adoption of such a default policy can it be
assured that states will take the capacity of prescribed fire to reduce the
incidence and severity of unplanned wildfires into account when implementing air
quality and smoke management rules. Accordingly, the smoke from unplanned
wildfires should be excludable only upon a demonstration that the state is
actively engaged in a program to reduce wildfire risk, such as through
cooperative programs between air quality and land  [*665]  managers to encourage
vegetation reduction through prescribed fire and mechanical thinning.

   Adoption of a "smoke is smoke" default policy requires that state and federal
officials make numerous other policy changes, each of which are discussed below.

   1. Abandon the Distinction Between "Natural" Wildfires and "Anthropogenic"
Prescribed Fires

 Excluding wildfire smoke and including prescribed-fire smoke in air quality
compliance determinations are each rooted in the fiction that wildfires are
"natural" and that prescribed fires are "anthropogenic" events. Because these
fictions support policy decisions that undervalue the wildfire-prevention
aspects of prescribed fire, regulators should abandon this distinction.

   2. Unplanned Wildfires Are Not "Natural" Events

 Given the past century of aggressive wildfire-suppression policy, it is
disingenuous to label the unplanned wildfires that do result as a "natural"
phenomenon. n270 The high number of severe wildfires today is, in part, an
effect of the long-standing, deliberate policy on behalf of federal and state
land managers to suppress wildfires on public lands. The unraveling of this
suppression policy, initiated in the late 1800s, is a comparatively recent
phenomenon.

   This legacy of wildfire suppression has largely contributed to the
accumulation of forest fuels and a consequent increase in the incidence and
severity of wildfires. For instance, research on a ponderosa pine forest in
Arizona found that average tree density increased more than eightfold under a
wildfire-suppression regime. n271 Density increases like these are now commonly
observed in the ponderosa pine forests common to the Western United States. n272
Open, park-like stands of ponderosa pine trees have diminished while smaller
tree species, like Douglas fir and true firs, have increased. n273 Because these
smaller-tree species provide "ladder fuels" that allow fire to reach the  [*666]
upper branches of the larger-tree species, torching and killing them, these
density increases greatly increase the risk of large, high-intensity fires. n274
A 1999 government study concluded that the over-accumulation of trees present a
severe wildfire risk to approximately 16 million hectares in the Intermountain
West. n275

   EPA's treatment in its exceptional event policy of wildfires as per se
natural events is inconsistent with EPA's own definition of wildfire, adopted
from federal land agencies. Under this definition, a wildfire is any unplanned
ignition of a wildland fire, including "unauthorized and accidental human-caused
fires" and "escaped prescribed fires." n276 Most wildfires are human-caused,
though humans are the cause of a smaller percentage of the backcountry wildfires
that are responsible for the most acreage burned. n277 Of the 63,591 to 96,386
fires that burned each year between 2001 and 2010, humans caused between 80 and
90 percent. n278 Humans are the source for 12 to 65 percent of the annual
acreage burned during that time period. n279 The number of human-caused fires in
forested areas is expected to increase as people continue to move into
residential areas adjoining forests, or the wildland-urban interface. n280

   EPA's determination that wildfire smoke is "natural" and hence per se
excludable under the exceptional events policy is not statutorily required.
Nothing in the legislative history of the statutory source for the exceptional
events rule - the amendment to the Clean Air Act by section 6013 of the Safe
Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act of 2005 (SAFETEA-LU)
- requires that the agency provide a regulatory exclusion of air quality
pollution measurements influenced by wildfires. n281 Similarly, nowhere in
section 6013 of SAFETEA-LU did Congress specify the definition of a "natural
event," nor did Congress identify wildfires as "natural events." If anything,
excluding wildfire smoke from air quality considerations seems inconsistent with
at least one of the principles governing EPA's exceptional event rulemaking set
forth in section 6013 - that "each State must take necessary measures to
safeguard public health regardless of the source of the air pollution." n282

    [*667]  Finally, the label "natural" gives the impression that smoke from
unplanned wildfires is somehow less harmful to health and to visibility values
than smoke originating from prescribed fires. Nothing could be further from the
truth. Smoke is smoke. From the perspective of risks to human health and the
environment, it makes no difference whether the pollution originates from fire
from lightning, from a negligent camper, or from Forest Service personnel.

   3. Prescribed Fires Are Not "Anthropogenic"

 Just as the assumption that unplanned wildfires are natural events is an
unhelpful fiction, so too is the blanket assumption that prescribed burning
wildfires managed for resource benefits are entirely anthropogenic. While a
prescribed fire is ignited by human means, in many other respects such fires are
natural phenomena. Both the purpose and the effect of prescribed fire and
wildfire managed for resource benefits are to mimic the natural fire cycle. n283
According to official Forest Service policy, the purpose of prescribed fire is
to "approximate the natural vegetative disturbance of periodic fire occurrence"
and to "maintain fire dependent ecosystems and restore those outside their
natural balance." n284 By mimicking the effect of natural, recurring fire
regimes, prescribed fire can be considered "natural." n285 In fact, given that
EPA considers "natural" wildfires to include those negligently ignited by
humans,  [*668]  the natural-versus-anthropogenic distinction does not entirely
fit the EPA's policy narrative.

   In short, the labels of "natural" and "anthropogenic," as used by EPA and the
states to justify regulatory distinctions between wildfire and prescribed fire,
lacks merit. These labels should be abandoned and, with them, the air pollution
related regulatory distinctions between them.

   4. Provide States with Incentives to Reverse Default Policy

 Under the default policy outlined above, EPA would not exclude smoke from
wildfires when determining a state's compliance with air quality standards. This
policy would provide air quality regulators with an incentive to authorize
prescribed fire. Prescribed fire would constitute not just a source of fire
smoke emissions, but also a means to reduce potentially catastrophic wildfires,
a larger source of fire smoke emissions. The default policy's rationale is that
smoke is smoke, a source of health-threatening air pollution, regardless of its
source. Fine particulate matter and ozone have deleterious effects upon health
and visibility, regardless of whether they derive from a raging unplanned
wildfire (currently eligible for per se exclusion under EPA's exceptional events
policy) n286 or prescribed fire (barely eligible for exclusion under EPA's
policy) n287 or a coal-fired utility (not excludable because burning coal for
electricity is neither a natural event nor an "exceptional" event).

   The potential consequence of the default rule is that, during the annual fire
season, more air quality control regions in the United States would measure
levels of particulate matter and ozone in excess of air quality standards. This
result could mean the redesignation of many more areas as "nonattainment" under
the Clean Air Act, a status that triggers the mandatory application of more
stringent technology-based standards for large sources of the nonattainment
pollutant. n288 It will also add to the regulatory burdens of federal land
managers carrying out prescribed fires, as the nonattainment designation will
mean that they will be required to carry out a conformity analysis under the
Clean Air Act. n289

    [*669]  The prospect of more nonattainment areas might tempt regulators to
adopt an opposite approach - a "smoke is not pollution" policy. Under this
alternative approach, regulators would provide for the total exclusion of all
wildfire and prescribed fire smoke for air quality compliance purposes. Such an
approach would, in theory, enable land managers to carry out prescribed fires by
alleviating any concern with the regulatory implications of the resulting smoke.

   The problem with the "smoke is not pollution" policy is that it replaces the
current fiction embodied in the exceptional events rule with another: that
wildfire smoke, of whatever origin, does not contribute to air pollution.
Moreover, under such an alternative policy, states and land managers would then
have no incentive to reduce air pollution from wildfire smoke.

   Rather than adopting a "smoke is not pollution" policy, regulators should
respond to the prospect of potentially more smoke-caused nonattainment areas by
providing states with incentives to carry out programs to reduce forest fuel
build-up through planned fire - prescribed fire and the management of unplanned
wildfires for resource benefits - as well as mechanical thinning. Such measures
might include greater reliance on prescribed fire and other fuel treatments in
existing smoke management plans and the institution of prescribed fire councils.
n290

   B. Revamp Smoke-Related Governance Structures to Encourage Prescribed Fire
and the Management of Wildfire for Resource Benefits

 Among the explanations for the insufficient use of prescribed fire and wildfire
managed for resource benefits is the current structure of state and federal
regulatory authorities governing burn decisions. While responsibility for
resource management and fire suppression is lodged within federal and state land
management agencies, responsibility for air quality compliance is lodged within
state and federal pollution control agencies. n291 This sets up a dynamic in
which resource agencies advocate for greater use of prescribed fire and managing
wildfires for resource benefits while pollution agencies oppose them. Neither
group of agencies believes the other is taking sufficient account of the others'
concerns. The result is a buildup of mistrust, strategic decision making, and a
continuation of the insufficient use of fire.

   One solution is that decisions concerning the use of prescribed fire and
wildfire managed for resource benefits receive input from both the resource and
the air quality agencies at the state and federal level. Only by making air
pollution a responsibility of the land management agencies and the risk of
wildfire a responsibility of the air pollution agencies will distortions in
decision making be corrected.

    [*670]  One method to ensure a joint decision-making process is to require
that the prescribed-fire authorizations at the state level be the joint product
of both state air quality officials and state resource managers, rather than the
unilateral product of either agency. A review of the state smoke management
plans of the nineteen states with the greatest amount of prescribed fire reveals
a sharp divide between states in the manner in which they allocate
decision-making authority. In Western states, it is usually the state
environmental agency, or the locus of the state's air pollution control
officials, that are authorized to permit prescribed fire. n292 On the other
hand, states in the Southeast tend to delegate this decision to a state natural
resource agency. n293 Given that a much greater number of acres is annually
subject to prescribed fire in the Southeast as opposed to the West, the
inclusion of resource agencies in the decision-making process theoretically
could result in more prescribed fire. n294

   Another method to address the governance distortions is for states to
encourage the development of "Prescribed Fire Councils." These councils
represent a forum for federal, state, and tribal officials, as well as private
parties, to discuss and cooperate around issues related to prescribed fire. n295
At present, twenty-five prescribed-fire councils exist in twenty-three states.
n296 Critically, Western states are the least represented states among those
with prescribed fire councils; no such council exists in Alaska, Idaho, Montana,
Nevada, Oregon, Texas, Utah, or Wyoming. n297 Although California has a
prescribed fire council, its jurisdiction is limited to the northern half of the
state. n298

   C. Presume Authorized Prescribed Fire Does Not Constitute a Nuisance

 Yet another factor discouraging prescribed fire and wildfire managed for
resource benefits is the intrusion of state nuisance law. In short, in many
states, complaints by the public - often disgruntled inhabitants of the
wildland-urban interface - can delay or shut down prescribed fire as a nuisance.
Protection of public health and the environment is of critical importance, but
prescribed fire  [*671]  is an important method of providing that protection.
Unfortunately, providing community members experiencing the discomfort and
health threats of wildfire smoke with a veto over prescribed fire threatens to
subordinate the protection of the public and the health of large ecosystems
through a reduced wildfire risk to the whims of the smaller group of citizens
living in close proximity to prescribed fire.

   For society overall, this subordination is not good policy. Protection of the
health and welfare of those living nearby prescribed fire projects can be
accomplished through careful planning and, where necessary, the relocation of
those residents to safe areas during prescribed fire or prior to authorizing the
management of a wildfire for resource benefits. Such measures cannot be provided
to the large number of persons whose health and well-being may be threatened by
an unplanned wildfire which may have been prevented, or its threats reduced, by
a more aggressive policy of prescribed fire and resource management burning.
When wildfire hits, temporary relocation is often not an option; residents are
lucky to escape with their lives. n299

   Conclusion

 Wildfire is on the rise. The United States, together with many other nations,
is witnessing a spectacular increase in acres lost to catastrophic wildfires, a
phenomenon tied to the generally hotter and drier conditions associated with
climate change. In addition to the lives, property, and natural resources lost,
wildfires are a plentiful source of air pollution, contributing thousands of
tons of particulate matter, ozone precursors, and carbon dioxide to the
atmosphere. Ironically, one of the most effective tools to reduce the incidence
and severity of unplanned wildfires is planned wildfires - prescribed fire or
wildfire managed for resource benefits - which work by reducing the buildup of
vegetation and restoring the natural fire resiliency of a given ecosystem by
eliminating fire-prone plant species.

   At present, the number of acres burned annually falls far short of the number
considered optimal for purposes of restoring ecosystems and reducing damages
from unplanned wildfires. While many social and economic factors contribute to
this shortfall in the use of prescribed fire, one group of factors has so far
escaped in-depth analysis: air pollution law and policy. Yet, as discussed in
this Article, pollution policy contributes in numerous ways to discouraging
prescribed fire and the management of unplanned wildfires for resource benefits.
These regulatory distortions include undervaluing the wildfire-reducing capacity
of prescribed fire by enabling states to exclude wildfire smoke from air quality
compliance determinations, governance structures that place air quality and
resource agencies at odds with each other, and nuisance  [*672]  authorities
that enable more narrow local interests to trump the broader public interest in
reduced wildfire risk and healthier forests.

   The status quo is not inevitable. Solutions are available. This Article has
suggested several, including the adoption of a default rule whereby all wildfire
smoke "counts" for purposes of calculating air quality unless states can
demonstrate a working program to encourage prescribed fire and the management of
wildfires for resource benefits. This rule would ensure that the state takes the
wildfire-reducing properties of prescribed fire into account when making air
quality determinations. Other solutions include joint decision making over
prescribed fire by state officials in both air quality and natural resource
agencies, eliminating the rivalries and strategic decisions that now
characterize some state smoke management regimes, and imposing a presumption
that the authorized use of prescribed fire or management of unplanned wildfire
for resource benefits does not constitute a nuisance. The latter will ensure the
responsiveness of smoke management planning to local interests and ensure that
the general public interest in reduced wildfire damages and healthy forests are
not subsumed to the local interests in reduced smoke impacts.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Environmental LawNatural Resources & Public LandsForest
ManagementGovernmentsPublic LandsForest LandsTortsStrict LiabilityHarm Caused by
AnimalsGeneral Overview

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  For example, historically, the necessity defense to criminal prosecution
was available only where the cause of the necessity was considered natural or of
divine origin. Matthew Hale, The History of the Common Law of England 26
(Charles M. Gray ed., 1971) (1713); see also United States v. Bailey, 444 U.S.
394, 410 (1980) ("The defense of necessity, or choice of evils, traditionally
covered the situation where physical forces beyond the actor's control rendered
illegal conduct the lesser of two evils.").





n2.  Shaun P. Martin, The Radical Necessity Defense, 73 U. Cin. L. Rev. 1527,
1534-35 (2005) (explaining that the necessity defense is generally available
today regardless of whether a cause is natural or man-made); Lawrence M.
Friedman & Joseph Thompson, Total Disaster and Total Justice: Responses to
Man-made Tragedy, 53 DePaul L. Rev. 251, 284-85 (2003) (describing sea-change in
late twentieth century according to which relief was expected for natural as
well as for human-made disasters).





n3.  See Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1362(6) (2012) (defining a "pollutant" as
"dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial,
municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water"); Sierra Club v. Abston
Constr. Co., 620 F.2d 41, 45 (5th Cir. 1980) (holding that the surface runoff
collected or channeled by the defendant mine operators may constitute a "point
source" discharge requiring a permit under the Clean Water Act regardless of the
fact the pollution was conveyed to a navigable water by gravity); Lead Indus.
Ass'n, Inc. v. EPA, 647 F.2d 1130, 1135-36, 1152-55 (D.C. Cir. 1980) (upholding
EPA restriction upon ambient lead concentrations based upon reducing individual
exposure to all lead, including natural sources, to safe levels).





n4.  See Technology Transfer Network: Clearinghouse for Inventories and
Emissions Factors, The National Emissions Inventory, U.S. EPA,
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/net/2008inventory.html (last updated Aug. 29, 2013)
(derived by manipulating "Sector Summaries - Criteria and Hazardous Air
Pollutants by 60 EIS Emission Sectors" on cited webpage by inputting "National"
under "National / State / County or Tribe," highlighting all regions under
"Geographic Aggregation," "CAP-PM10 Primary (Filt + Cond)" for "Pollutant" and
"Fires - Prescribed Fires" for "Sector"). Supporting files for Technology
Transfer Network citations are on file with the Ecology Law Quarterly.





n5.  Id. (derived by by manipulating "Sector Summaries - Criteria and Hazardous
Air Pollutants by 60 EIS Emission Sectors" on cited webpage by inputting
"National" under "National / State / County or Tribe," highlighting all regions
under "Geographic Aggregation," "CAP-PM25 Primary (Filt + Cond)" for "Pollutant"
and "Fires - Prescribed Fires" for "Sector").





n6.  Id.





n7.  See, e.g., Mark A. Finney et al., Simulation of Long-Term Landscape-Level
Fuel Treatment Effects on Large Wildfires, 16 Int'l J. Wildland Fire 712, 712
(2007). See also infra text accompanying notes 91-113.





n8.  See Antonis Analitis et al., Forest Fires Are Associated with Elevated
Mortality in a Dense Urban Setting, 69 Occupational & Envtl. Med. 158, 160-61
(2012) (finding that forest fires burnt around the greater Athens area between
1998 and 2004 were associated with a large increase in the number of
cardiovascular and respiratory deaths in the nearby urban population); Fay
Johnston et al., Extreme Air Pollution Events from Bushfires and Dust Storms and
Their Association with Mortality in Sydney, Australia 1994-2007, 111 Envtl. Res.
811, 814 (2011) (stating that smoke events associated with a 5 percent increase
in non-accidental mortality); Ana G. Rappold et al., Peat Bog Wildfire Exposure
in Rural North Carolina Is Associated with Cardiopulmonary Emergency Department
Visits Assessed Through Syndromic Surveillance, 119 Envtl. Health Persp. 1415,
1415 (2011) (finding that exposure to smoke from 2008 peat bog fires in North
Carolina increased emergency department visits for asthma, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, pneumonia, acute bronchitis, and heart failure in rural
communities). See also Sarah B. Henderson & Fay H. Johnston, Measures of Forest
Fire Smoke Exposure and Their Associations with Respiratory Health Outcomes, 12
Current Opinion Allergy & Clinical Immunology 221, 226 (2012) (summarizing
recent studies on the association between forest fire smoke and health effects);
Martine Dennekamp & Michael J. Abramson, The Effects of Bushfire Smoke on
Respiratory Health, 16 Respirology 198, 207 (2011) (summarizing recent studies
on the association between forest fire smoke and health effects).





n9.  Grant J. Williamson et al., Satellite-Based Comparison of Fire Intensity
and Smoke Plumes from Prescribed Fires and Wildfires in South-Eastern Australia,
Int'l J. Wildland Fire 121, 128 (2013) (concluding that plumes from wildfires
are six times larger than plumes from prescribed fires).





n10.  Lenya N. Quinn-Davidson & J. Morgan Varner, Impediments to Prescribed Fire
Across Agency, Landscape and Manager: An Example from Northern California, 21
Int'l J. Wildland Fire 210, 213 (2012) (stating that the percentage burned of
all areas to achieve objectives is only 38.37 percent). For a further discussion
of this study, see infra text accompanying notes 132-134.





n11.  Ross W. Gorte, Cong. Research Serv., Federal Funding for Wildfire Control
and Management 17 tbl.5 (2011), available at
http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL33990.pdf.





n12.  In general, the regulation of wildfire remains underexplored and
under-theorized in the legal literature. Important exceptions include Robert H.
Palmer III, A New Era of Federal Prescribed Fire: Defining Terminology and
Properly Applying the Discretionary Function Exception, 2 Seattle J. Envtl. L.
279, 279 (2012) (asserting that recent policy changes expose the federal
government to claims for damages resulting from prescribed burning practices);
Karen M. Bradshaw, Backfired! Distorted Incentives in Wildfire Suppression
Techniques, 31 Utah Envtl. L. Rev. 155, 159 (2011) (demonstrating that the
incentives facing firefighters to use backfire as a wildfire suppression
technique can be poorly aligned with that of landowners and environmentalists
interested in protecting timberlands); Karen M. Bradshaw, A Modern Overview of
Wildfire Law, 21 Fordham Envtl. L. Rev. 445, 477 (2010) (discussing the
differing incentives guiding the actions of institutions and groups with roles
in fighting fires: government firefighting suppression agencies, wildland urban
interface owners, and private institutional landowners); Jonathan Yoder et al.,
Liability, Incentives, and Prescribed Fire for Ecosystem Management, 2 Frontiers
Ecology & Env't 361 (2004) (examining the implications of various legal
liability regimes for escaped prescribed fire upon the incentives to use
prescribed fire as a vegetation management tool). A prior attempt to tackle the
important issue of air quality policy and wildfire smoke regulation was made
recently by the author and her co-author, Andrew Reeves. Kirsten H. Engel &
Andrew Reeves, When "Smoke Isn't Smoke': Missteps in Air Quality Regulation of
Wildfire Smoke, in Wildfire Policy: Law and Economics Perspectives 127 (2011).





n13.  See infra text accompanying notes 182-91.





n14.  See infra text accompanying notes 212-29.





n15.  See Nat'l Ass'n of State Foresters, Quadrennial Fire Review 1, 3, 6
(2009), available at http://www.iafc.org/files/wild_QFR2009Report.pdf. The
quadrennial fire review summarizes the current and projected status of fire
management by the five federal natural resource management agencies and their
state, local, and tribal counterparts. The five federal agencies are the Forest
Service within the Department of Agriculture and the Bureau of Indian Affairs,
the Bureau of Land Management, the Fish and Wildlife Service, and the National
Park Service within the Department of Interior. Id.





n16.  Total Wildland Fires and Acres (1960-2012), Nat'l Interagency Fire Ctr.,
http://www.nifc.gov/fireInfo/fireInfo_stats_totalFires.html (last visited Aug.
16, 2013). The NIFC reports that more than 9.3 million acres were subject to
wildfire in 2012. Id.





n17.  Nat'l Ass'n of State Foresters, supra note 15, at 9.





n18.  Mead Gruver, "Unreal": Residents Tour Colorado Blaze Devastation,
Associated Press, July 1, 2012, available at
http://www.aspentimes.com/article/20120701/NEWS/120709994.





n19.  See infra text accompanying notes 22-127.





n20.  See infra text accompanying notes 128-269.





n21.  See infra text accompanying notes 270-299.





n22.  See Jan W. van Wagtendonk, The History and Evolution of Wildland Fire Use,
3 Fire Ecology 3, 4 (2007).





n23.  Id.





n24.  See id.; George Busenberg, Wildfire Management in the United States: The
Evolution of a Policy Failure, 21 Population Res. Pol'y Rev. 145, 149 (2004).





n25.  See Stephen J. Pyne, Fire in America: A Cultural History of Wildland and
Rural Fire 250-51 (1982).





n26.  Busenberg, supra note 24, at 149.





n27.  Ross W. Gorte & Kelsi Bracmort, Cong. Research Serv., Forest Fire/Wildfire
Protection 2 (2012), available at http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL30755.pdf.





n28.  Id.





n29.  See id.





n30.  Michael P. Dombeck et al., Wildfire Policy and Public Lands: Integrating
Scientific Understanding with Social Concerns Across Landscapes, 18 Conservation
Biology 883, 884 (2004).





n31.  See id.





n32.  Id.





n33.  Id.





n34.  Geoffrey H. Donovan & Thomas C. Brown, Wildfire Management in the U.S.
Forest Service: A Brief History, 29 Nat. Hazard Observer 1, 2 (2005), available
at http://www.colorado.edu/hazards/o/archives/2005/july05/july05.pdf.





n35.  Id.





n36.  See id.; Busenberg, supra note 24, at 152.





n37.  U.S. Forest Serv., Rocky Mountain Region, Colorado Smoke Management Plan
Evaluation: A Question of Balance 1 (2011), available at
http://www.colorado.gov/cs/Satellite?blobcol=urldata&blobheader=application%2Fpd
f&blobkey=id&blobtable=MungoBlobs&blobwhere=1251805052085&ssbinary=true.





n38.  Gorte, supra note 11, at 5-6 tbls.1& 2.





n39.  Id. at 15.





n40.  Id.





n41.  See U.S. Forest Serv., Protecting People and Sustaining Resources in
Fire-Adapted Ecosystems: A Cohesive Strategy 23 (2000) available at
http://www.fs.fed.us/publications/2000/cohesive_strategy10132000.pdf; U.S. Gov.
Accountability Office, Western National Forests: A Cohesive Strategy Is Needed
to Address Catastrophic Wildfire Threats 6 (1999) available at
http://www.gao.gov/assets/160/156559.pdf; Stephen J. Pyne, Fire in America: A
Cultural History of Wildland and Rural Fire 302 (1982).





n42.  See Robert E. Keane et al., U.S. Forest Serv., Cascading Effects of Fire
Exclusion in Rocky Mountain Ecosystems: A Literature Review 8-9 (2002),
available at http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr091.pdf. .





n43.  Press Release 11-193: Scorched Earth: The Past, Present and Future of
Human Influences on Wildfires, Nat'l Sci. Found. (Sept. 14, 2011),
http://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=121644&org=NSF&from=news.





n44.  Total Wildland Fires and Acres (1960-2012), supra note 16.





n45.  Id.





n46.  Nat'l Ass'n of State Foresters, supra note 15, at 9.





n47.  See id. at 10 (predicting worsening drought conditions caused by climate
change); David V. Sandberg et al., U.S. Forest Serv., National Strategic Plan:
Modeling and Data Systems for Wildland Fire and Air Quality 1 (1999) available
at http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/pubs/pnw_gtr450.pdf.





n48.  Nat'l Ass'n of State Foresters, supra note 15, at 10.





n49.  See A.L. Westerling et al., Warming and Earlier Spring Increase Western
U.S. Forest Wildfire Activity, 313 Sci. 940, 940 (2006).





n50.  Nat'l Ass'n of State Foresters, supra note 15, at 10.





n51.  Id.





n52.  Id.





n53.  Id.





n54.  Christine Wiedinmyer & Matthew D. Hurteau, Prescribed Fire As a Means of
Reducing Forest Carbon Emissions in the Western United States, 44 Envtl. Sci. &
Tech. 1926, 1926 (2010).





n55.  See Greenhouse Gas Equivalency Calculator, U.S. EPA,
http://www.epa.gov/cleanenergy/energy-resources/calculator.html (last updated
April 2013).





n56.  Nat'l Wildfire Coordinating Grp., Smoke Management Guide for Prescribed
and Wildland Fire 29, 63 (2001).





n57.  Id. at 98.





n58.  D.W. Dockery et al., An Association Between Air Pollution and Mortality in
Six U.S. Cities, 329 New Eng. J. Med. 1753, 1753-59 (1993).





n59.  See Zack Parsons & Steven Arnold, Western States Air Resources Council,
Ozone Transport in the West: An Exploratory Study 2, 6 (2004), available at
http://www.colorado.gov/cs/Satellite?blobcol=urldata&blobheadername1=Content-Dis
position&blobheadername2=Content-Type&blobheadervalue1=inline%3B+filename%3D%22O
zone+Transport+in+the+West.pdf%22&blobheadervalue2=application%2Fpdf&blobkey=id&
blobtable=MungoBlobs&blobwhere=1251808871845&ssbinary=true.





n60.  Id. at 6-7 (discussing episodes in Utah where forest fires were recognized
by EPA as a large contributor to elevated ozone levels); Haiganoush K. Preisler
et al., Estimating Contribution of Wildland Fires to Ambient Ozone Levels in
National Parks in the Sierra Nevada, 158 Envtl. Pollution 778, 786 (2010)
(detecting a "small but significant effect of fires on ozone variation").





n61.  See, e.g., Thomas J. Duck et al., Transport of Forest Fire Emissions from
Alaska and the Yukon Territory to Nova Scotia During Summer 2004, J. Geophysical
Res., May 19, 2007, D10S44, at 1, available at
http://nature.berkeley.edu/ahg/pubs/transport.pdf; Dan Jaffe et al., Long-Range
Transport of Siberian Biomass Burning Emissions and Impact on Surface Ozone in
Western North America, Geophysical Res. Letters, Aug. 20, 2004, L16106, at 2-4
(showing that smoke from fires burned in Siberia was transported to North
America); A.C. Lewis et al., Chemical Composition Observed Over the Mid-Atlantic
and the Detection of Pollution Signatures far from Source Regions, 112 J.
Geophysical Res., Feb. 13, 2007, D10S39, at 2.





n62.  The exact amount of fine particulate matter contributed by wildfires in
2008 is 998,604 tons. Technology Transfer Network, supra note 5 (derived by
manipulating "Sector Summaries - Criteria and Hazardous Air Pollutants by 60 EIS
emission sectors" on cited webpage by inputting "National" under "National /
State / County or Tribe," highlighting all regions under "Geographic
Aggregation," "CAP-PM25 Primary (Filt + Cond)" for "Pollutant" and "Fires -
Wildfires" for "Sector"). The electricity sector contributes 309,315. Id.
(derived from same inputs but substituting, under "Sector," fuel combustion for
the production of electricity for all sources of fuel combustion).





n63.  The 998,604 tons of fine particulate matter from wildfires in 2008
compares to 814,215 tons from all sources of fuel combustion. Id. (derived from
same inputs but substituting all fuel combustion sources for "Fires - Wildfires"
under "Sector"). The 998,604 tons of fine particulate matter from wildfires in
2008 is roughly three times the 309,315 tons of fine particulates produced by
the electricity sector. Id. (derived from same inputs, but substituting all
options for fuel combustion for the generation of electricity under "Sector").





n64.  Id. (derived from same inputs, but substituting "HAP-VOC" for "Pollutant"
and "Fires - Wildfires" for "Sector").





n65.  Id. (derived from same inputs but substituting all fuel combustion options
for "Sector").





n66.  Id. (derived from same inputs but substituting all Region 9 states for
"Geographic Aggregation," "CAP-PM25 Primary (Filt + Cond)" for "Pollutant" and
"Fires - Wildfires" for "Sector").





n67.  Id. (derived from same inputs but substituting all Region 1 states for
"Geographic Aggregation").





n68.  See Celia A. Alves et al., Emission of Trace Gases and Organic Components
in Smoke Particles from a Wildfire in a Mixed-Evergreen Forest in Portugal, 409
Sci. Total Env't 1466, 1466 (2011); id. at 1474 (describing the breakdown of
particulate matter found in smoke).





n69.  Teresa C. Wegesser et al., California Wildfires of 2008: Coarse and Fine
Particulate Matter Toxicity, 117 Envtl. Health Persp. 893, 896 (2009).





n70.  Id. at 895-96.





n71.  Nat'l Wildfire Coordinating Grp., supra note 56, at 29.





n72.  Id.





n73.  See James M. Roberts et al., Isocyanic Acid in the Atmosphere and Its
Possible Link to Smoke-Related Health Effects, 108 Proc. Nat'l Acad. Sci. U.S.
8966, 8966 (2011).





n74.  Bhopal Trial: Eight Convicted Over India Gas Disaster, BBC News, June 7,
2010, available at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/8725140.stm. Of course, the Bhopal
disaster followed the release of a massively large amount of methyl
isocyanates--forty tons--as opposed to the minute quantities found in wildfire
smoke. Still, the disaster is a potent reminder of the dangerous nature of this
chemical.





n75.  See Roberts et al., supra note 73, at 8966.





n76.  See B.D. Finley et al., Particulate Mercury Emissions in Regional Wildfire
Plumes Observed at the Mount Bachelor Observatory, 43 Atmospheric Env't 6074,
6082 (2009) (Particulate-bound mercury released from wildfires is a source of
mercury comparable to that from anthropogenic sources.); Jerome O. Nriagu, A
Global Assessment of Natural Sources of Atmospheric Trace Metals, 338 Nature 47,
47 (1989).





n77.  Kingsley O. Odigie & A. Russel Flegal, Pyrogenic Remobilisation of
Historical Industrial Lead Depositions, 45 Envtl. Sci. & Tech. 6290, 6291-92
(2011).





n78.  Nat'l Ass'n of State Foresters, supra note 15, at 12 tbl.2 (U.S. Forest
Service & Department of Interior Fuels Treatment Acres 2004-2008).





n79.  See James K. Agee & Carl N. Skinner, Basic Principles of Forest Fuel
Reduction Treatments, 211 Forest Ecology & Mgmt. 83, 87 (2005) (distinguishing
different types of thinning).





n80.  Susan J. Prichard et al., Fuel Treatments Reduce the Severity of Wildfire
Effects in Dry Mixed Conifer Forest, Washington, USA, 40 Canadian J. Forest Res.
1615, 1624 (2010) (providing strong quantitative evidence that, without reducing
surface fuels, thinning alone does not reduce tree mortality during a large
wildfire).





n81.  16 U.S.C. §§6501-91 (2012).





n82.  Michael P. Dombeck et al., Wildfire Policy and Public Lands: Integrating
Scientific Understanding with Social Concerns Across Landscapes, 18 Conservation
Biology 883, 887 (2004) (stating that the timber industry calls for more
aggressive logging to restore forest health interpreted by conservation
community as ploy to increase timber cutting).





n83.  Sierra Club v. Bosworth, 510 F.3d 1016, 1034 (9th Cir. 2007).





n84.  Jolie Pollet & Philip N. Omi, Effect of Thinning and Prescribed Burning on
Crown Fire Severity in Ponderosa Pine Forests, 11 Int'l J. Wildland Fire 1, 8
(2002) (stating that fuel treatments are effective in reducing severity in short
fire-return interval ecosystems but may be less effective in long fire-return
interval ecosystems). But see Agee & Skinner, supra note 79 (presenting
empirical results limiting the effectiveness of thinning to circumstances where
thinning is performed in tandem with prescribed burning).





n85.  The wildland-urban interface has been defined as areas where "urban
development presses against private and public wildlands." David M. Theobald &
William H. Romme, Expansion of the U.S. Wildland-Urban Interface, 83 Landscape &
Urb. Plan. 340, 340 (2007). The wildland-urban interface, which continues to
grow, was estimated to include 39 percent of all housing in the continental
United States. Id.





n86.  See infra text accompanying note 157.





n87.  Forests at the Wildland-Urban Interface: Conservation and Management 219
(Susan W. Vince et al. eds., 2005) (stating that resource managers must use
mechanical and herbicide treatments to reduce fuel build up where the number of
days on which burning is acceptable is insufficient).





n88.  Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests 571-72 (John A. Stanturf &
Palle Madsen eds., 2005).





n89.  Susan J. Prichard et al., Fuel Treatments Reduce the Severity of Wildfire
Effects in Dry Mixed Conifer Forest, 40 Canadian J. Forest Res. 1615, 1621
(2010) (providing "strong quantitative evidence" that tree thinning in the
absence of reducing surface fuels "does not reduce tree mortality during a large
wildfire"). See also Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests, supra note 88,
at 570 (stating that in absence of mechanized treatment, dense understory of
trees in some forests renders prescribed fire too likely to escalate into a
catastrophic fire).





n90.  U.S. Forest Serv., supra note 37, at 2.





n91.  According to guidance documents for federal wildfire officials, a
"prescribed fire" or a "prescribed burn" is a fire intentionally lighted by
managers to meet specific resource management objectives. Nat'l Fire & Aviation
Exec. Bd., Directives Task Force Briefing Paper #03 (2005), available at
http://www.nwcg.gov/branches/ppm/fpc/archives/fire_policy/general/3_kinds_of_wil
dland_fire_BP3_1_19_05.pdf.





n92.  Coal. of Prescribed Fire Councils, Inc., 2012 National Prescribed Fire Use
Survey Report ii (2012), available at
https://docs.google.com/viewer?a=v&pid=sites&srcid=cHJlc2NyaWJlZGZpcmUubmV0fGNvY
WxpdGlvbi1vZi1wcmVzY3JpYmVkLWZpcmUtY291bmNpbHN8Z3g6Mzg2ZDQxODg5NmJjMzM3Yg.





n93.  Total Wildland Fires and Acres (1960-2012), supra note 16.





n94.  Prescribed Fires and Acres by Agency, National Interagency Fire Center,
http://www.nifc.gov/fireInfo/fireInfo_stats_prescribed.html (last visited Aug.
29, 2013).





n95.  See id. fig. 3.





n96.  Id. at 5 fig. 5.





n97.  Id. at 6 fig. 8.





n98.  Mark A. Finney et al., Stand-and Landscape-Level Effects of Prescribed
Burning on Two Arizona Wildfires, 35 Canadian J. Forest Res. 1714, 1714 (2005).





n99.  Paulo M. Fernandes & Herminio S. Botelho, A Review of Prescribed Burning
Effectiveness in Fire Hazard Reduction, 12 Int'l. J. Wildland Fire 117, 117
(2003); Richard Monastersky, Burning Questions, 138 Sci. News 264, 265 (1990)
(reporting that most forest researchers contend that crown fires did not occur
in the Sierran mixed-conifer forests until white settlers adopted a practice of
extinguishing the smaller periodic "caretaker" fires that burned close to the
ground, cleaning the forest floor and killing small understory firs and cedars).





n100.  See Monastersky, supra note 99, at 265.





n101.  See Alan A. Ager et al., A Comparison of Landscape Fuel Treatment
Strategies to Mitigate Wildland Fire Risk in the Urban Interface and Preserve
Old Forest Structure, 259 Forest Ecology & Mgmt. 1556, 1563 (2010). See also
Finney et al., supra note 98, at 1719; Scott L. Stephens & Jason J. Moghaddas,
Experimental Fuel Treatment Impacts on Forest Structure, Potential Fire
Behavior, and Predicted Tree Mortality in a California Mixed Conifer Forest, 215
Forest Ecology & Mgmt. 21, 26 (2005); Craig Loehle, Applying Landscape
Principles to Fire Hazard Reduction, 198 Forest Ecology & Mgmt. 261, 265 (2004);
Philip N. Omi & Erik J. Martinson, U.S. Forest Serv., PSW-GTR-193, Effectiveness
of Thinning and Prescribed Fire in Reducing Wildfire Severity 89 (2004); Jolie
Pollet & Philip N. Omi, Effect of Thinning and Prescribed Burning on Crown Fire
Severity in Ponderosa Pine Forests, 11 Int'l J. Wildland Fire 1, 1 (2002); Mark
A. Finney, Design of Regular Landscape Fuel Treatment Patterns for Modifying
Fire Growth and Behavior, 47 Forest Sci. 219, 220 (2001).





n102.  See Paulo M. Fernandes et al., Empirical Modelling of Surface Fire
Behaviour in Maritime Pine Stands, 18 Int'l J. Wildland Fire 698, 698-99 (2009);
P. Fernandes & H. Botelho, Analysis of the Prescribed Burning Practice in the
Pine Forest of Northwestern Portugal, 70 J. Envtl. Mgmt. 15, 19 (2004).





n103.  Bruce Finley, Colorado Fire Experts Defend Prescribed Burns,
Denverpost.com, Mar. 29, 2012, http://www.denverpost.com/environment/ci_20278071
(quoting Dr. Frederick "Skip" Smith, Department Head and Professor, Department
of Forest, Rangeland and Watershed Stewardship, Colorado State University).





n104.  See Or. Admin. R., 629-048-0020 (3) (2012) ("When areas do not experience
fire or other means of reducing forest fuels for extended periods, there is a
greater wildfire hazard and the likelihood increases that if unplanned ignitions
occur, through whatever means, that the resulting wildfire will burn at greater
intensity and be more difficult to suppress.").





n105.  Id. at 629-048-0020 (4) ("Wildfires often occur during periods of
atmospheric stability and thus air stagnation, trapping smoke close to the
ground where it is more likely to impact humans and less likely to be quickly
carried away by higher altitude transport winds.").





n106.  Wildland Fires and Air Pollution 528 (Andrzej Bytnerowicz et al. eds.,
2009) (discussing smoke prediction systems used to model the smoke impacts of a
prescribed burn prior to authorizing the burn).





n107.  Di Tian et al., Air Quality Impacts from Prescribed Forest Fires Under
Different Management Practices, 42 Envtl. Sci. & Tech. 2767, 2767 (2008).





n108.  Forest Soils Research: Theory, Reality and Its Role in Technology
Transfer 179 (Margaret R. Gale & Robert F. Powers eds., 2005).





n109.  James E. Lotan, Cone Serotiny - Fire Relationships in Lodgepole Pine, in
Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference Proceedings 14 267, 267 (1976), available
at
http://digitalcommons.usu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1010&context=barkbeetl
es.





n110.  Kenneth W. Outcold, Prescribed Burning for Understory Restoration, in The
Longleaf Pine Ecosystem: Ecology, Silviculture, and Restoration 326 (Shibu Jose
et al. eds., 2006).





n111.  See supra text accompanying note 5.





n112.  See supra note 64.





n113.  Id. (derived by manipulating "Sector Summaries - Criteria and Hazardous
Air Pollutants by 60 EIS Emission Sectors" on cited webpage by inputting
"National" under "National / State / County or Tribe," highlighting all regions
under "Geographic Aggregation," inputting "HAP-VOC" for "Pollutant," and all of
the industrial sources listed under "Sector").





n114.  Nat'l Wildfire Coordinating Grp., Wildland Fire Use: Implementation
Procedures Reference Guide 3 (2005) (referring to the use of unplanned wildfire
in this manner as "the application of the appropriate management response to
naturally-ignited wildland fires to accomplish specific resource management
objectives in predefined designated areas outlined in fire management plans").





n115.  Id. at 4. See also Nat'l Fire & Aviation Exec. Bd., supra note 91
(stating that the federal land agencies determined that there are three types of
wildland fires, "wildfire," "wildland fire use," and "prescribed fire").





n116.  U.S. Dep't of Interior et al., Modification of Federal Wildland Fire
Management Policy Guidance: Communication Plan 4 (2008) (referring to the
"current direction" as that where "only one management objective will be applied
to a wildland fire. Wildland fires will either be managed for resource benefits
or suppressed. A wildland fire cannot be managed for both objectives
concurrently"). See also Richard Lasko, Implementing Federal Wildland Fire
Policy - Responding to Change, 70 Fire Mgmt. Today 5, 6 (2010) (The 2003
wildland fire response policy defined the alternative strategies to manage
unplanned natural ignitions as "manage a fire to achieve resource benefits or
manage a fire to reduce losses and minimize suppression costs.") (emphasis
added).





n117.  U.S. Dep't of Interior et al., supra note 116, at 4 (stating that, under
the "current direction," "once a wildland fire has been managed for suppression
objectives, it may never be managed for resource benefit objectives.").





n118.  Nat'l Wildfire Coordinating Grp, Review and Update of the 1995 Federal
Wildland Fire Management Policy 9, 13 (2001), available at
http://www.nwcg.gov/branches/ppm/fpc/archives/fire_policy/docs/chp2.pdf (finding
the use of a variety of terms such as "wildland fire," "wildfire," "fire use,"
"wildland fire for resource benefit," and "prescribed fire" to have "caused
confusion and misunderstanding within the agencies and among cooperators,
partners, and the public").





n119.  U.S. Dep't of Interior et al., supra note 116, at 3 (finding that the
pre-2009 policy guidance "may have unnecessarily narrowed the interpretation of
the Federal Wildland Fire Policy and restricted the application of a full
spectrum of suppression and management strategies commensurate with risk, public
and firefighter safety, values to be protected, and land management
objectives").





n120.  U.S. Dep't of Agric. & U.S. Dep't of Interior, Guidance for
Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy 7 (2009), available at
http://www.nifc.gov/policies/policies_documents/GIFWFMP.pdf.





n121.  Id. See also Tom Harbour, Managing Wildfire for Resource Benefits, 70
Fire Mgmt. Today 4, 4 (2010).





n122.  U.S. Dep't of Agric. & U.S. Dep't of Interior, supra note 120, at 7.





n123.  See id. at 17.





n124.  See id. See also Tom Harbour, supra note 121, at 4.





n125.  U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, Wildland Fire Management: Lack of Clear
Goals or a Strategy Hinders Federal Agencies' Efforts to Contain the Costs of
Fighting Fires (2007) [hereinafter GAO 2007 Report]; U.S. Dep't of Agric.,
Office of Inspector Gen., W. Region, Audit Report: Forest Service: Large Fire
Suppression Costs 14 (2006).





n126.  U.S. Dep't of Agric., supra note 125, at 14.





n127.  See Don McKenzie, The Effects of Climatic Change and Wildland Fires on
Air Quality in National Parks and Wilderness Areas, 70 Fire Mgmt. Today 26, 27
(2010) (noting that the dispersal of wildfire smoke restricts land managers'
ability to manage fires for resource benefits).





n128.  Matthew Stepp, Fighting Climate Change with Nuclear Energy, The Christian
Science Monitor (June 18, 2013),
http://www.csmonitor.com/Environment/Energy-Voices/2013/0618/Fighting-climate-ch
ange-with-nuclear-energy.





n129.  Backgrounder on Radioactive Waste, U.S. Nuclear Reg. Commission (Apr.
2007), http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/fact-sheets/radwaste.html.





n130.  Amy Westervelt, Can Recycling Be Bad for the Environment?, Forbes (Apr.
25, 2012),
http://www.forbes.com/sites/amywestervelt/2012/04/25/can-recycling-be-bad-for-th
e-environment/.





n131.  Daniel A. Farber, Probabilities Behaving Badly: Complexity Theory and
Environmental Uncertainty, 37 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 145, 152-53 (2003).





n132.  See Quinn-Davidson & Varner, supra note 10, at 213.





n133.  See id.





n134.  Id.





n135.  David V. Sandberg et al., U.S. Forest Serv., PNW-GTR-450, National
Strategic Plan: Modeling and Data Systems for Wildland Fire and Air Quality 1
(1999), available at http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/pubs/pnw_gtr450.pdf.





n136.  Janice Peterson et al., Estimating Natural Emissions from Wildland and
Prescribed Fire 1-12 (June 16, 1998) (unpublished manuscript), available at
http://www.westar.org/Docs/Fire/emissions.PDF (projecting air pollution
emissions from the use of prescribed fire at levels equivalent to historic
frequency, to those needed to sustain desired ecosystem characteristics, as
determined by the scientific community and by land managers, and to reduce
damages from wildfires).





n137.  Wildfire and Forest Management: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Public
Lands & Envtl. Regulation of the H. Comm. on Natural Res., 113th Cong. (2013)
(statement of James Hubbard, Deputy Chief, State and Private Industry, U.S.
Forest Service).





n138.  U.S. Forest Serv., supra note 37, at 3.





n139.  U.S. Dep't of Interior & U.S. Dep't of Agric., A National Cohesive
Wildland Fire Management Strategy 32 tbl.1 (2009).





n140.  Id.





n141.  See Gorte, supra note 11, at 17-18 tbls.5 & 6.





n142.  Id. at 17 tbl.5.





n143.  Prescribed Fires and Acres by Agency, supra note 94.





n144.  See generally Quinn-Davidson & Varner, supra note 10.





n145.  David A. Cleaves et al., U.S. Forest Serv., PSW-GTR-173, Prescribed
Burning Costs: Trends and Influences in the National Forest System 277, 283
(1999), available at
http://www.fs.fed.us/psw/publications/documents/psw_gtr173/psw_gtr173_06_cleaves
.pdf.





n146.  Id.





n147.  Id. at 281.





n148.  Philip N. Omi, U.S. Forest Serv., PSW-GTR-208, Evaluating Trade-offs
Between Wildfires and Fuel Treatments, Proceedings of the Second International
Symposium on Fire Economics, Planning, and Policy: A Global View 485, 490
(2004), available at
http://www.fs.fed.us/psw/publications/documents/psw_gtr208en/psw_gtr208en_485-49
4_omi.pdf ("Estimates vary from a low of $ 41.69/ha for the Fish and Wildlife
Service in 1998 to a high of $ 200.76/ha for the National Park Service in 1998,
with an average $ 96/ha across all agencies.").





n149.  See id. at 489-90 (While prescribed burning cost at most $ 200 per
hectare, wildfire suppression is estimated at $ 375 to $ 571 per hectare.).





n150.  See Darryl Fears, U.S. Runs Out of Funds to Battle Wildfires, Wash. Post
(Oct. 7, 2012),
http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/us-runs-out-of-funds-to-battle-wildfires/
2012/10/07/d632df5c-0c0c-11e2-bd1a-b868e65d57eb_story.html (noting that in 2012,
the Forest Service ran out of money allocated to wildfire suppression and was
thereby forced to raid its fire prevention budgets for funds).





n151.  Kurt Menning, Practical and Institutional Constraints on Adopting
Wide-Scale Prescribed Burning: Lessons from the Mountains of California, in
Living on the Edge: Economic, Institutional and Management Perspectives on
Wildfire Hazard in the Urban Interface (Advances in the Economics of
Environmental Resources, Volume 6) 73, 86 (2007).





n152.  Id.





n153.  Id. See also Jennifer Weeks, Managing Wildfires, 22 CQ Researcher 941,
955 (2012) (Because the Forest Service was likely going to overspend its $ 948
million fire suppression budget for fiscal 2012, it was making plans to transfer
$ 400 million from other agency accounts to cover the shortfall.).





n154.  See Yoder, Engle & Fuhlendorf, supra note 12, at 361 ("Legal liability as
a result of property damage due to escaped fires remains an important concern
for prescribed burning on private and public land.").





n155.  Leslie Jorgensen, Lower North Fork Fire Victims Want Answers, Colo.
Observer (Aug. 21, 2012),
http://thecoloradoobserver.com/2012/08/lower-north-fork-fire-victims-want-answer
s/. The incident prompted a temporary ban on all prescribed burning in Colorado
pending a formal review of the incident, which appears to have been caused by
unexpected high wind conditions and a corresponding lack of sufficient
monitoring of the burn by state officials. Colo. State Univ., Lower North Fork
Prescribed Fire: Prescribed Fire Review 1-2 (2012), available at
http://dnr.state.co.us/SiteCollectionDocuments/Review.pdf.





n156.  See Palmer, supra note 12, at 279.





n157.  See Dale Wade & Hugh Mobley, USFS Southern Research Station, Managing
Smoke at the Wildland-Urban Interface 1 (2007).





n158.  See David M. Theobald & William H. Romme, Expansion of the Wildland-Urban
Interface, 83 Landscape & Urb. Plan. 340, 348 (2007).





n159.  Id.





n160.  See Tania Schoennagel et al., Implementation of National Fire Plan
Treatments Near the Wildland-Urban Interface in the Western United States, 106
Proc. Nat'l. Acad. Sci. 10,706, 10,706 (2009).





n161.  See Quinn-Davidson & Varner, supra note 10, at 214 tbl.3 (In survey,
district-level fire managers across northern California ranked air pollution
regulations second out of thirteen impediments to prescribed burning, just
behind the presence of a narrow burn window.); Coal. of Prescribed Fire
Councils, Inc., supra note 92, at 16-19 (summarizing a national survey of state
forestry agency personnel, ranking air quality/smoke management the third most
major impediment limited prescribed fire use behind concerns over capacity,
ranked number one, and weather concerns, ranked number two). See also U.S.
Forest Serv., supra note 37, at 2 ("Increased tightening of national air quality
standards, combined with more restrictive state permit requirements, have made
prescribed fire increasingly difficult to implement in Colorado.").





n162.  Under the Clean Air Act, regions of each state are classified as in
attainment, nonattainment, or unclassifiable with respect to compliance with the
NAAQS. 42 U.S.C. § 7407 (2012).





n163.  See id. § 7409 (requiring EPA establish NAAQS); 40 C.F.R. § 50 (2013)
(promulgated standards).





n164.  See U.S. EPA, APTI Course 452: Principles and Practices of Air Pollution
Control 5-4-5-5 (2003), available at
http://www.4cleanair.org/apti/452combined.pdf.





n165.  See id.





n166.  See 42 U.S.C. § 7502.





n167.  See id. The regulatory requirements applicable to nonattainment areas are
much more onerous than those applicable to areas in attainment. Within a
nonattainment area, the state must submit a plan demonstrating that it will
attain the NAAQS by the statutory deadline, making reasonable further progress
each year. Id. Major sources of nonattainment pollutants are subject to
stringent technology standards. Id. Finally, any federal approval of a major
source of pollutants must demonstrate "conformity" to the state implementation
plan. Id.





n168.  See id.§§7470-92 (Prevention of Significant Deterioration provisions of
Clean Air Act).





n169.  See id. § 7475. For instance, a major new or modified source of the
attainment pollutant must install "best available control technology" to control
the emissions of any pollutant the source emits that is regulated under the
Clean Air Act. See id.





n170.  This terminology derives from the exceptional events provision added to
the Clean Air Act by Congress in amendments enacted in 2005: Section 319 of the
Clean Air Act, as amended by section 6013 of the Safe Accountable Flexible
Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-LU) of 2005.
See id. § 7619.





n171.  See Treatment of Data Influenced by Exceptional Events, 72 Fed. Reg.
13,560, 13,562 (Mar. 22, 2007) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 50, 51)
(describing history of EPA's exclusion policies).





n172.  See 42 U.S.C. § 7619.





n173.  See id.





n174.  See id. § 7619(b).





n175.  See 72 Fed. Reg. at 13,568. The process a state must follow to obtain a
data exclusion by EPA is a several-stage process. See id. at 13,571. Following
an exceptional event, a state requests that EPA "flag" the air quality
measurements that it believes were affected by the event. See id. This flagging
is a placeholder; it has no regulatory significance. See id. At its discretion,
the state may follow up the request to flag the data with a formal request to
exclude the data. See id. This request is usually supported by extensive
documentation. See id. Using the criteria set forth in the rule, EPA makes a
determination to either approve or disapprove the request. See id.





n176.  See 40 C.F.R. § 50.1 (2013).





n177.  See 72 Fed. Reg. at 13,564-67.





n178.  See id. at 13,567-68.





n179.  See id. at 13,570.





n180.  See id.





n181.  See id. at 13,571.





n182.  See id. at 13,568.





n183.  See Memorandum on Areas Affected by PM-10 Natural Events from Mary D.
Nichols, Assistant Adm'r, Office of Air & Radiation, to U.S. Envtl. Prot. Agency
Reg'l Admins. 7-8 (May 30, 1996).





n184.  See id.





n185.  See id.





n186.  See 72 Fed. Reg. at 13575-76.





n187.  See 42 U.S.C. § 7619(b) (2006).





n188.  72 Fed. Reg. at 13,566.





n189.  Id. ("We believe that both wildfires and wildland fire use fires fall
within the meaning of "natural events' as that term is used in section 319 ...
.").





n190.  Id.





n191.  Id. One oft-stated purpose of prescribed fire is to apply fire to an
ecosystem at a regular interval that mimics the natural fire cycle. See, e.g.,
Prescribed Burning, Nat'l Park Service,
http://www.nps.gov/natr/parkmgmt/prescribed-burning.htm (last updated Aug. 18,
2013) ("Prescribed fires attempt to replicate and reintroduce this [natural
fire] cycle and restore forest communities to historical conditions.").

   Yet in order to qualify as an exceptional event, states must demonstrate that
prescribed fire influencing the data is "unlikely to recur at a particular
location." 72 Fed. Reg. at 13,566. Similarly, the event must be "not reasonably
controllable or preventable," which the agency has reasoned could apply to
prescribed fire where it is demonstrated that the buildup of forest fuels risks
the outbreak of a catastrophic fire. Id. Even in this latter case, the state
must demonstrate the need for prescribed fire, as opposed to an alternative
method, such as mechanical treatments, to reduce the wildfire risk. Id.





n192.  See infra text accompanying notes 287-88.





n193.  See Design Values, EPA, http://www.epa.gov/airtrends/values.html (last
updated Aug. 9, 2013).





n194.  The findings and conclusions presented in the ensuing paragraphs were
made possible by the data analysis performed by Daniel Duerr, Department of
Sociology, University of Arizona. In performing this analysis, we received
invaluable assistance from Mark Evangelista, U.S. EPA.





n195.  A design value is a statistical value that reliably captures the highest
pollution level observed in a given air quality control region over a given span
of time. Design values are used in determining a region's compliance with the
NAAQS. See Air and Radiation, Air Trends, Design Values, EPA,
http://www.epa.gov/airtrends/values.html (last updated Aug. 9, 2013).





n196.  For example, in 2007, Montana excluded 5005 hourly observations, Alabama
excluded 1844, South Carolina excluded thirty-seven, and Wyoming excluded four.
See Design Values, supra note 193.





n197.  National Primary and Secondary Ambient Air Quality Standards, 40 C.F.R.
pt. 50 (2013).





n198.  To give a couple of examples drawn from the Air Trends data, the
threshold levels for a PM[in'2.5'] NAAQS violation are fifteen ug/m3 on an
averaged annual basis, and thirty-five ug/m3 averaged on a daily basis.
Immediately prior to September 5, 2007, Butte, California was in violation of
the daily PM[in'2.5'] NAAQS, and close to violating the annual measurement as
well with a yearly value of 12.4 ug/m3. It is possible that wildfire smoke would
have pushed Butte over the line into a violation of the yearly value as well,
had a reading of 116 ug/m3 on that September 7 not been excluded as a wildfire
-influenced exceptional event reading. Another example is the exclusion of a
daily PM[in'2.5 ']reading of 116 ug/m3 in Bibb, Georgia on May 12, 2007. At the
time, Bibb fell within target values, but again they were close to the line. On
the day the 116 reading was excluded, Bibb's yearly value was 13.5 ug/m3
(slightly below the NAAQS violation threshold of fifteen ug/m3) and their daily
value was twenty-eight (below the NAAQS of thirty-five ug/m3, but not by much).
See Design Values, supra note 193.





n199.  42 U.S.C. § 7491 (2006). The parks included are those designated by the
Act as mandatory Class I Federal Areas and consist of national parks exceeding
6000 acres, wilderness areas and national memorial parks exceeding 5000 acres,
and all international parks that were in existence on August 7, 1977. 42 U.S.C.
§ 7472(a). EPA, in consultation with the Department of Interior, promulgated a
list of 156 areas where visibility is identified as an important value.
Identification of Mandatory Class I Federal Areas Where Visibility Is an
Important Value, 44 Fed. Reg. 69,122, 69,122 (Nov. 30, 1979) (codified at 40
C.F.R. pt. 81).





n200.  List of 156 Mandatory Class I Federal Areas, EPA,
http://www.epa.gov/visibility/class1.html (last updated May 31, 2012).





n201.  Regional Haze Regulations, 64 Fed. Reg. 35,714, 35,715 (Jul. 1, 1999)
(codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 51).





n202.  Id. (noting that, when legislating to address regional haze in the 1977
Clean Air Act Amendments, Congress specifically recognized that the "visibility
problem is caused primarily by emission into the atmosphere of SO<2>, oxides of
nitrogen, and particulate matter, especially fine particulate matter, from
inadequately controlled sources") (alteration in original).





n203.  Id. at 35,724-25.





n204.  Sara Elizabeth Jensen, Policy Tools for Wildland Fire Management:
Principles, Incentives, and Conflicts, 46 Nat. Resources J. 959, 997 (2006); see
also W. Regional Air Partnership, http://www.wrapair2.org (last visited Aug. 20,
2013).





n205.  42 U.S.C. § 7491(b)(2)(A) (requiring state implementation plans include
best available retrofit technology for certain older sources that impair
visibility in national parks and wilderness areas); 40 C.F.R. § 51.308(e) (EPA
BART-implementing regulations).





n206.  64 Fed. Reg. at 35,740-41; Patricia Brewer & Tom Moore, Source
Contributions to Visibility Impairment in the Southeastern and Western United
States, 59 J. Air & Waste Mgmt. Ass'n. 1070, 1074 (2009).





n207.  See, e.g., Liane Hansen & Laura Krantz, Remembering the 1988 Yellowstone
Fires, Nat'l Pub. Radio (Aug. 29, 2008, 5:17 PM),
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=94126845.





n208.  See Jensen, supra note 204, at 996.





n209.  Brewer & Moore, supra note 206, at 1073.





n210.  64 Fed. Reg. at 35,737.





n211.  Natural vs Anthropogenic Task Team, W. Reg'l Air P'ship, Guidance for
Categorizing Natural vs Anthropogenic Fire Emissions 8 (2005), available at
http://www.wrapair.org/forums/fejf/documents/nbtt/WRAPFEJFNAGuidance.pdf.





n212.  Id. at 6.





n213.  Id.





n214.  See id.





n215.  Brewer & Moore, supra note 206, at 1075.





n216.  See generally Natural vs Anthropogenic Task Team, supra note 211.





n217.  Id. at 4.





n218.  Id.





n219.  Id. (discussing distinction under section 2.4).





n220.  See Nat'l Wildfire Coordinating Grp., supra note 114, at 75.





n221.  In California, for instance, prescribed burning is governed by Title XVII
of the California Administrative Code, which reads, in part, "No person shall
knowingly set or allow agricultural or prescribed burning unless he or she has a
valid permit from a district or designated agency. No burning shall be conducted
pursuant to such permit without specific district approval." Further, California
has codified procedures for determining whether any given day will be an
allowable burn day, a no-burn day, or a "marginal burn-day" reliant upon present
meteorological conditions. Cal. Code Regs. tit.17, §§80110, 80120 (2013). Thus,
a number of factors, from the bureaucratic (getting permits approved) to the
natural (appropriate weather being present), must come together for any
prescribed burn to occur, ensuring that prescribed burns are heavily regulated.





n222.  See Rebecca Battye et al., Features of Prescribed Fire and Smoke
Management Rules for Western and Southern States 1 (U.S. Envtl. Prot. Agency
Office of Air Quality Planning & Standards, Air Quality Strategies & Standards
Div., Working Paper No. 112, 1999), available at
http://www.wrapair.org/forums/fejf/documents/woodard.pdf (summarizing the
features of the smoke management plans and programs of the nineteen states where
fire is used most often to achieve resource benefits).





n223.  Nat'l Wildfire Coordinating Grp., supra note 114, at 75.





n224.  This criterion incorporates virtually all prescribed burn proposals.
State of Wash. Dep't of Natural Res., Smoke Management Plan 7-8 (1998),
available at http://www.dnr.wa.gov/Publications/rp_burn_smptoc.pdf.





n225.  Id.





n226.  See Daily Smoke Management Approvals for Large Burn Silvicultural
Prescribed Fires, Wash. Dep't of Nat. Resources,
http://fortress.wa.gov/dnr/burnrequests/ (last visited Aug. 20, 2013) (providing
interactive information on location of burn requests, acreage and tons of
pollutants estimated from burn activity and whether the request was approved or
denied).





n227.  See generally Battye et al., supra note 222.





n228.  Nat'l Wildfire Coordinating Grp., supra note 114, at 41.





n229.  Id.





n230.  Id. A review of this summary of state smoke managing plans reveals that
Arizona, Alaska, Oregon, and Washington use complaints from the public as a
basis for a finding that prescribed fire constitutes a public nuisance. Other
states indicate prescribed burning can constitute a public nuisance, but are
silent as to the conditions under which this could occur.





n231.  Wash. Admin. Code § 33224205 (West 2013).





n232.  Id.





n233.  Battye et al., supra note 222. States that use public complaints as the
basis for an investigation and response by state authorities as to whether the
smoke endangers public health or welfare or causes unacceptable odors are:
Colorado, Colo. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 25-7-106(7) (West 2013) ("After an
investigation initiated either independently by the division or upon the request
of an affected member of the public ... the division shall ... issue a written
cease-and-desist order; or ... apply to any district court of this state ... for
a temporary restraining order ... or ... both."); Florida (prompting a state
agency investigation; while certified burners cannot be shut down for causing a
nuisance, they can be shut down for threats to health or safety), Battye et al.,
supra note 222, at 41; Montana (prohibiting any person from causing or allowing
any emissions of gases, vapors or odors beyond his property line in such a
manner as to create a public nuisance), Battye et al., supra note 222, at 81
(citing Mont. Admin. R. 17.8.315 (repealed 2001)); Oregon (protecting other
areas sensitive to smoke), Battye et al., supra note 222, at 108 (citing Or.
Admin. R. 629043043(2)(q) (2007)); Texas ("TNRCC has a welfare-based nuisance
rule which precludes any person from discharging an air contaminant in such
concentration and of such duration as to interfere with the normal use and
enjoyment of ones property. Nuisance conditions are established by the
investigator and the investigator must document that the observed conditions
were of sufficient concentration and duration as to constitute a nuisance
condition."), Battye et al., supra note 222, at 128; Washington ("A nuisance
exists when emissions from any open fire cause physical discomfort or health
problems to people residing in the vicinity of the burning, or physical damage
to property."), Battye et al., supra note 222, at 148.





n234.  U.S. Forest Serv., supra note 37, at 28.





n235.  Nat'l Wildfire Coordination Grp., supra note 114, at 21-23.





n236.  See John P. Dwyer, The Practice of Federalism Under the Clean Air Act, 54
Md. L. Rev. 1183, 1193 (1995).





n237.  EPA, Air Quality Policy on Wildland and Prescribed Fire 2, 17-18 (1998),
available at www.epa.gov/ttn/oarpg/t1/memoranda/firefnl.pdf.2 (discussing how
state Smoke Management Plans, which contain procedures and regulations governing
the management of wildland fires permitted to burn for resource benefits as well
as prescribed burns, are the primary vehicle used by states to prevent the
deterioration of air quality and NAAQS violations); Battye et al., supra note
222, at 1 (same).





n238.  U.S. Dep't of Agric. & U.S. Dep't of Interior, supra note 120, at 16;
EPA, supra note 237 at 12.





n239.  See supra text accompanying notes 197202.





n240.  Of course, states must still perform the arduous task of officially
requesting EPA's exclusion of the data, which requires the states to make the
oftentimes difficult demonstration that given exceedances were caused by the
wildfire. Claiming that preparation of an official exclusion request for a
single high wind event can take 400 staff hours to prepare, Congressman Jeff
Flake has introduced H.R. 5381, Common Sense Legislative Exceptional Events
Reforms Act of 2012, which requires EPA to act upon requests within a ninety-day
time period, requires the agency to promulgate new criteria for exclusions, and
subjects EPA's decisions to judicial review. To Amend the Clean Air Act with
Respect to Exceptional Event Demonstrations, and for Other Purposes: Hearing on
H.R. 5381 Before the H. Comm. on Energy and Commerce, 112th Cong. 1-5 (2012)
(statements of Sen. Jeff Flake).





n241.  See Treatment of Data Influenced by Exceptional Events, 72 Fed. Reg.
13,560, 13,566 (Mar. 22, 2007) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 50 & 51).





n242.  Id.





n243.  Natural vs Anthropogenic Task Team, supra note 211, at 6.





n244.  See id.





n245.  Id.





n246.  See supra text accompanying notes 98-110.





n247.  See Union Elec. Co. v. EPA, 427 U.S. 246, 25657 (1976) ("The [Clean Air]
Amendments place the primary responsibility for formulating pollution control
strategies on the States, but nonetheless subject the States to strict minimum
compliance requirements.").





n248.  See id.





n249.  See supra text accompanying notes 209-210.





n250.  For example, in Arizona and Colorado, it is the state environmental
department that oversees prescribed burning permits. See Battye et al., supra
note 222, at 10, 27.





n251.  The applicable land manager for federal public lands is the head of the
agency owning or controlling the land, such as the Department of Agriculture for
U.S. Forest Service lands and the Department of Interior for National Park
Service lands.





n252.  Thus in the Gunnison National Forest, prescribed burning will be overseen
by Forest Service officials in the Department of Agriculture while the air
quality impacts of the prescribed burning will be authorized and monitored by
the Colorado Air Pollution Control Division. See Battye et al., supra note 222,
at 27.





n253.  E-mail from Janice Peterson, Acting Region 6 Smoke Program Manager, U.S.
Forest Serv., to author (Mar. 8, 2012) (on file with author).





n254.  Id.





n255.  Daily Smoke Management Approvals for Large Burn Silvicultural Prescribed
Fires, supra note 226 (demonstrating that on occasional days none of the
proposed and approved burning actually took place).





n256.  See, e.g., U.S. Forest Serv., supra note 37, at 2 ("The Colorado Smoke
Management Program (SMP) permit conditions for these areas are often so
restrictive that it is neither practical nor cost-effective to implement
prescribed fire treatments in the very areas where they are needed most."). In
this document, the Forest Service requests that the Colorado Air Quality Control
Commission meet the intent of a Colorado statute requiring that the Commission
evaluate its existing prescribed fire permit program so as to support and
increase where prescribed burning by "assessing the current SMP and its
implementation methods to determine if smoke permit conditions are objective,
verifiable, and tied directly to the NAAQS." Id.





n257.  Id. at 26 ("[The Colorado Air Pollution Control Division] has developed a
very conservative permit system that ensures the NAAQS will not be exceeded.
However, this conservative approach often leaves the significant capacity for
additional prescribed burning underutilized."); see also id. at 27 ("Permit
conditions have become a system of layered filters which each prescribed burn
project must sift through in order to be approved by the APCD. Individual layers
may not appear overly restrictive; however, when combined, these layers create a
significant burden to successfully implementing a prescribed fire project.");
id. at 23 (finding that the forty-acre-per-day limit upon prescribed burning
means that "many [prescribed burning] projects are never planned and smoke
permits are never requested").





n258.  See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 821D (1977) ("A private nuisance is a
nontrespassory invasion of another's interest in the private use and enjoyment
of land.").





n259.  Nat'l Wildfire Coordinating Grp., supra note 114, at 47.





n260.  See infra text accompanying notes 267268.





n261.  See Melissa Sanchez, Where There's Smoke There's Ire, Yakima
Herald-Republic, Jan. 5, 2010 (describing two instances where a state
environmental agency initiated enforcement actions against the U.S. Forest
Service for smoke intrusions from prescribed burning).





n262.  Notice of Violation No. 6134, Yakima Clean Air Agency, to Randall D.
Shepard, U.S. Forest Serv. (Dec. 10, 2009) (on file with author).





n263.  Palmer, supra note 12, at 279.





n264.  See, e.g., Barak D. Richman & Christopher Boerner, A Transaction Cost
Economizing Approach to Regulation: Understanding the NIMBY Problem and
Improving Regulatory Responses, 23 Yale J. on Reg. 29, 37 (2006) ("A NIMBY is
defined as a socially desirable land use that broadly distributes benefits, yet
is difficult or impossible to implement because of local opposition.").





n265.  See Yongqiang Liu et al., Smoke Plume Height Measurement of Prescribed
Burns in the South-Eastern United States, 22 Int'l J. Wildland Fire 130, 130
(2012) ("Smoke plume heights range from hundreds of metres for prescribed fires
to thousands of metres for wildfires.").





n266.  See, e.g., Thomas J. Miceli, Property, in The Elgar Companion to Law and
Economics 246, 250 (Jurgen G. Backhaus ed., 2d ed. 2005) ("The principal common
law remedies for externalities are ... the laws of trespass and nuisance.").





n267.  See, e.g., Kristin L. Shive et al., Pre-Wildfire Management Treatments
Interact with Fire Severity to Have Lasting Effects on Post-Wildfire Vegetation
Response, 297 Forest Ecology & Mgmt. 75, 78 (2013) (finding persistent impacts
upon post-vegetation impacts from prior wildfires, especially high-severity
wildfires).





n268.  See generally Daniel A. Farber, From Here to Eternity: Environmental Law
and Future Generations, 2003 U. Ill. L. Rev. 289 (2003).





n269.  Cf. Agee & Skinner, supra note 79, at 94 ("The probabilities of wildfire
in space and time are not well defined: wildfire may not occur here this year,
or there next year, but at some scale the spatial loss per time period can be
defined. It may be quite difficult to point to a particular stand and define its
probability of burning in some given future period, but the probability that
substantial areas of dry forest will continue to be burned by severe wildfire is
known, and it is high.").





n270.  See Peterson et al., supra note 136, at 1 ("Aggressive fire suppression
(including the use of prescribed fires to reduce fire hazard) and land use
changes have made the current pattern of wildland fires anything but natural.").





n271.  Peter Z. Fule et al., Determining Reference Conditions for Ecosystem
Management of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests, 7 Ecological Applications
895, 895 (1997).





n272.  Stephen A. Fitzgerald, U.S. Forest Serv., PSW-GTR-198, Fire Ecology of
Ponderosa Pine and the Rebuilding of Fire-Resilient Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems
197, 209-10 (2005) (finding that, as compared to the start of Euro-American
settlement 140 years ago, stand densities in ponderosa pine ecosystems have
increased from a range of 49-124 trees ha (20-50 trees acre) to a range of
1235-2470 trees ha (500 to 1000 stems acre)).





n273.  Sarah E. Greene & Angela Evenden, U.S. Forest Serv., The Role of Fire in
Research Natural Areas in the Northern Rockies and Pacific Northwest 32,
available at http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_int/int_gtr341/int_gtr341_032_033.pdf.





n274.  Fitzgerald, supra note 272, at 210.





n275.  U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, GAO/RCED-99-65, Western National
Forests: A Cohesive Strategy Is Needed to Address Catastrophic Wildland Fire
Threats 3 (1999), available at http://www.gao.gov/assets/160/156559.pdf.





n276.  U.S. Dep't of Agric. & U.S. Dep't of Interior, supra note 120, at 17.





n277.  Lightning Fires (by Geographic Area), Nat'l Interagency Fire Ctr.,
http://www.nifc.gov/fireInfo/fireInfo_stats_lightng.html (last visited Aug. 20,
2013).





n278.  See id.





n279.  See id.





n280.  Nat'l Ass'n of State Foresters, supra note 15, at 6.





n281.  See Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A
Legacy for Users, Pub. L. No. 109-59, § 6013(b), 119 Stat. 1144 (2005),
available at www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-109publ59/pdf/PLAW-109publ59.pdf.





n282.  Id. at § 6013(b)(3)(iv).





n283.  Admittedly, studies demonstrate that this purpose may fail. Managed fire
regimes have not been entirely successful in returning ecosystems to their
pre-fire-suppression state. Studies show that artificial fire regimes lag behind
the natural fire regimes in terms of the amount of fire. See James K. Brown et
al., Comparing the Prescribed Natural Fire Program with Presettlement Fires in
the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness, 4 Int'l. J. Wildland Fire, 157, 165 (1994)
("Presettlement stand replacement fire was greater than during the recent period
for all fire regime types by nearly 1.7 times."). Also, even intensive programs
of annual prescribed burning can fail to restore an ecosystem to the types and
diversity of species that existed prior to the time that fires were actively
suppressed. See Alan S. White, The Effects of Thirteen Years of Annual
Prescribed Burning on a Quercus Ellipsoidalis Community in Minnesota, 64 Ecology
1081, 1081 (1983). Part of the reason for this is that differences in the
intensity and occurrence of fire from that which would occur naturally alters
the native plant regime. See Matthew L. Brooks et al., Effects of Invasive Alien
Plants on Fire Regimes, 54 BioScience 677, 677 (2004). This lack of success,
however, does not undermine the overall benefits that result from prescribed and
wildland fire use fire in bringing ecosystems closer to their status under an
undisturbed fire regime.





n284.  Prescribed Fires, Daniel Boone Nat'l Forest, U.S. Forest Serv.,
http://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/dbnf/home/?cid=fsbdev3_032591 (last visited Sept.
1, 2013); see also Prescribed Burn Terminology, Bureau of Land Mgmt.,
http://www.blm.gov/or/resources/fire/prescribedburns/burn_terminology.php (last
visited Sept. 1, 2013) (describing prescribed burning as a vegetative management
tool "to maintain fire dependent ecosystems and restore those outside their
natural balance"); Kevin E. Shaffer, Fire and At-Risk Species, in Fire in
California Ecosystems 520, 530 (Neil G. Sugihara et al. eds., 2006)
("Fundamentally, use of fire restores fire back to natural communities; at-risk
species have existed in fire-adapted ecosystems, and the long-term viability of
these species is tied to ecological processes such as the fire cycle.").





n285.  See Jonathan C.B. Nesmith et al., A Comparison of Effects from Prescribed
Fires and Wildfires Managed for Resource Objectives in Sequoia and Kings Canyon
National Parks, 261 Forest Ecology & Mgmt. 1275, 1281 (2011) (finding that the
similarity in fire affects prescribed fires and managed wildfires indicates that
prescribed fires appear to be creating post-fire conditions that approximate
natural fires).





n286.  See supra text accompanying note 193.





n287.  See supra text accompanying note 196.





n288.  The regulatory requirements applicable to a nonattainment area are much
more onerous than those applicable to an area in attainment. Within a
nonattainment area, the state must submit a plan demonstrating that it will
attain the NAAQS by the statutory deadline, making reasonable further progress
each year. See 42 U.S.C. § 7502 (2006). Major sources of nonattainment
pollutants are subject to stringent technology standards. Id.





n289.  Under the Clean Air Act, a federal agency proposing any action in a
nonattainment area must carry out an analysis prior to performing the action
that the action conforms to the state implementation plan. 42 U.S.C. § 7506.
Under EPA's general conformity rule, conformity requires that the federal
activity not interfere with the state's ability to attain and maintain
compliance with national ambient air quality standards and that it not cause or
contribute to a new violation of these standards. Determining Conformity of
General Federal Actions to State or Federal Implementation Plans, 63 Fed. Reg.
63,213, 63,214 (Nov. 30, 1993) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 6, 51, 93).





n290.  See Nat'l Coal. of Prescribed Fire Councils, Guide to Smoke Management 1
(2007), available at
http://www.garxfire.com/pdf%20files/The_National_Coalition_of_Prescribed_Fire_Co
uncils_Guide_to_Smoke_Management.pdf.





n291.  See supra text accompanying notes 167169.





n292.  Battye et al., supra note 222, at 1011, 27, 51, 75, 91, 139.





n293.  Id. at 36, 43, 66, 83, 110.





n294.  See U.S. Forest Serv., supra note 37, at 31 (claiming that Florida's
success in performing vastly greater number of acres of prescribed burning than
Colorado is attributable to the fact that Florida's Smoke Management Plan is
managed by the state Division of Forestry).





n295.  An example is the Georgia Prescribed Fire Council, which is made up of
sixteen federal, state, and county representatives together with private
industry representatives. The council provides input to smoke management and air
quality issues on the Oconee National Forest and across the state generally and
specifically to encourage the use of a promote the public understanding of the
use of prescribed fire. See Prescribed Burning Chattahoochee-Oconee National
Forests, Georgia, U.S. Forest Serv.,
http://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/conf/landmanagement/planning/?cid=fsm9_029220
(last visited Aug. 20, 2013).





n296.  Coal. of Prescribed Fire Councils, Inc., supra note 92, at 15 fig. 18.





n297.  Id.





n298.  Id.





n299.  See Christine Kenneally, The Inferno, The New Yorker, Oct. 2009, at 46.


                              580 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                             June 29, 2017 Thursday
                                  Main Edition

As wildfires flare up in West, lawmakers fight over forest policy

BYLINE: From wire reports

SECTION: A; Pg. 002

LENGTH: 405 words


WASHINGTON - With wildfire season raging in Western states, Congress is
embroiled in a battle over how best to fight the fires.

Many Republicans want to help prevent and fight wildfires by giving the agencies
that manage the federal forests more money and greater ability to thin out the
forests. Most Democrats, as well as environmental groups, say the bill would
lead to more logging without first considering potential damage to the forests.

At the moment, Utah, California and Arizona are dealing with more than 20 fires.
A wildfire burning in communities around Prescott, Arizona, has burned 32 square
miles and forced thousands of evacuations. In Utah, firefighters Wednesday
tried to slow a stubborn wildfire that has burned 13 homes and forced the
evacuation of 1,500 people from a ski resort town.

Washington, Idaho, California, Alaska and Oregon have all endured multiple
"megafires" - those that burn more than 100,000 acres - in the past decade,
according to data from the National Interagency Fire Center in Boise, which
coordinates wildfire response around the country.

These massive fires also consume a huge part of the federal Forest Service
budget. The agency has asked Congress for help in addressing the problem of
wildfire funding.

That's why lawmakers are considering the "Resilient Federal Forests Act of
2017." It would give the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management access
to funds to fight fires from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which
coordinates responses to disasters like hurricanes, if their budgets for
fighting wildfires run out.

Under the current system, the Forest Service often has to take money from the
budgets of other programs to pay for wildfire costs, a practice known as "fire
borrowing."

But making what looks like a simple  maneuver is getting complicated.

The bill cleared its first hurdle, the House Natural Resources committee, this
week on a 23-12 party-line vote. The full House is expected to vote next month.

But while the bill has drawn support from two Minnesota Democrats, none of the
Democrats on the committee voted for the bill at its hearing Tuesday due to
concern that the bill would allow logging without proper environmental review.

The bill would expedite the review process for certain forest management
activities such as logging, controlled burns or salvaging wood.

The following fields overflowed: KEYWORD = WILDFIRES:WA - national (750 words)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                              581 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                              June 21, 2013 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Crews answer Alaska's call; Province lends forest firefighters, planes to state
at 'extreme' risk

BYLINE: Jana G. Pruden, Edmonton Journal

SECTION: CITY & REGION; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 215 words


With a soggy stretch of weather reducing fire activity around Alberta, the
province is sending four firefighting planes and crews to help fight wildfires
in Alaska.

Wildfire information officer Geoffrey Driscoll said Thursday the province has
gone two full days without a new wildfire, which is a rare occurrence around
wildfire season. Four fires are burning across the province, but all are under
control and are being monitored until they are completely out, Driscoll said.

With the wildfire equipment not in use, he said the province has been able to
grant a request for help from emergency officials in Alaska, where hot, dry
weather has sparked a series of wildfires and the risk in many areas of the
state is classified as "extreme."

Driscoll said the province has mutual aid agreements with many other
jurisdictions, and is currently in a position to help.

The province is sending three CL-215T air tankers, commonly known as "ducks," as
well as a "bird dog" plane that helps determine the tankers' approach. A group
of pilots, engineers and one government wildfire expert will also make the trip.

Driscoll said the wildfire risk in Alberta remains low to moderate. But if that
changes, the planes can "come back at a moment's notice."
jpruden@edmontonjournal. com twitter.com/@jana_pruden

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Government Of Alberta; Alberta is sending four airplanes to help
Alaska, which has been hit by a series of wildfires amid hot, dry weather.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 Edmonton Journal, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              582 of 987 DOCUMENTS

                    The Sunday Telegraph (Sydney, Australia)

                              July 4, 1999, Sunday

Rats extinguish Wildfires

BYLINE: STEVE O'SHEA

SECTION: SPORT; Pg. 137

LENGTH: 228 words


NEWCASTLE Wildfires were trounced by Warringah in their first game at their new
home ground in Newcastle yesterday.

The Wildfires' move from Marathon Stadium to St John Oval, Charlestown has not
produced any change of fortune on the field.

Warringah dominated the game to thrash the Wildfires 62-26.

Warringah put first points on the board when forward Willie Longi crossed the
Wildfires' try line after just two minutes.

Evan Jones converted for a 7-0 lead.

At the seventh minute fullback Andrew Apps scored and Jones converted for a 14-0
lead.

Wildfires replied three minutes later when loose forward Chris Carswell crossed
and Brad Dilley converted.

There was a quick response from Warringah with a try by Greg Donaghey converted
by Jones for a 21-7 lead.

The visitors handled the heavy ground much better than the Wildfires with the
forwards dominating the lineouts and the backs handling well.

A converted try to Warringah's Tuiloa and a try on halftime to Wildfires' Doug
North saw the visitors leading 28-14 at the break.

A try to Dilley early in the second half gave the Wildfires some hope of getting
back into the game but Warringah replied with tries to Meehan, Jones, Pilcher
and Donaghey.

Wildfires forward Api Apelu crossed for the team's fourth try for a final
scoreline of 62-26.

Warringah won the reserve grade 30-5.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: STE

                   Copyright 1999 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              583 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Daily Camera (Boulder, Colorado)

                           October 10, 2013 Thursday

Boulder region has nearly 9,000 homes at high wildfire risk

BYLINE: Charlie Brennan Camera Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 735 words


Seven regions by highly endangered properties and total value


Austin, Texas:  59,318; $ 8,115,362,404

 Los Angeles:  45,252; $6,558,995,589

 San Diego:  16,568; $2,723,793,090

 Prescott, Ariz.:  14,619; $2,870,164,489

 Boulder:  8,955; $1,797,584,353

 Albuquerque, N.M.:  10,980; $1,276,511,498

 Salt Lake City, Utah:  5,271; $727,293,240

 Source: CoreLogic: 2013 Wildfire Hazard Risk Report

 Boulder County and the immediate vicinity is home to 8,955 properties at high
risk of being touched by wildfire, with a combined value of nearly $1.8 billion,
according to a national study released Thursday.





 "Boulder is an area that has a unique geographical location," said Thomas
Jeffery, senior hazards scientist for CoreLogic, which released its 2013
Wildfire Hazard Risk Report on Thursday.



 "You have a site where the city is kind of growing up against an area that is
high risk. One of the things the report brings out is that you don't have to
have a home located in a forest or sitting on top of high risk, in order for
that home to be threatened by wildfire."



 In compiling the numbers, CoreLogic considered not only the city of Boulder and
its immediate neighbors, but also communities as far south as Golden and as far
north as Lyons, which are considered part of the same Core Based Statistical
Area.



 Additionally, it counted not only properties where the terrain a house sits on
is itself high risk, but also factored in risk stemming from adjacent property
that is classified as high risk.



 The danger can stem, Jeffery said, "from airborne embers, where the risk isn't
really on the property and it really isn't right next to the property; but you
can have these flying burning embers that migrate more than a quarter mile, land
on a house and ignite that house."



 CoreLogic's number for properties at risk is actually very close to those in
Boulder County's Wildfire Management Zone 1, which is 8,876. That counts
properties in the unincorporated areas west of a line drawn approximately along
U.S. 36 north of the city, west of Broadway through central Boulder -- but not
those in city limits -- and, west of Colo. 93 south of the city.



 The dimensions of the county's Wildfire Zone 1 "hasn't changed in years,"
according to Jim Webster, the county's community wildfire protection planner.
"As more homes are added into those zones, each new home built into mountain
areas increases that number."



 While any home built in what is termed the wildland urban interface is
inherently at some degree of risk to wildfires, Webster points out that the
Boulder County building code has required since 1990 the use of
ignition-resistant construction, and, since 1993, a wildfire
mitigation/defensible space plan.



 The executive summary of the CoreLogic report notes that "drought conditions
that reached unprecedented levels last year are still plaguing many of the
western and plains states and are forecast to persist into late fall."



 Boulder is one of seven Core Based Statistical Areas receiving special
attention in the study -- along with: Los Angeles; San Diego; Austin, Texas;
Salt Lake City, Utah; Albuquerque, N.M.; and Prescott, Ariz. But it does not
make note of the fact that Boulder received 17 inches of rain in one week of
September, dramatically lowering the immediate risk here of wildfire.



 "At least in the short term, right now because of the saturation you probably
have a relatively low risk," said Jeffery. "But long term, when you have more
fuel growing, you have the potential for having more fuel available for that
fire should it occur in the future.



 Of the 13 western states highlighted in the study, Texas was the state with the
highest number of properties carrying the highest "comprehensive" risk score --
that is, the level of wildfire risk that factors in proximity to other risk
areas.



 In Texas, the number of such properties was 678,544, outstripping even
California, with 375,500. Colorado was third, with 200,443.



 In 2012, 87.5 percent of the total acreage lost to wildfire in the contiguous
United States occurred within the 13 western states included in the study area.



 Contact Camera Staff Writer Charlie Brennan at 303-473-1327 or
brennanc@dailycamera.com

A heavy tanker? drops fire retardant near a home while fighting the Flagstaff
wildfire in June 2012. Boulder and the surrounding area were among seven regions
across the West highlighted in a new national study on wildfire risk.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A heavy tanker? drops fire retardant near a home while fighting the
Flagstaff wildfire in June 2012. Boulder and the surrounding area were among
seven regions across the West highlighted in a new national study on wildfire
risk.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Prairie Mountain Publishing
                              All Rights Reserved


                              584 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                      IBNS

                       August 6, 2017 Sunday 6:30 AM EST

New Zealand firefighters to combat BC Wildfire in Canada

BYLINE: India Blooms News Service

LENGTH: 238  words


Ottawa, Aug 6 (IBNS): New Zealand firefighters have extended their helping hands
to Canada with an aim to combat the ongoing wildfire in British Columbia.

New Zealand firefighters support came at a time when around 4000 Canadian
firefighters are working to get the situation under control. On August 3, Fire
and Emergency New Zealand took to Twitter to announce their plan of combating
the wildfire. New Zealand firefighters to help combat Canadian wildfires. On
July 7, the disaster occurred when lightening storm made the fire spread rapidly
in the Interior of B.C. An emergency was called immediately after the wildfire.
It continued to grow forcing local people to flee from their homes. A media
report on July 28 suggested around 10000 people were forced to go out of
Williams Lake, the largest city in the Central Interior of British Columbia,
which was under a high alert. This years wildfire has now become the worst since
1958, Global News said. The record of wildfires are kept since 1950. In 1958,
8560 sq. kms were burnt due to the wildfire contrary to 4910 in 2017, the latter
recording much lesser than the former. Still, 2017 wildfire is considered to be
dreadful as statistically it is the worst in last 59 years. Meanwhile, the
ongoing provincial state of emergency has been extended till August 18. Images:
Twitter handle of New Zealand Firefighters, official site of Public Safety
Canada (Government of Canada).

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


            Copyright 2017 India Blooms., distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              585 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 31, 2015 Saturday

Florida: National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day is March 3

LENGTH: 593  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


Volusia County, The State of Florida has issued the following news release:

Three local, state and federal agencies are joining forces March 3 to promote
wildfire awareness on National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day.

Firefighters from Volusia County Fire Services, the Florida Forest Service, and
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service will leave wildfire safety information at 200 homes
in at-risk communities near the Lake George State Forest and Lake Woodruff
National Wildlife Refuge in west Volusia County. They'll also be available to
talk to homeowners about ways they can prepare their homes and property for
wildfires.

"This is part of an ongoing effort to reach communities that border forests and
wildland areas," said John Pasqualle, a battalion commander for Volusia County
Fire Services. "We remind homeowners that a single ember from a wildfire can
travel over a mile and that they can take actions now to protect their homes in
the future."

Firefighters offer these tips for homeowners:

Clear leaves, pine needles and other vegetative debris from roofs, gutters,
porches and decks. This helps prevent embers from igniting your home.

    Remove dead vegetation and other items from under your deck or porch and
within 10 feet of the house.

    Screen in areas below patios and decks with wire mesh to prevent debris and
combustible materials from accumulating.

    Remove flammable materials, including wood piles and propane tanks, within
30 feet of your home's foundation and outbuildings, including garages and sheds.
If it can catch fire, don't let it touch your house, deck or porch.

    Prune trees so the lowest branches are six to 10 feet from the ground.
Remove dead and overhanging tree branches.

    Keep your lawn hydrated and maintained. If it's brown, cut it down to reduce
fire intensity. Dry grass and shrubs are fuel for wildfire.

    Dispose of debris and lawn cuttings quickly to reduce fuel for fire.

    Inspect shingles and roof tiles. Replace or repair loose or missing shingles
to prevent ember penetration.

    Cover exterior attic vents with metal wire mesh no larger than one-eighth
inch to prevent sparks from entering the home.

    Enclose eaves and screen soffit vents using one-eighth-inch mesh metal
screening to prevent ember entry.


Wildfires are a serious threat to lives and property in the United States. The
combination of drought, warmer temperatures, high winds and an excess of dried
vegetation in forests and grasslands has made fire seasons progressively worse
over the past 50 years. In the past decade, wildfires have burned over 59
million acres across America.

Fire officials are predicting a moderate fire season in Volusia County this
year. Since the summer of 1998, when wildfires burned 137,000 acres across the
county, firefighters have taken steps to educate homeowners, improve response
through collaboration, and reduce threats through prescribed burns. Last year,
wildfires burned 2,438 acres in Volusia County.

National Wildfire Community Awareness Day is sponsored by the National Fire
Protection Association to raise wildfire awareness, promote collaboration and
bring neighbors together to work on projects that can help protect homes,
neighborhoods and entire communities from future wildfire risk or current
post-fire impacts.

For more information, contact:

John Pasqualle, Volusia County Fire Services, 386-527-0919
    Candice Stevenson, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, 321-288-7215
    Timber Weller, Florida Forest Service, 386-503-7351


For further information please visit: http://volusia.org/

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              586 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                               May 2, 2014 Friday

Florida: National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day is May 3

LENGTH: 592  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


Volusia County, The State of Florida has issued the following news release:

Three local, state and federal agencies are joining forces May 3 to promote
wildfire awareness on National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day.

Firefighters from Volusia County Fire Services, the Florida Forest Service, and
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service will leave wildfire safety information at 200 homes
in at-risk communities near the Lake George State Forest and Lake Woodruff
National Wildlife Refuge in west Volusia County. They'll also be available to
talk to homeowners about ways they can prepare their homes and property for
wildfires.

"This is part of an ongoing effort to reach communities that border forests and
wildland areas," said John Pasqualle, a battalion commander for Volusia County
Fire Services. "We remind homeowners that a single ember from a wildfire can
travel over a mile and that they can take actions now to protect their homes in
the future."

Firefighters offer these tips for homeowners:

Clear leaves, pine needles and other vegetative debris from roofs, gutters,
porches and decks. This helps prevent embers from igniting your home.

    Remove dead vegetation and other items from under your deck or porch and
within 10 feet of the house.

    Screen in areas below patios and decks with wire mesh to prevent debris and
combustible materials from accumulating.

    Remove flammable materials, including wood piles and propane tanks, within
30 feet of your home's foundation and outbuildings, including garages and sheds.
If it can catch fire, don't let it touch your house, deck or porch.

    Prune trees so the lowest branches are six to 10 feet from the ground.
Remove dead and overhanging tree branches.

    Keep your lawn hydrated and maintained. If it's brown, cut it down to reduce
fire intensity. Dry grass and shrubs are fuel for wildfire.

    Dispose of debris and lawn cuttings quickly to reduce fuel for fire.

    Inspect shingles and roof tiles. Replace or repair loose or missing shingles
to prevent ember penetration.

    Cover exterior attic vents with metal wire mesh no larger than one-eighth
inch to prevent sparks from entering the home.

    Enclose eaves and screen soffit vents using one-eighth-inch mesh metal
screening to prevent ember entry.


Wildfires are a serious threat to lives and property in the United States. The
combination of drought, warmer temperatures, high winds and an excess of dried
vegetation in forests and grasslands has made fire seasons progressively worse
over the past 50 years. In the past decade, wildfires have burned over 59
million acres across America.

Fire officials are predicting a moderate fire season in Volusia County this
year. Since the summer of 1998, when wildfires burned 137,000 acres across the
county, firefighters have taken steps to educate homeowners, improve response
through collaboration, and reduce threats through prescribed burns. Last year,
wildfires burned 2,438 acres in Volusia County.

National Wildfire Community Awareness Day is sponsored by the National Fire
Protection Association to raise wildfire awareness, promote collaboration and
bring neighbors together to work on projects that can help protect homes,
neighborhoods and entire communities from future wildfire risk or current
post-fire impacts.

For more information, contact:

John Pasqualle, Volusia County Fire Services, 386-527-0919
    Candice Stevenson, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, 321-288-7215
    Timber Weller, Florida Forest Service, 386-503-7351


For further information please visit: http://volusia.org/

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              587 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 30, 2014 Wednesday

Florida: National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day is May 3

LENGTH: 592  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


Volusia County, The State of Florida has issued the following news release:

Three local, state and federal agencies are joining forces May 3 to promote
wildfire awareness on National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day.

Firefighters from Volusia County Fire Services, the Florida Forest Service, and
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service will leave wildfire safety information at 200 homes
in at-risk communities near the Lake George State Forest and Lake Woodruff
National Wildlife Refuge in west Volusia County. They'll also be available to
talk to homeowners about ways they can prepare their homes and property for
wildfires.

"This is part of an ongoing effort to reach communities that border forests and
wildland areas," said John Pasqualle, a battalion commander for Volusia County
Fire Services. "We remind homeowners that a single ember from a wildfire can
travel over a mile and that they can take actions now to protect their homes in
the future."

Firefighters offer these tips for homeowners:

Clear leaves, pine needles and other vegetative debris from roofs, gutters,
porches and decks. This helps prevent embers from igniting your home.

    Remove dead vegetation and other items from under your deck or porch and
within 10 feet of the house.

    Screen in areas below patios and decks with wire mesh to prevent debris and
combustible materials from accumulating.

    Remove flammable materials, including wood piles and propane tanks, within
30 feet of your home's foundation and outbuildings, including garages and sheds.
If it can catch fire, don't let it touch your house, deck or porch.

    Prune trees so the lowest branches are six to 10 feet from the ground.
Remove dead and overhanging tree branches.

    Keep your lawn hydrated and maintained. If it's brown, cut it down to reduce
fire intensity. Dry grass and shrubs are fuel for wildfire.

    Dispose of debris and lawn cuttings quickly to reduce fuel for fire.

    Inspect shingles and roof tiles. Replace or repair loose or missing shingles
to prevent ember penetration.

    Cover exterior attic vents with metal wire mesh no larger than one-eighth
inch to prevent sparks from entering the home.

    Enclose eaves and screen soffit vents using one-eighth-inch mesh metal
screening to prevent ember entry.


Wildfires are a serious threat to lives and property in the United States. The
combination of drought, warmer temperatures, high winds and an excess of dried
vegetation in forests and grasslands has made fire seasons progressively worse
over the past 50 years. In the past decade, wildfires have burned over 59
million acres across America.

Fire officials are predicting a moderate fire season in Volusia County this
year. Since the summer of 1998, when wildfires burned 137,000 acres across the
county, firefighters have taken steps to educate homeowners, improve response
through collaboration, and reduce threats through prescribed burns. Last year,
wildfires burned 2,438 acres in Volusia County.

National Wildfire Community Awareness Day is sponsored by the National Fire
Protection Association to raise wildfire awareness, promote collaboration and
bring neighbors together to work on projects that can help protect homes,
neighborhoods and entire communities from future wildfire risk or current
post-fire impacts.

For more information, contact:

John Pasqualle, Volusia County Fire Services, 386-527-0919
    Candice Stevenson, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, 321-288-7215
    Timber Weller, Florida Forest Service, 386-503-7351


For further information please visit: http://volusia.org/

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              588 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 29, 2014 Tuesday

Florida: National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day is May 3

LENGTH: 592  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


Volusia County, The State of Florida has issued the following news release:

Three local, state and federal agencies are joining forces May 3 to promote
wildfire awareness on National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day.

Firefighters from Volusia County Fire Services, the Florida Forest Service, and
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service will leave wildfire safety information at 200 homes
in at-risk communities near the Lake George State Forest and Lake Woodruff
National Wildlife Refuge in west Volusia County. They'll also be available to
talk to homeowners about ways they can prepare their homes and property for
wildfires.

"This is part of an ongoing effort to reach communities that border forests and
wildland areas," said John Pasqualle, a battalion commander for Volusia County
Fire Services. "We remind homeowners that a single ember from a wildfire can
travel over a mile and that they can take actions now to protect their homes in
the future."

Firefighters offer these tips for homeowners:

Clear leaves, pine needles and other vegetative debris from roofs, gutters,
porches and decks. This helps prevent embers from igniting your home.

    Remove dead vegetation and other items from under your deck or porch and
within 10 feet of the house.

    Screen in areas below patios and decks with wire mesh to prevent debris and
combustible materials from accumulating.

    Remove flammable materials, including wood piles and propane tanks, within
30 feet of your home's foundation and outbuildings, including garages and sheds.
If it can catch fire, don't let it touch your house, deck or porch.

    Prune trees so the lowest branches are six to 10 feet from the ground.
Remove dead and overhanging tree branches.

    Keep your lawn hydrated and maintained. If it's brown, cut it down to reduce
fire intensity. Dry grass and shrubs are fuel for wildfire.

    Dispose of debris and lawn cuttings quickly to reduce fuel for fire.

    Inspect shingles and roof tiles. Replace or repair loose or missing shingles
to prevent ember penetration.

    Cover exterior attic vents with metal wire mesh no larger than one-eighth
inch to prevent sparks from entering the home.

    Enclose eaves and screen soffit vents using one-eighth-inch mesh metal
screening to prevent ember entry.


Wildfires are a serious threat to lives and property in the United States. The
combination of drought, warmer temperatures, high winds and an excess of dried
vegetation in forests and grasslands has made fire seasons progressively worse
over the past 50 years. In the past decade, wildfires have burned over 59
million acres across America.

Fire officials are predicting a moderate fire season in Volusia County this
year. Since the summer of 1998, when wildfires burned 137,000 acres across the
county, firefighters have taken steps to educate homeowners, improve response
through collaboration, and reduce threats through prescribed burns. Last year,
wildfires burned 2,438 acres in Volusia County.

National Wildfire Community Awareness Day is sponsored by the National Fire
Protection Association to raise wildfire awareness, promote collaboration and
bring neighbors together to work on projects that can help protect homes,
neighborhoods and entire communities from future wildfire risk or current
post-fire impacts.

For more information, contact:

John Pasqualle, Volusia County Fire Services, 386-527-0919
    Candice Stevenson, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, 321-288-7215
    Timber Weller, Florida Forest Service, 386-503-7351


For further information please visit: http://volusia.org/

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              589 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 26, 2014 Saturday

Florida: National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day is May 3

LENGTH: 557  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


Volusia County, The State of Florida has issued the following news release:

Three local, state and federal agencies are joining forces May 3 to promote
wildfire awareness on National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day.

Firefighters from Volusia County Fire Services, the Florida Forest Service, and
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service will leave wildfire safety information at 200 homes
in at-risk communities near the Lake George State Forest and Lake Woodruff
National Wildlife Refuge in west Volusia County. They'll also be available to
talk to homeowners about ways they can prepare their homes and property for
wildfires.

"This is part of an ongoing effort to reach communities that border forests and
wildland areas," said John Pasqualle, a battalion commander for Volusia County
Fire Services. "We remind homeowners that a single ember from a wildfire can
travel over a mile and that they can take actions now to protect their homes in
the future."

Firefighters offer these tips for homeowners:

Clear leaves, pine needles and other vegetative debris from roofs, gutters,
porches and decks. This helps prevent embers from igniting your home.

    Remove dead vegetation and other items from under your deck or porch and
within 10 feet of the house.

    Screen in areas below patios and decks with wire mesh to prevent debris and
combustible materials from accumulating.

    Remove flammable materials, including wood piles and propane tanks, within
30 feet of your home's foundation and outbuildings, including garages and sheds.
If it can catch fire, don't let it touch your house, deck or porch.

    Prune trees so the lowest branches are six to 10 feet from the ground.
Remove dead and overhanging tree branches.

    Keep your lawn hydrated and maintained. If it's brown, cut it down to reduce
fire intensity. Dry grass and shrubs are fuel for wildfire.

    Dispose of debris and lawn cuttings quickly to reduce fuel for fire.

    Inspect shingles and roof tiles. Replace or repair loose or missing shingles
to prevent ember penetration.

    Cover exterior attic vents with metal wire mesh no larger than one-eighth
inch to prevent sparks from entering the home.

    Enclose eaves and screen soffit vents using one-eighth-inch mesh metal
screening to prevent ember entry.


Wildfires are a serious threat to lives and property in the United States. The
combination of drought, warmer temperatures, high winds and an excess of dried
vegetation in forests and grasslands has made fire seasons progressively worse
over the past 50 years. In the past decade, wildfires have burned over 59
million acres across America.

Fire officials are predicting a moderate fire season in Volusia County this
year. Since the summer of 1998, when wildfires burned 137,000 acres across the
county, firefighters have taken steps to educate homeowners, improve response
through collaboration, and reduce threats through prescribed burns. Last year,
wildfires burned 2,438 acres in Volusia County.

National Wildfire Community Awareness Day is sponsored by the National Fire
Protection Association to raise wildfire awareness, promote collaboration and
bring neighbors together to work on projects that can help protect homes,
neighborhoods and entire communities from future wildfire risk or current
post-fire impacts.

For further information please visit: http://volusia.org/

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              590 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 25, 2014 Friday

Florida: National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day is May 3

LENGTH: 557  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


Volusia County, The State of Florida has issued the following news release:

Three local, state and federal agencies are joining forces May 3 to promote
wildfire awareness on National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day.

Firefighters from Volusia County Fire Services, the Florida Forest Service, and
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service will leave wildfire safety information at 200 homes
in at-risk communities near the Lake George State Forest and Lake Woodruff
National Wildlife Refuge in west Volusia County. They'll also be available to
talk to homeowners about ways they can prepare their homes and property for
wildfires.

"This is part of an ongoing effort to reach communities that border forests and
wildland areas," said John Pasqualle, a battalion commander for Volusia County
Fire Services. "We remind homeowners that a single ember from a wildfire can
travel over a mile and that they can take actions now to protect their homes in
the future."

Firefighters offer these tips for homeowners:

Clear leaves, pine needles and other vegetative debris from roofs, gutters,
porches and decks. This helps prevent embers from igniting your home.

    Remove dead vegetation and other items from under your deck or porch and
within 10 feet of the house.

    Screen in areas below patios and decks with wire mesh to prevent debris and
combustible materials from accumulating.

    Remove flammable materials, including wood piles and propane tanks, within
30 feet of your home's foundation and outbuildings, including garages and sheds.
If it can catch fire, don't let it touch your house, deck or porch.

    Prune trees so the lowest branches are six to 10 feet from the ground.
Remove dead and overhanging tree branches.

    Keep your lawn hydrated and maintained. If it's brown, cut it down to reduce
fire intensity. Dry grass and shrubs are fuel for wildfire.

    Dispose of debris and lawn cuttings quickly to reduce fuel for fire.

    Inspect shingles and roof tiles. Replace or repair loose or missing shingles
to prevent ember penetration.

    Cover exterior attic vents with metal wire mesh no larger than one-eighth
inch to prevent sparks from entering the home.

    Enclose eaves and screen soffit vents using one-eighth-inch mesh metal
screening to prevent ember entry.


Wildfires are a serious threat to lives and property in the United States. The
combination of drought, warmer temperatures, high winds and an excess of dried
vegetation in forests and grasslands has made fire seasons progressively worse
over the past 50 years. In the past decade, wildfires have burned over 59
million acres across America.

Fire officials are predicting a moderate fire season in Volusia County this
year. Since the summer of 1998, when wildfires burned 137,000 acres across the
county, firefighters have taken steps to educate homeowners, improve response
through collaboration, and reduce threats through prescribed burns. Last year,
wildfires burned 2,438 acres in Volusia County.

National Wildfire Community Awareness Day is sponsored by the National Fire
Protection Association to raise wildfire awareness, promote collaboration and
bring neighbors together to work on projects that can help protect homes,
neighborhoods and entire communities from future wildfire risk or current
post-fire impacts.

For further information please visit: http://volusia.org/

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              591 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             Penticton Western News

                          September 6, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Crown land area restriction due to Finlay Creek fire

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 406 words


An area restriction for all Crown land in the vicinity of the Finlay Creek
wildfire is in effect as of 9 a.m., Wednesday, Sept. 6.

The order applies to all Crown land within the geographic boundaries as outlined
on the map that is available online: http://ow.ly/NMYN30eWot4 . As illustrated
in the map, this area restriction includes Darke Lake Provincial Park, Garnet
Lake and Munro Lake Forest Service Road.

The area restriction will remain in force until noon on Oct. 31, 2017, or until
the order is rescinded.

Related: Finlay Creek wildfire held overnight at 1,000 hectares

Area restrictions are put in place to help protect public safety and allow fire
suppression efforts to continue efficiently. Under this order and Section 11(2)
of the Wildfire Act, a person must not remain in or enter the Finlay Creek
wildfire restricted area without prior written authorization of an official
designated for the purposes of the Wildfire Act, unless the person:

Enters the area only in the course of:

1. travelling to or from his or her principle residence that is not under an
evacuation order;

2. travelling to or from leased property for the purpose of accessing a
secondary residence or recreational property not under an evacuation order;

3. using a highway as defined in the Transportation Act;

4. travelling as a person acting in an official capacity;

5. travelling for the purpose of supporting wildfire suppression activities; or

6. engaging and/or participating in a commercial activity within the regular
course of the person's business or employment on private or leased lands.

As the Finlay Creek wildfire continues to be active with ongoing fire
suppression efforts, the BC Wildfire Service asks the public to abide by this
order so fire suppression operations are not impeded and can be done safely and
effectively. Public and fire personnel safety remains the number one priority of
the BC Wildfire Service.

Evacuation orders and alerts issued by the Central Okanagan Regional District
and the Regional District of Okanagan-Similkameen remain in place. For more
information about these alerts and orders, please visit: www.CORDemergency.ca (
http://www.cordemergency.ca/ ) or www.rdos.bc.ca .

To report a wildfire or open burning violation, call 1 800 663-5555 toll-free or
*5555 on a cellphone.

For the latest information on current wildfire activity, burning restrictions,
road closures and air quality advisories, go to: www.bcwildfire.ca .

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              592 of 987 DOCUMENTS

                       Telegram & Gazette (Massachusetts)

                   September 12, 2002 Thursday, NORTH EDITION

Wildfire-control classes scheduled;
 Four-day course begins Saturday

BYLINE: Jean Laquidara Hill; TELEGRAM & GAZETTE STAFF

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 531 words

DATELINE: WEST BROOKFIELD



- Firefighters will be learning to control wildfires from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Saturday and Sunday and Sept. 28 and Sept. 29 at the West Brookfield Fire
Department Headquarters and field locations.

The four-day course provides federal certification in wildfire fighting. It is
sponsored by the state Department of Environmental Management and the West
Brookfield Fire Department, West Brookfield Fire Chief Timothy R. Batchelor
said.

Chief Batchelor is a member of the Massachusetts Wildland Fire Crew of federally
certified firefighters who fight wildfires in drought conditions all over the
country. He will be among instructors for the four-day course, which will
involve classroom and field instruction. About 60 firefighters are in the
state-run Mass. Wildfire Crew, and they are dispatched in teams of 20 to
wherever they are needed, he said.

Chief Batchelor and other members of the wildfire crew spent part of June and
July in Colorado fighting a massive, stubborn fire. And while Massachusetts has
been spared the worst forest fires for the past 30 or 40 years, the conditions
are right for such fires to happen here, said Chief Batchelor.

He said Massachusetts is susceptible to wildfires in drought conditions because
some of the vegetation that grows in this state and the underlying soil is
similar to that in areas where wildfires have burned out of control recently.

Because of the state's susceptibility, Chief Batchelor and other members of the
wildfire crew are trying to increase the number of firefighters federally
certified in fighting wildfires. Most members of the West Brookfield Fire
Department are certified, as are most members of the North Brookfield Fire
Department, where Mr. Batchelor serves as a captain.

He said the upcoming classes are open to members of 26 communities in the
southern Worcester County area, and he already has firefighters signed up from
10 communities. The classes are paid for by the state, said Chief Batchelor.

''It's not something everyone wants to do or has the time to do. It really is
something you have to be available to do. They could call any time,'' said Chief
Batchelor.

Field training will not involve live fires, said Chief Batchelor, but will teach
firefighters how to contain a fire and rob it of fuel so it does not spread; and
how to use the equipment necessary for containing fires.

Firefighters will clear brush and dig out and remove organic soil on which fire
can feed, and leave a trail of underlying mineral soil, such as sand, which does
not fuel fire, said Chief Batchelor.

The trail usually is about six inches deep and about 18 inches wide, he said.
Instructors also will focus on firefighter safety in wildfire conditions, he
said.

''A lot of these techniques are used out West. We're trying to bring this
training to the East because we're getting drought fires out here,'' he said.

''People are building further off the road and are letting brush grow right up
to their houses, and this creates a whole new problem for firefighters trying to
fight the fires,'' he said.

Firefighters who are interested may call the West Brookfield Fire Department
Headquarters at (508) 867-1408 .

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright 2002 Worcester Telegram & Gazette, Inc.


                              593 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 11, 2018 Thursday

Washington: Inhofe and Udall Introduce Wildfire Regulatory Relief Act

LENGTH: 749  words



Washington: Office of the Senator Jim Inhofe has issued the following news
release:

U.S. Sen. Jim Inhofe (R-Okla.) and Sen. Tom Udall (D-N.M.) introduced the
Wildfire Regulatory Relief Act today, key legislation that would improve federal
wildfire disaster response, specifically for the agricultural community. This
bipartisan bill addresses the unique concerns farmers, ranchers and rural
communities face after a wildfire.


"As Oklahomans experienced firsthand last March, wildfires can have a
devastating impact," Inhofe said. "Current disaster response must do a better
job considering the unique needs of rural communities when it comes to recovery
efforts. I visited Woodward during the fires and saw for myself--hundreds of
thousands of acres of farms and ranches were destroyed. Unfortunately, the
disaster response assistance available for those suffering was hamstrung by
unnecessary regulations. Banks were prevented from lending more money to their
customers to recover, and federal aid was slow and insufficient because of
bureaucratic red tape. This new legislation will address that. By updating
FEMA's disaster assessments to include the damaged property of farmers and
ranchers, ensuring federal regulations do not limit community recovery efforts
through local banks, and improving coordination among emergency services, we can
better support farmers and ranchers as they rebuild their livelihood."
"New Mexicans know too well the frequent and increasingly severe toll that
wildfires can take on our state and on peoples' livelihoods," Udall said. "When
New Mexico's farmers and ranchers work to recover after a damaging wildfire, it
is critical that the federal government provides flexibility and needed support
-- not red tape. As we brace for increasingly unpredictable and intense
wildfires in New Mexico and across the West in the coming years, we need to make
sure that we're giving rural communities and farmers and ranchers the unique and
targeted resources they need to get back on their feet."
The Wildfire Regulatory Relief Act is supported by the Oklahoma Cattlemen's
Association, the Oklahoma Bankers Association and the Oklahoma Farm Bureau:
"Ranchers in Western Oklahoma were severely impacted by the wildfires earlier
this year," said Weston Givens, President of the Oklahoma Cattlemen's
Association. "Senator Inhofe worked immediately to provide information and
resources to individuals and communities that needed to rebuild. As we enter
wildfire season, rather than accepting the red tape and hurdles our members
faced going through the disaster relief process--Senator Inhofe is taking action
to improve the process for rural communities in Oklahoma and across the country.
We appreciate his continued leadership on these efforts."
"As anchor institutions in rural communities across Oklahoma, community banks
are directly engaged in helping individuals and rural communities recover from
natural disasters, including devastating wildfires," said David Cook, President
and CEO of the Bank of Laverne. "The legislation introduced by Senator Inhofe
will empower community banks to continue to  play a key role in revitalizing
their communities."
"Oklahoma Farm Bureau proudly stood by the farmers, ranchers and rural residents
who were devastated by wildfires in the Oklahoma Panhandle earlier this year,"
said Rodd Moesel, President of the Oklahoma Farm Bureau. "However, efforts to
rebuild in those communities have been hindered by bureaucratic red tape and
other significant hurdles. With this legislation, Senator Inhofe is working to
improve the recovery process for farmers, ranchers and rural communities both in
Oklahoma and across the country. We appreciate his leadership on these efforts."

In March of this year, devastating wildfires in northwest Oklahoma destroyed
hundreds of miles of fencing and other farming and ranching equipment. The
Wildfire Regulatory Relief Act would:
    Allow grazing on CRP lands when a governor declares a state emergency, not
just for drought and flooding conditions.
     Improve disaster assessments by requiring FEMA to account for all damage,
including agricultural operations, like fence line.
     Encourage state-federal collaboration by making grants available to states
that strengthen state-wide collaboration and communication.
     Provide regulatory relief for community banks, such as flexible loan teams
and reporting requirements so banks can better facilitate recovery efforts in
their communities

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              594 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                 Stateline.org

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            October 5, 2017 Thursday

Wildfires Put State Budgets Under Pressure

BYLINE: Sophie Quinton, Stateline.org

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1414 words


Oct. 05--The wildfires that tore through over a million acres of Montana this
year damaged homes, cloaked communities in smoke, and burned a hole in the state
budget.

With winter snow already falling, Montana's blazes mostly have subsided. But the
state now faces a $200 million budget shortfall exacerbated by the record cost
of fighting wildfires, Gov. Steve Bullock, a Democrat, said in an early
September statement explaining the crisis. "We are also facing the most
expensive fire season in state history, requiring spending of over $60 million
to date."

State and federal lawmakers across the country are looking back on a record fire
season and asking whether there's a way to better prepare financially for major
wildfires. The federal government spent more than $2 billion on fires from
Florida to Washington this year. States spend untold millions more.

As the wildfire season lengthens and the fires become larger and more dangerous
-- a trend driven by a number of factors, including climate change -- both state
and federal natural resource departments are spending more time and money on
firefighting and less on other forest management programs that help the land
recover after wildfires, or lessen the impact of future fires.

Western states typically spend less than 1 percent of their general fund each
year on wildfire suppression, according to a University of Idaho research group
that advises the state Legislature. When fires are severe, budgets are tight or
both, the share can spike above 2 percent.

Such percentages seem small but can still have a big impact, said lead author
Dennis Becker, an associate professor in the department of natural resources and
director of the policy research group.

In states with small tax bases such as Montana, expensive fires in a tight
budget year can wipe out reserve funds and escalate a fiscal crisis.

Paying to Put Out Fires

Each state pays for wildland firefighting slightly differently. Lawmakers in
many wildfire-prone states set aside part of their general fund each year for
fighting fires. Programs in Oregon and Washington are partly funded by taxing
timber companies and other forest landowners, for instance. Most states also set
aside pools of money to pay for natural disasters and other emergencies.

But sometimes that extra money doesn't go far enough. Then it's up to lawmakers
to figure out how to cover the extra cost.

"When there's an emergency, the money gets found, someway, somehow," said Mike
Morgan, the director of the division of fire prevention and control at the
Colorado Department of Public Safety. In Colorado, most counties pay into a
wildfire suppression fund that generates about a million dollars a year, he
said. The money runs out quickly. "Some of these big fires can [cost] a million
dollars a day," he said.

One of the biggest fires in Colorado's recent history, the Waldo Canyon fire,
burned near Colorado Springs in 2012 for 17 days and cost over $16.6 million to
suppress, according to the National Wildfire Coordinating Group, a multiagency
organization that helps coordinate wildfire suppression operations.

When Colorado's wildfire suppression fund is exhausted, the governor declares a
state of emergency and state lawmakers scramble to find more money. They often
end up taking money away from the capital budget used to pay for maintenance
projects, Morgan said. "We're robbing Peter to pay Paul."

It can take months to tally the cost of a bad fire season.

The federal government typically pays to put out fires on federal land, and
states pay to put out wildfires on state and private land. But fires often
straddle property boundaries. And when a fire starts, the fire crew closest to
it will rush to the scene regardless of jurisdiction.

To complicate matters, a dangerous blaze that threatens homes, roads, reservoirs
and other infrastructure can involve local and state firefighters, firefighters
from other states, and state or federal equipment such as bulldozers and air
tankers.

"It's like an instant army that shows up," said Gary Schiff, policy director for
the National Association of State Foresters, a Washington, D.C., based nonprofit
comprised of the directors of state forestry agencies.

The Federal Emergency Management Agency will reimburse states for three-quarters
of the cost of putting out fires that threaten lives and critical
infrastructure. But some fires are too rural or remote to qualify. States also
spend a lot of time and money putting out smaller, less dangerous fires.

Reimbursement from the federal government and other entities typically covers a
fraction of a state's spending on fire suppression, Becker's study found. In
2015, an extreme fire year, the nine states his team studied collectively spent
$1.8 billion to fight wildfires. They were reimbursed by the federal government
and other payers -- such as other state and local agencies -- for nearly $300
million.

'Up in Smoke'

Montana used to pay for wildfires after they happened. A few bad fire years in
the 2000s made that strategy untenable. In 2007 the state created a wildfire
suppression fund which currently receives revenue from surplus money found in
state agency budgets and the governor's emergency appropriations.

State Sen. Pat Connell, a Republican who helped craft the current funding
mechanism, said it has worked well every year -- until this one.

Montana came into 2017 facing a budget shortfall due to lower-than-expected
revenue from taxes, fees and mineral royalties. Legislators passed legislation
in May that authorized the state to withdraw $30 million from the wildfire
suppression fund if the revenue situation didn't improve.

The money was withdrawn in July, leaving just over $30 million to pay for
fighting fires. "That $30 million went up in smoke," Connell said.

He said FEMA will help cover the cost of six of this year's major fires in
Montana, but it's unclear what that will mean for the state's bottom line and
when the federal money will arrive.

In Oklahoma, an ongoing budget crisis has squeezed the state's Forestry Services
Division and driven up the cost of fighting fires.

Years of budget cuts have whittled the division down to 130 people, including
administrators, at a time when the state is seeing more frequent major fires,
said George Geissler, the Oklahoma state forester. "We do not have the capacity,
within our state, with our own personnel, to fight these fires."

He said he's become more dependent on expensive out-of-state resources and on
tapping the state's emergency fund. After a major fire, his team waits for the
invoices to trickle in with their fingers crossed. "We've come very close to
thinking -- how are we going to make payroll?" he said.

In Oregon, state lawmakers will have to find an additional $12 million to cover
the cost of fighting large wildfires this year, according to Amy Patrick,
director of forest protection for the Oregon Forest and Industries Council, a
trade association.

Such an additional appropriation is unusual in Oregon, which has bought
catastrophic wildfire insurance from Lloyd's of London almost every year since
the 1970s. It's the only state that uses insurance to help pay for wildfire
suppression.

Oregon's premiums and deductible have risen along with its fire risk, however.
This year the state spent $38 million on large wildfires, according to the
Oregon Department of Forestry -- more than the $20 million it budgets for such
fires but not enough to hit its $50 million deductible. The state expects about
$6 million in reimbursements.

As fires get worse, states need some kind of cushion to protect themselves from
a costly year, Becker said, whether that's an emergency fund, an insurance
policy or another mechanism.

In Idaho, state forester David Groeschl said his department hired an outside
contractor to take a close look at its budget and make recommendations for
improving the way the state pays for fighting wildfires.

"It's something that everybody's taking a look at right now," he said. "How do
you do this without breaking the bank?"

Connell said he still thinks Montana's wildfire suppression fund is a good
solution to the state's wildfire budgeting problem. But now the fund is empty,
and he's not sure his colleagues in the Legislature will be eager to make a
one-time appropriation to fill it back up. "There is no money in the till for
2018," he said. "It will be problematic."

___ (c)2017 Stateline.org Visit Stateline.org at www.stateline.org Distributed
by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20171005-SH-Wildfires-Put-State-Budgets-Under-Pressure-20171005

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SH


                            Copyright 2017 Stateline


                              595 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      Chico Enterprise-Record (California)

                            November 5, 2017 Sunday

Wildfire survivors face choice: Rebuild fast, better, not at all

BYLINE: Ellen Knickmeyer; The Associated Press

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 687 words

ABSTRACT

Wildfire survivors left with little but white ash and hard choices: Rebuild
quickly as before, rebuild defensively against future fires, or abandon some
burned neighborhoods entirely as lethal mistakes in the country's most wildfire
-prone state

FULL TEXT

SANTA ROSA >> The most destructive complex of wildfires in California history
wreaked most of its damage and deaths among housing subdivisions in this San
Francisco Bay Area bedroom town, leaving survivors with little but white ash and
hard choices: Rebuild quickly as things were, rebuild defensively against future
fires, or abandon some burned neighborhoods entirely as lethal mistakes in the
country's most wildfire-prone state.

With $3.3 billion in insured losses so far and 8,900 homes and structures
destroyed, the scale of loss from October's Northern California wildfires is
unusual, but the devastated areas had burned before and almost certainly will
again, fire ecologists say.

The weeks since have given rise to conflicting desires for rebuilding.

Many families are eager to rebuild as before, and local officials have vowed to
speed them along. Wildfire experts, meanwhile, are urging California officials
to consider seizing the moment to strengthen regulations.

If authorities take bigger steps toward fire-safety now, "when the next fire
comes, which it will, the horrific impacts will be avoided," said Caitlin
Cornwall, a research biologist with a Sonoma County nonprofit and one of the
hundreds of survivors, regulators and developers cramming meetings and town
halls to plot out recovery. The fires that started Oct. 8 burned one in every 10
acres in Sonoma County, a territory stretching from the Pacific to redwood
groves to commuter cities and wine valleys.

Following wildfires, urban areas tend to build up more densely despite the
remaining fire risk, and residents tend to build in only as many fire-defense
measures as regulations require, researchers with the U.S. Forest Service and
University of Wisconsin found from studying rebuilding after past U.S. wildfires
.

Rebuilding also often takes years longer than residents realize. In California
wildfires studied, just 35 percent of buildings lost were rebuilt within five
years, the researchers determined. "We found people generally don't change their
behavior in terms of how they rebuild, what materials they use, or how they
landscape, if there aren't incentives in place," said Anu Kramer, a wildfire
-rebuilding researcher at the University of Wisconsin.

The motivation to quickly rebuild often leaves little time for authorities to
impose tougher fire standards, Kramer said.

In the hard-hit Santa Rosa neighborhoods of Fountaingrove and Coffey Park -
where the fires obliterated block after block of homes, as well as big
box-stores and hotels - some residents already are banding together to quickly
rebuild houses using their old blueprints. Flames spread fast among houses
crowded together on hilltops for million-dollar views over the coastal ridges.
Homeowners bent on getting as much house as possible on their lots can make them
more vulnerable in wildfires, experts say.

In Fountaingrove as elsewhere now, many just want to "try and get houses rebuilt
on the same footprint for the least amount of money," said David Rust, a retired
housing contractor who wore a white hazmat suit this week to pick through the
few identifiable lumps of metal in the ruins of his family's home.

The affluent neighborhood was an acknowledged fire-risk area in a state that the
national Insurance Information Institute trade group says is the nation's most
wildfire-prone.

Santa Rosa, a more affordable alternative to San Francisco, saw its population
rise by about 10 percent in 10 years and housing pushed into formerly open areas
where wildfire previously could strike without threatening humans.

Mayor Chris Coursey has worried about the loss of 5 percent of Santa Rosa's
housing stock in the fires and stresses that he wants to make rebuilding as easy
as possible for homeowners.

"People have a right to rebuild what they had, if that's what they want to do,"
Coursey told a meeting last month.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              596 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 31, 2015 Saturday

Florida: National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day is March 3

LENGTH: 593  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


Volusia County, The State of Florida has issued the following news release:

Three local, state and federal agencies are joining forces March 3 to promote
wildfire awareness on National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day.

Firefighters from Volusia County Fire Services, the Florida Forest Service, and
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service will leave wildfire safety information at 200 homes
in at-risk communities near the Lake George State Forest and Lake Woodruff
National Wildlife Refuge in west Volusia County. They'll also be available to
talk to homeowners about ways they can prepare their homes and property for
wildfires.

"This is part of an ongoing effort to reach communities that border forests and
wildland areas," said John Pasqualle, a battalion commander for Volusia County
Fire Services. "We remind homeowners that a single ember from a wildfire can
travel over a mile and that they can take actions now to protect their homes in
the future."

Firefighters offer these tips for homeowners:

Clear leaves, pine needles and other vegetative debris from roofs, gutters,
porches and decks. This helps prevent embers from igniting your home.

    Remove dead vegetation and other items from under your deck or porch and
within 10 feet of the house.

    Screen in areas below patios and decks with wire mesh to prevent debris and
combustible materials from accumulating.

    Remove flammable materials, including wood piles and propane tanks, within
30 feet of your home's foundation and outbuildings, including garages and sheds.
If it can catch fire, don't let it touch your house, deck or porch.

    Prune trees so the lowest branches are six to 10 feet from the ground.
Remove dead and overhanging tree branches.

    Keep your lawn hydrated and maintained. If it's brown, cut it down to reduce
fire intensity. Dry grass and shrubs are fuel for wildfire.

    Dispose of debris and lawn cuttings quickly to reduce fuel for fire.

    Inspect shingles and roof tiles. Replace or repair loose or missing shingles
to prevent ember penetration.

    Cover exterior attic vents with metal wire mesh no larger than one-eighth
inch to prevent sparks from entering the home.

    Enclose eaves and screen soffit vents using one-eighth-inch mesh metal
screening to prevent ember entry.


Wildfires are a serious threat to lives and property in the United States. The
combination of drought, warmer temperatures, high winds and an excess of dried
vegetation in forests and grasslands has made fire seasons progressively worse
over the past 50 years. In the past decade, wildfires have burned over 59
million acres across America.

Fire officials are predicting a moderate fire season in Volusia County this
year. Since the summer of 1998, when wildfires burned 137,000 acres across the
county, firefighters have taken steps to educate homeowners, improve response
through collaboration, and reduce threats through prescribed burns. Last year,
wildfires burned 2,438 acres in Volusia County.

National Wildfire Community Awareness Day is sponsored by the National Fire
Protection Association to raise wildfire awareness, promote collaboration and
bring neighbors together to work on projects that can help protect homes,
neighborhoods and entire communities from future wildfire risk or current
post-fire impacts.

For more information, contact:

John Pasqualle, Volusia County Fire Services, 386-527-0919
    Candice Stevenson, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, 321-288-7215
    Timber Weller, Florida Forest Service, 386-503-7351


For further information please visit: http://volusia.org/

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              597 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                 Cold Lake Sun

                           September 26, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

In a dangerously hot and dry summer, Alberta mostly dodges wildfire threat

BYLINE: Shawn Logan, Postmedia

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 472  words


Despite a sizzling summer that left much of the province tinder dry, Alberta
largely dodged a bullet when it comes to devastating wildfires, registering far
fewer in 2017 than normal.

Coming off a pair of particularly rough years for wildfires in Alberta,
including last year's Fort McMurray firestorm that scorched 600,000 hectares and
forced 88,000 people to flee their homes, the province this year has recorded
237 fewer fires in its Wildfire Management Areas compared with the five-year
average of 1,391.

While two of Alberta's largest blazes this year - the late-summer Kenow fire
that swept through Waterton Lakes National Park and the stubborn Verdant Creek
fire near Banff - occurred on federal land, even when combined with wildfires in
Alberta Wildfire Management Areas, the amount of land burned was a mere fraction
of the area charred in the previous two years.

Alberta Wildfire spokeswoman Melissa Crawford said a combination of luck, timing
and legislative changes prompted by last year's massive Fort McMurray blaze may
have spared the province a more devastating fire season.

"We've gotten quite lucky this year," Crawford said.

"We actually had some pretty helpful weather conditions this year and we've also
implemented some legislative changes that have helped."

As of last Tuesday morning, the province was still battling 17 wildfires in
Wildfire Management Areas throughout Alberta, while the Kenow and Verdant Creek
fires were both considered to be held.

To date, some 45,400 hectares of Alberta Crown land has been lost to wildfires,
though that number doesn't include the combined 55,000 hectares scorched between
the Kenow and Verdant Creek fires. Even so, it's a far cry from the 611,000
hectares of provincial Crown land burned in 2016, and the 471,000 hectares in
the previous year.

After the Fort McMurray blaze, the province hiked fines for people who ignore
fire bans from $5,000 to as high as $100,000. Corporations that once would have
to pay as little as $5,000 may now face a penalty of $1 million.

Crawford said after the fines were increased in February, the province has
noticed significantly more compliance during fire bans, something the province
believes may have helped reduce the fire threat.

She added that lessons learned in the aftermath of Fort McMurray prompted the
province to take another look at its fire prevention strategies.

"We put a lot of prevention resources in place and that helped lower the number
of fires this year," Crawford said.

Also helping the cause was a relatively wet spring, traditionally the most
dangerous period for Alberta wildfires.

Crawford said while the wildfire season is winding down, those heading for the
backcountry in summer's waning days should still take precautions.

"We are never fully out of the woods, but we are looking at the downside now,"
she said.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Bryan Passifiume, Postmedia Network; Calgary fire trucks were stationed
outside the historic Prince of Wales hotel in Waterton Lakes National Park in
southwest Alberta on Sept. 9. As the wildfire approached the national park,
Calgary fire crews were tasked with keeping the 90-year-old hotel, a national
historic site, safe.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2017 Cold Lake Sun
                              All Rights Reserved


                              598 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Abbotsford News

                           September 15, 2017 Friday
                                 Final Edition

After 70 days, B.C. state of emergency to end

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 247 words


The provincial state of emergency due to a record-breaking wildfire season comes
to an end Friday at midnight.

The state of emergency was declared on July 7 and extended four times over the
nine weeks that followed. During this wildfire season, approximately 65,000
people evacuated from their homes.

Given the weather forecast and efforts of the BC Wildfire Service to contain and
extinguish fires, the province said in a statement its now is in a position to
allow the state of emergency to expire and return to a standard emergency
response.

PHOTOS: Community members band together during wildfire season

READ MORE: B.C. loses more than one million hectares to wildfires

This means the Canadian Forces will be demobilizing members who've been working
with the provincial wildfire service.

But the wildfire season is not over yet.

As of this morning, 153 wildfires are burning in B.C., with 11 evacuation orders
affecting about 3,000 individuals. Approximately 23 evacuation alerts are also
still impacting more than 5,000 people.

Resources - including the bi-weekly stipend from the Canadian Red Cross - will
continue for those still displaced, confirmed Robert Turner with Emergency
Management BC.

Province to review record-breaking season

Forest Minister Doug Donaldson said the province will be undergoing a full
review of how the wildfires were handled this summer.

This will include looking at how fuel was treated in the fire zones and other
recommendations for next year.

www.twitter.com

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              599 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                            June 14, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Early Edition

Wildfire report offers criticism of tactics, but it's not that simple

BYLINE: David Staples, Edmonton Journal

SECTION: CITY; Commentary; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 1017 words


A new report on the Fort McMurray wildfire makes an explosive criticism,
suggesting if Alberta Forestry officials had used "high risk/high reward" fire
ignition techniques to fight the wildfire before it hit Fort McMurray on May 3,
2016, they might have had some success quelling it.

"Ignition tactics may have been employed earlier with some success," the MNP
consulting report released last week said.

How much validity is there to this notion? Could more of Fort McMurray been
saved? The critique has some weight because MNP employed six wildfire
specialists from across North America, three to help investigate and three to
review the report.

I recently spent a month digging into these issues myself and talked at length
with Bernie Schmitte, the Fort McMurray forest area manager who led the initial
fight. Schmitte explained he had hoped to use ignition tactics but wasn't able
to because igniting a man-made backfire to take away fuel between Fort McMurray
and the main wildfire itself might have gone wrong, with the man-made backfire
possibly roaring into the city.

University of Alberta professor Mike Flannigan, director of the Western
Partnership for Wildland Fire Science, agrees with Schmitte's assessment.

"In this situation I don't think a backfire for the first couple days was
practical," Flannigan said. "The primary reason is that winds were shifting."

Changes in the wind direction were forecast even as the wildfire raged west of
the city, Flannigan says. "That backfire could have quickly become a headfire
spreading to town and the fire could have reached town even sooner than what the
wildfire did. It's a risky strategy and could have been dangerous and perhaps
life-threatening. So I think not doing a backburn was the appropriate call."

The wildfire started in the late afternoon on May 1 about seven kilometres west
of Fort McMurray. Alberta forests were exceptionally dry and at risk of burning
at that time. In the last week of April there were 44 wildfires across Alberta,
including one other near Fort McMurray. The MNP report gives credit to Alberta
Forestry for being ramped up early and ready to go.

In Fort McMurray, crews and helicopters were ready to go three weeks earlier
than normal. On May 1, the air tanker base at Fort McMurray was fully
operational, but there were no air tankers there. Instead they were positioned
in Lac La Biche, Whitecourt, Slave Lake and Peace River, providing coverage for
wherever a wildfire might break out across northern Alberta, MNP reports.
"Alberta Forestry took a logical approach to pre-positioning its resources."

It continues: "Having the benefit of hindsight, positioning an air tanker group
at the Fort McMurray airport would have allowed air attack operations more
quickly. However, there is no evidence the plan for the day was unreasonable
given known variables."

An Alberta Forestry wildfire crew was on helicopter patrol and spotted the Horse
River fire on May 1 when it was still relatively small. "This indicates the
system deployed that day was working," MNP reports.

The fire burned close to Fort McMurray that evening. The following day, May 2,
the wind changed direction and the fire moved away from the city. The MNP report
suggests Alberta Forestry might have erred then in not using ignition tactics.
These tactics worked later in the firefight to save towns such as Anzac and
Gregoire Lake Estates, the report said.

"Because of the proximity to the (Fort McMurray) community and the expected fire
behaviour, there was a reluctance to use ignition tactics as part of the initial
suppression efforts," the report says. "Ignition can be a high risk/high reward
technique."

Schmitte, who is an experienced heli-torch specialist himself, considered using
ignition tactics. They are sometimes the best way to stop an out-of-control
wildfire.

Heli-torch specialists in helicopters rigged with torches spray flaming gasoline
gel on a line of trees below to ignite a burnout. They attempt to torch a thin
strip of the forest between the main body of the wildfire and a man-made or
natural control line, such as a road or a river. The controlled burn is to move
toward the main inferno, either blown there by the day's winds or by the great
sucking in of oxygen by the primary fire itself. If the strip burns out
thoroughly, it takes away the fuel that would otherwise keep the wildfire
charging ahead. The hope is to slow the wildfire so the air tankers and ground
crews can be more effective.

To ignite a successful backburn, Schmitte needed protection, a line of defence
through the forest that could stop a controlled burn if it moved in the wrong
direction. On May 2, his heavy machinery crews went to work on a dozer guard.
The bulldozers were to take out a six-metre-wide swath and enclose the hot tip
of the wildfire. Only then would they attempt a backfire.

But the MNP report notes that no bulldozers were at work on May 1 and they were
slow to get to work on May 2. "This represents a significant delay."

When the dozer crews did get going, they were slowed because of the difficult
topography, with two rivers in deep valleys in the area as well as pipelines
that were difficult for heavy equipment to cross. Some progress was made. But
the following day, the wind changed again, blowing the wildfire into Fort
McMurray, bringing on an estimated $8.9 billion in damages and the evacuation of
close to 90,000 people.

It's clear the firefighters didn't do everything right. Perhaps the dozer guard
should have been started sooner. And, as the MNP report notes, there could have
been much better co-ordination between Alberta Forestry and Fort McMurray
emergency response officials.

But I asked Flannigan what the reaction might have been if a backfire, and not
the wildfire itself, had been the cause of Fort McMurray burning.

What if government action had burned down parts of the city and maybe caused
loss of life? "The litigation would be a factor of ten more than what we're
already going to see," he says. dstaples@postmedia.com
twitter.com/DavidStaplesYEG !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 Edmonton Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              600 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                              July 31, 2017 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Solution to Wildfires in front of us; Filmon Report outlined steps to take,
writes Robert Gray

BYLINE: Robert Gray, Vancouver Sun

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 638 words


It's summer in B.C. and once again wildfires are destroying homes and
threatening communities.

In the aftermath of the record-breaking 2003 fire season, there was much hype
and promise associated with the Filmon Report, the Liberal government's response
to the wildfires. The province invested millions in planning and fuel treatments
and in return several tens of thousands of hectares of hazardous fuels have been
treated.

However, if we step back and look at the situation from a provincewide
perspective we see that not a single community has all the identified hazard
mitigated - all are still vulnerable. All still have too many avenues for
wildfire to spread from Crown land to private and municipal land.

Several of the key Filmon Report recommendations, if applied at the appropriate
scale and intensity, would have a significant impact on wildfire behaviour.
These recommendations included changes to the tenure system and management focus
in the wild-land-urban interface, creating incentives for industrialscale
extraction of low-value biomass, and significantly increasing the use of
prescribed fire as a fuel treatment.

B.C.'s antiquated tenure system prevents entrepreneurial solutions to the
wildfire issue. At the same time, the management focus adjacent to communities
is still maximizing timber production instead of hazard reduction. This point is
especially critical given the recent noteworthy international wildfires, where
forest plantations right next to communities in Chile and Portugal burned,
leading to catastrophic consequences for local residents.

Incentivizing the removal and treatment of low-value biomass (fuel for wildfires
) would greatly reduce the cost of fuel treatments and increase rural
employment. And, an increased use of prescribed fire will extend the length of
time fuel treatments are effective at reducing fire behaviour.

These critical recommendations were not implemented in a meaningful and
effective way. The program that came out of the Filmon Report, the Strategic
Wildfire Prevention Initiative, is administered by the Union of B.C.
Municipalities and the First Nations Emergency Services Society. It has been
effective at helping communities develop useful Community Wildfire Protection
Plans and carry out some hazardous-fuel treatments.

But, nowhere near enough forest has been treated. A large part of the problem
lies in the pervasive idea that solving the wildfire threat requires local
government to lead the effort on Crown land. They don't have the legal mandate
or capacity to do so at the appropriate scale. That mandate lies with the
fiduciary - the provincial Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource
Operations.

Now B.C. has a new government promising to review the situation once the fire
season is over. If they're to transform the current state of emergency into
meaningful and cost-effective actions, they may want to consider two pieces of
advice.

First, seriously consider the key recommendations from the Filmon Report that
weren't implemented. It clearly states solutions to a problem that has only
escalated during a decade of near inaction.

Second, to really gauge what has and hasn't worked over the last 13 years, the
province would be wise to listen to municipal and regional district governments
who are actively and aggressively engaged in trying to reduce the wildfire
threat to their communities and get their perspective.

The previous administration never discussed the program successes or barriers
with local government. In fact, local governments passed several resolutions to
improve the program at Union of B.C. Municipalities conventions, but each time
their resolutions were ignored by the province.

Robert Gray is a fire ecologist and principal of R.W. Gray Consulting Ltd.
!@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Opinion

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 The Vancouver Sun
                              All Rights Reserved


                              601 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        The East Bay Times (California)

                              July 5, 2016 Tuesday

Tri-Valley youth sports results

BYLINE: Bay Area News Group

SECTION: MY TOWN; Alameda; Contra Costa; News; Local

LENGTH: 525 words


West Coast Soccer

Girls U17

The West Coast Wildfire U17 girls team went undefeated at the U.S. Club West
Regionals competition and qualified for the national tournament held in Aurora,
Colo. in late July.

In the first game held in Davis, the Wildfire shutout Nevada 8-0. Within the
first 10 minutes, the Wildfire got on the scoreboard when Tatiana Elsea scored
off an assist from Rachel McCarthy. Sydney Mendoza followed up with a goal four
minutes later. Kate Wallace fed Savannah Seals for the third score and Sierra
Martin scored twice right before half to make the score 5-0. As the second half
got underway, Tori Borga crossed to Tatiana Elsea for the first second half
goal. McCarthy followed up with an unassisted goal before Sara Shea fed Kayla
Grisham for the final score.

In the second match of the tournament, the Wildfire battled Bay Oaks to a
hard-fought 2-1 victory. Megan Clifton scored first off an assist from Tori
Borgna but Bay Oaks responded with the equalizer and the game remained tied at
1-1 until the late in the second half. In the 70th minute, Isabella Barbero sent
a corner kick to the middle of the box where Martin flicked the ball over her
back and into the net for the game-winning score.

The Wildfire next faced a physically large team from Boulder, Colo. and played
from behind for most of the game. FC Boulder scored a quick goal to start the
game off, then held the Wildfire scoreless throughout the rest of the first
half. In the second half, West Coast fired numerous shots on goal but couldn't
breakthrough until the 70th minute, when Martin connected with a loose ball to
tie the game at 1-1 and the game ended in a draw.

The two top point earners, Wildfire and FC Boulder, moved on to the fourth and
final game with a chance to compete at Nationals up for grabs. From the start
both teams tried to find a rhythm and the game quickly turned into a battle in
the midfield. Wildfire's Amanda Zeck, Mayzin Kung, Martin and Mendoza took
control in the middle forcing Boulder to the outside where the Wildfire's
defensive line of Seals, Clifton, Shea, Leila Anzo, Bri Torres and Krissy Keller
disrupted plays and picked off runners. With 20 minutes remaining in the second
half, the Wildfire's Zeck came up with a steal then distributed it to Borgna,
who made a run down the right side and sent a cross to Kate Wallace, who
finished the play with header that was deflected into the path of Clifton who
scored the lone goal of the match. Wildfire goalkeeper's Mackenzie Long and
Brianne Radliff deflected multiple shots throughout the game to combine for the
clean sheet.

With one summer tournament championship under their belt, the Wildfire will next
play in the Davis Legacy College Showcase, Best of the Best Surf Cup and the
U.S. Club Soccer National tournament.

The West Coast Wildfire roster consists of: Brianne Radliff, Mackenzie Long,
Sierra Martin, Briane Torres, Amanda Zeck, Krissey Keller, Savannah Seals, Kate
Wallace, Leila Anzo, Tatiana Elsea, Megan Clifton, Sara Shea, Mayzin Kung,
Sydney Mendoza, Tori Borgna, Bella Barbero, Kayla Grisham, Tyarah Trias, Rachel
McCarthy and coaches Karen Dayak and Adarie Dayak,

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2016 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              602 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        The East Bay Times (California)

                              July 5, 2016 Tuesday

Tri-Valley youth sports results

BYLINE: Bay Area News Group

SECTION: MY TOWN; Alameda; Contra Costa; News; Local

LENGTH: 525 words


West Coast Soccer

Girls U17

The West Coast Wildfire U17 girls team went undefeated at the U.S. Club West
Regionals competition and qualified for the national tournament held in Aurora,
Colo. in late July.

In the first game held in Davis, the Wildfire shutout Nevada 8-0. Within the
first 10 minutes, the Wildfire got on the scoreboard when Tatiana Elsea scored
off an assist from Rachel McCarthy. Sydney Mendoza followed up with a goal four
minutes later. Kate Wallace fed Savannah Seals for the third score and Sierra
Martin scored twice right before half to make the score 5-0. As the second half
got underway, Tori Borga crossed to Tatiana Elsea for the first second half
goal. McCarthy followed up with an unassisted goal before Sara Shea fed Kayla
Grisham for the final score.

In the second match of the tournament, the Wildfire battled Bay Oaks to a
hard-fought 2-1 victory. Megan Clifton scored first off an assist from Tori
Borgna but Bay Oaks responded with the equalizer and the game remained tied at
1-1 until the late in the second half. In the 70th minute, Isabella Barbero sent
a corner kick to the middle of the box where Martin flicked the ball over her
back and into the net for the game-winning score.

The Wildfire next faced a physically large team from Boulder, Colo. and played
from behind for most of the game. FC Boulder scored a quick goal to start the
game off, then held the Wildfire scoreless throughout the rest of the first
half. In the second half, West Coast fired numerous shots on goal but couldn't
breakthrough until the 70th minute, when Martin connected with a loose ball to
tie the game at 1-1 and the game ended in a draw.

The two top point earners, Wildfire and FC Boulder, moved on to the fourth and
final game with a chance to compete at Nationals up for grabs. From the start
both teams tried to find a rhythm and the game quickly turned into a battle in
the midfield. Wildfire's Amanda Zeck, Mayzin Kung, Martin and Mendoza took
control in the middle forcing Boulder to the outside where the Wildfire's
defensive line of Seals, Clifton, Shea, Leila Anzo, Bri Torres and Krissy Keller
disrupted plays and picked off runners. With 20 minutes remaining in the second
half, the Wildfire's Zeck came up with a steal then distributed it to Borgna,
who made a run down the right side and sent a cross to Kate Wallace, who
finished the play with header that was deflected into the path of Clifton who
scored the lone goal of the match. Wildfire goalkeeper's Mackenzie Long and
Brianne Radliff deflected multiple shots throughout the game to combine for the
clean sheet.

With one summer tournament championship under their belt, the Wildfire will next
play in the Davis Legacy College Showcase, Best of the Best Surf Cup and the
U.S. Club Soccer National tournament.

The West Coast Wildfire roster consists of: Brianne Radliff, Mackenzie Long,
Sierra Martin, Briane Torres, Amanda Zeck, Krissey Keller, Savannah Seals, Kate
Wallace, Leila Anzo, Tatiana Elsea, Megan Clifton, Sara Shea, Mayzin Kung,
Sydney Mendoza, Tori Borgna, Bella Barbero, Kayla Grisham, Tyarah Trias, Rachel
McCarthy and coaches Karen Dayak and Adarie Dayak,

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2016 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              603 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         The Mercury News (California)

                              July 5, 2016 Tuesday

Tri-Valley youth sports results

BYLINE: Bay Area News Group

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 525 words


West Coast Soccer

Girls U17

The West Coast Wildfire U17 girls team went undefeated at the U.S. Club West
Regionals competition and qualified for the national tournament held in Aurora,
Colo. in late July.

In the first game held in Davis, the Wildfire shutout Nevada 8-0. Within the
first 10 minutes, the Wildfire got on the scoreboard when Tatiana Elsea scored
off an assist from Rachel McCarthy. Sydney Mendoza followed up with a goal four
minutes later. Kate Wallace fed Savannah Seals for the third score and Sierra
Martin scored twice right before half to make the score 5-0. As the second half
got underway, Tori Borga crossed to Tatiana Elsea for the first second half
goal. McCarthy followed up with an unassisted goal before Sara Shea fed Kayla
Grisham for the final score.

In the second match of the tournament, the Wildfire battled Bay Oaks to a
hard-fought 2-1 victory. Megan Clifton scored first off an assist from Tori
Borgna but Bay Oaks responded with the equalizer and the game remained tied at
1-1 until the late in the second half. In the 70th minute, Isabella Barbero sent
a corner kick to the middle of the box where Martin flicked the ball over her
back and into the net for the game-winning score.

The Wildfire next faced a physically large team from Boulder, Colo. and played
from behind for most of the game. FC Boulder scored a quick goal to start the
game off, then held the Wildfire scoreless throughout the rest of the first
half. In the second half, West Coast fired numerous shots on goal but couldn't
breakthrough until the 70th minute, when Martin connected with a loose ball to
tie the game at 1-1 and the game ended in a draw.

The two top point earners, Wildfire and FC Boulder, moved on to the fourth and
final game with a chance to compete at Nationals up for grabs. From the start
both teams tried to find a rhythm and the game quickly turned into a battle in
the midfield. Wildfire's Amanda Zeck, Mayzin Kung, Martin and Mendoza took
control in the middle forcing Boulder to the outside where the Wildfire's
defensive line of Seals, Clifton, Shea, Leila Anzo, Bri Torres and Krissy Keller
disrupted plays and picked off runners. With 20 minutes remaining in the second
half, the Wildfire's Zeck came up with a steal then distributed it to Borgna,
who made a run down the right side and sent a cross to Kate Wallace, who
finished the play with header that was deflected into the path of Clifton who
scored the lone goal of the match. Wildfire goalkeeper's Mackenzie Long and
Brianne Radliff deflected multiple shots throughout the game to combine for the
clean sheet.

With one summer tournament championship under their belt, the Wildfire will next
play in the Davis Legacy College Showcase, Best of the Best Surf Cup and the
U.S. Club Soccer National tournament.

The West Coast Wildfire roster consists of: Brianne Radliff, Mackenzie Long,
Sierra Martin, Briane Torres, Amanda Zeck, Krissey Keller, Savannah Seals, Kate
Wallace, Leila Anzo, Tatiana Elsea, Megan Clifton, Sara Shea, Mayzin Kung,
Sydney Mendoza, Tori Borgna, Bella Barbero, Kayla Grisham, Tyarah Trias, Rachel
McCarthy and coaches Karen Dayak and Adarie Dayak,

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2016 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              604 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Clovis News Journal (New Mexico)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            March 2, 2016 Wednesday

County secures wildfire grant

BYLINE: Douglas Clark, Clovis News Journal, N.M.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 414 words


March 02--Curry County has secured a grant designed to assist in limiting area
wildfires.

During Tuesday's County Commission meeting, Curry County Public Services
Director Sandra Stewart shared specifics about $17,000 allotted via the 2015-16
Wildfire Risk Reduction Program, administered by the New Mexico Association of
Counties in partnership with the Bureau of Land Management (BLM).

"These funds will assist Curry County with the development of community wildfire
protection plan updates, as well as education and outreach initiatives," Stewart
said. "With regard to updating our wildfire protection plan, we had our first
core group meeting on Feb. 25, with the purpose being to review the checklist of
action items."

Stewart said Clovis interim Police Chief Doug Ford and Fire Chief Michael Nolen
attended the initial Wildfire Risk Reduction Program planning session, in
addition to representatives from the city's public works and emergency
management departments.

The Curry County Sheriff's department, roads department and the Texico, Melrose
and Grady fire departments also attended, along with members of several
volunteer fire departments and BLM personnel.

A initial public meeting on the Wildfire Risk Reduction Program will be held
5:30 p.m. March 10 at the Clovis-Carver Library's Ingram Room while a second
public session is slated for 5:30 p.m. April 12 in the library's North Annex.

"Homeowners and communities have a responsibility to create fire safe conditions
in and around structures that will limit the transmission of fire from wildlands
to property and property to wildlands," New Mexico Association of Counties
Executive Director Steve Kopelman said. "The program targets at-risk communities
by offering seed money to help defray the costs of reducing wildland fire risk
to non-federal wildland urban interface areas in New Mexico and outreach
activities should support implementation of an applicable Community Wildfire
Protection Plan through the development of educational products, community
outreach events and data collections."

Stewart said a second core group meeting would be conducted later this month to
draft a version of the updated wildfire reduction program plan, pending comment
at the second public meeting. The final revised plan is slated fora May 7
presentation to county commissioners.

___ (c)2016 the Clovis News Journal (Clovis, N.M.) Visit the Clovis News Journal
(Clovis, N.M.) at www.cnjonline.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160302-CJ-County-secures-wildfire-grant-0302-20160302

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CJ


                       Copyright 2016 Clovis News Journal


                              605 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                             July 3, 2013 Wednesday

What's ahead for a warming planet;
Vast wildfires to become 'more severe' - including in Canada, climate experts
say

BYLINE: Raveena Aulakh Toronto Star

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 616 words


Fierce wildfires, like the fatal one still burning near Yarnell, Ariz., will
become more frequent, more intense and burn more area as global warming
accelerates, scientists predict.

The hotter the temperature gets, the drier fuels will be and "that increases the
chances of igniting wildfires," said Mike Flannigan, a specialist in fire and
climate interaction at the University of Alberta. "There will be a longer
wildfire season and it will become much harder to suppress these fires."

Crews at Yarnell Hills are still trying to subdue a wildfire that has killed 19
highly trained firefighters and charred nearly 3,400 hectares of tinder-dry
chaparral and grasslands northwest of Phoenix. It is being called the worst
wildland fire tragedy in 80 years.

The fire remained dangerous and unpredictable late Tuesday, but it was no longer
burning out of control, officials told Reuters.

Flannigan, who has co-authored several papers on the link between wildfires and
global warming, says the area burned in Canada will likely double by the end of
this century due to climate change.

"It's not going to get any better, the way the Earth is warming up," he said.

As temperatures rise, so does the chance of extreme weather, including heat
waves that are conducive to wildfires.

In the past decade in Canada, about 8,000 wildfires have devoured up to two
million hectares every year, researchers say. That is the size of Nova Scotia.

Worldwide, wildfires are responsible for destroying approximately 350 to 400
million hectares a year, the size of India, Flannigan says.

Firefighters are well trained, especially in North America. But Flannigan says
there is only so much they will be able to do "before traditional avenues reach
the limit."

Al Tithecott, director of aviation, forest fire and emergency services with
Ontario's Ministry of Natural Resources, agrees that most research points to a
warming globe and "climate change will lead to more severe fires."

"And we know the more severe a fire, the more difficult it is to control," he
said.

With that in mind, the ministry is planning for more severe wildfires in the
future and "looking at the skills we need," he said.

In Canada, about 65 per cent of wildfires are started by people, and 35 per cent
by lightning. Fires started by people tend to be near roads and are reported
quickly. Lighting strikes - and subsequent fires - in backcountry areas take
longer to detect.

Only 3 per cent of fires cover an area of 200 hectares or more; that's 200
football fields. The fires that reach that size are responsible for 97 per cent
of the area burned, and become much harder to fight - especially if the weather
is dry and windy.

The strategy is to hit hard and fast, Flannigan said. Neither he nor Tithecott
wanted to speculate about the deaths of the 19 firefighters in Arizona on
Sunday, but they agree that something went terribly wrong.

Fire officials say the men - members of an elite "hotshot" team - were carving a
fire break with hand tools on one flank of the fire Sunday afternoon when strong
winds from a thunderstorm abruptly turned the flames in their direction. They
apparently were overtaken by flames in a matter of seconds before they had a
chance to seek shelter.

The precise circumstances of the tragedy are under investigation.

"There was nothing (the helicopter crew) could do to get to them," Peter
Andersen, a former Yarnell fire chief who was helping the firefighting effort,
told Reuters.

Only one member of the team survived. He was moving the team's truck at the
time.

"It's such a sad loss of life," Flannigan said.

"Wind can change direction quickly. . . . It is pretty scary how powerful
wildfires can be."

With files from Star wire services

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: In 2009, a wildfire swept through Lillooet, B.C., forcing 2,000
residents to evacuate. There are about 8,000 wildfires in Canada each year.
Darryl dyck/THE CANADIAN PRESS file photo A photo by Arizona firefighter Andrew
Ashcraft shows his crew nearing the wildfire that would later kill them.
Ashcraft texted it to his wife before he died. Andrew Ashcraft/Courtesy Juliann
Ashcraft

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                 Copyright 2013 Toronto Star Newspapers Limited


                              606 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                WMI Company News

                              June 22, 2012 Friday

Chubb expands wildfire defense services in Texas

LENGTH: 176 words


According to Christie Alderman, vice president, Chubb & Son, and new products
and services manager for Chubb Personal Insuranceby expanding Chubb wildfire
defense services to more counties in the state, the firm will be able to help
more customers protect their homes from an approaching fire.

In addition to providing wildfire education and property risk assessments, the
program responds to wildfires through a network of certified wildfire fighters
and the application of a highly effective fire-blocking gel.

In 2011, Chubb's Wildfire Defense Services responded to six major wildfires in
Texas, helping evacuate customers, setting up perimeter sprinkler systems and
engaging in active fire suppression at several homes.

There were more than 30,000 wildfires in Texas last year, burning nearly 4
million acres, the most of any state in 2011 and 43% of the national total,
according to the Texas Forest Service.

The September 2011 wildfire in Bastrop County was the most catastrophic fire in
Texas history, destroying 1,669 homes and scorching 34,000 acres.



LOAD-DATE: September 06, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2012 World Market Intelligence Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              607 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                            January 6, 2012, Friday

Women s team rallying for 2012 football season

BYLINE: Clint Thomas

SECTION: METRO WEST PUTNAM; Pg. P8

LENGTH: 597 words


cthomas@cnpapers.com

304-348-1232

The West Virginia Wildfire is looking for a few good women - who can be
downright defensive (or offensive) at the snap of a football.

The Wildfire is a women's tackle football team which belongs to the Women's
Spring Football League. The team's inaugural season, as the Wildfire, got
underway last April, with home games played at the Riverside High School
football field in Belle.

According to its website, the West Virginia Wildfire's mission is: "to give
women athletes in West Virginia an opportunity to play full-contact football as
an organized sport while creating a unique entertainment experience for our
community and our fans. To further the sport of women's football by creating
awareness in our area and giving young girls with the hope of one day playing
the sport the opportunity. To be involved in community service events promoting
fitness initiatives and the advancement of women and girls."

Bob Koontz of Charleston is the head coach of the West Virginia Wildfire, which
he co-owns with his wife, Kimberly, who also plays both the offensive and
defensive line for the team.

The tentative spring roster thus far includes Jennifer Arbogast of Charleston,
Tiffany Boggess of Charleston, Keri Bragg of Turtle Creek, Bobbie Braley of
Fraziers Bottom, Jessica Burnette of Marmet, Liz Honegger of Montgomery,
Adrienne Kees of Oak Hill, Kimberly Koontz of Charleston, Fanica Payne of
Dunbar, Mercedes Robinson of Marmet, Leslie Scott of Charleston, Nakia Summers
of Teays Valley, Kisha Walker of Charleston and Samantha Williams. Aside from
Koontz and Walker, who have three years of experience each, all of the players
will be entering their second season with the Wildfire.

Last year's season began with rocky results; in April, the Wildfire were blanked
twice by the Cape Fear Thunder. On April 20, the Wildfire lost 40-0 to Cape
Fear. A week later, they fell 47-0 to the Thunder.

In May, the Wildfire fell to the West Virginia Bruisers 13-6. In June, they tied
the Cape Fear Thunder 6-6 in their first meeting and lost 13-6 in the second
matchup. The West Virginia Bruisers defeated the Wildfire 16-6 on June 18.

All-Star players for the 2011 season were Adrienne Kees, Jessica Burnette,
Jennifer Arbogast, Fanica Payne, Nakia Summers and Samantha Williams.

Spanning the United States, the Women's Spring Football League started play two
years ago. The league is divided into 11-player and eight-player divisions.

The 11-player teams include: the Arkansas Rampage, the Atlanta Heartbreakers,
the Baltimore Burn, the Binghamton Tiger Cats, the D.C. Saints, the Finger Lakes
Falcons, the Frederick Saints, the Huntsville Tigers, the Iowa Thunder, the
Louisville Belles, the Mass. Chaos, the New Jersey Titans, the North Texas
Knockouts, the Savannah Vizionz and the Tri-State Bruisers.

As well as the West Virginia Wildfire, the eight-player division is made up of
the Cape Fear Thunder, the Carolina Freedom, the Desert Fire Cats, the Kansas
City Phoenix, the Las Vegas Heat, the Nevada Storm, the Racine Pirates, the Salt
City Arch Angels and the Ventura Black Widows.

Women 18 years old or older (or 16 and 17, with parents' permission) are
encouraged to try out for the Wildfire. For more information, including
donations or sponsorship opportunities, direct e-mail messages to
wildfirefootball@gmail.com or call/text 304-542-8831.

The 2011 West Virginia Wildfire players and coaches are seen in this photograph
from the women's tackle football team's website. Owners Bob and Kimberly Koontz
are recruiting players for the upcoming spring season.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 Charleston Newspapers


                              608 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)

                             April 23, 2007 Monday
                                  City Edition

Dry winter fuels fire danger

BYLINE: ALGIS J. LAUKAITIS, Lincoln Journal Star

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 580 words


Forestry officials are preparing for what could be another bad wildfire season
this summer in western Nebraska and other parts of the West.

The drought-stricken region didn't get a lot of snow or rain over the winter,
and trees and grasses are pretty dry, said Don Westover, fire program leader for
the Nebraska Forest Service in Lincoln.

"We're in something like the eighth year of the drought, and the forecast (for
this summer) is for warmer-than-average temperatures and less-than-normal
precipitation," Westover said.

Last year was the second-worst wildfire year in Nebraska since record-keeping
began in 1975, Westover said.

Statewide, about 120,000 acres were burned by wildfires.

The worst year was 2000, when the state lost about 250,000 acres to wildfires,
he said.

Six separate wildfires occurred in the state's Panhandle region near Harrison
and Chadron in July and August. There also was a major wildfire that threatened
Valentine in June.

Below-normal moisture over the winter has federal forestry officials worried
about potential wildfires not only in western Nebraska, but in other nearby
states, too.

"If the La Nina weather pattern plays out and if it brings warmer and drier
conditions, predictions say we can experience a more intense fire season than
last year," said Jerry Schumacher, a spokesman for the U.S. Forest Service
office in Chadron.

Nationwide, last year was the worst wildfire year since 2002, he said. However,
no figures were available.

Insect-damaged areas, especially in the Black Hills, could worsen the problem by
creating large tracts of dead trees and fuel for wildfires.

The National Weather Service says the fire danger is fairly low across western
and north-central Nebraska right now and those conditions should continue into
May. However, any period of above-normal temperatures and lack of precipitation
could quickly lead to an increase in fire danger.

"We're coming into the two wettest months, May and June, but as soon as you get
to July - bang -and things change drastically," Westover said.

The Nebraska Forest Service is preparing for the possibility of a bad wildfire
season by placing more equipment in areas where it is likely to be needed.

Westover said the agency also is cost-sharing with landowners who do have
forests to thin trees, thereby reducing the amount of fuel available for
wildfires.

"What happens is the trees grow without a lot of management and they are too
thick," he said. "A fire in there is likely to become a crown fire, and they are
hard to suppress and they are very damaging."

Over the past several years, the Nebraska Forest Service has spent about $1
million on the cost-share program, which has attracted nearly 100 landowners,
Westover said. This year, they may get another $300,000 or more.

The U.S. Forest Service also is hosting fire refresher courses and training
people who want to become qualified as firefighters, Schumacher said.

Most of the wildfires started last year were caused by lightning, Westover said,
"but that doesn't mean people should let their guard down."

He and Schumacher urged landowners and others to be pro-active and clear areas
of potential fuel on their property and around their homes, such as low-hanging
branches and thick grasses.

"We don't need people starting fires," Westover said. "We need people to be
very, very careful."

Reach Algis J. Laukaitis at (402) 473-7243 or alaukaitis@journalstar.com.

On the Web

To can cut down the wildfire risk to your property: www.firewise.org.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 Lincoln Journal Star,
                              All Rights Reserved


                              609 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 4, 2017 Saturday

Washington: Feinstein, Western Senators Urge Trump, Senate Leaders to Prioritize
Wildfire Disaster Response in Next Aid Package

LENGTH: 1135  words



Washington: Office of the Senator Dianne Feinstein has issued the following news
release:
Senator Dianne Feintein (D-Calif.) joined a group of ten Western Senators to
strongly urge President Donald Trump and Senate leaders to include funding for
wildfire disaster response in the next disaster aid package.


The letters to the President and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and
Minority Leader Chuck Schumer were also signed by Senators Jeff Merkley
(D-Ore.), Kamala Harris (D-Calif.), Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), Patty Murray (D-Wash.),
Maria Cantwell (D-Wash.), Catherine Cortez Masto (D-Nev.), Martin Heinrich
(D-N.M.), Michael Bennet (D-Colo.), and Jon Tester (D-Mont.).
Following a record-shattering fire season, the senators wrote, "As we continue
to assist Texas, Puerto Rico and other parts of the country recover from damage
caused by hurricanes so must we assist in the recovery of western states
scorched by wildfire. It is critical to include additional disaster relief
funding in the next aid package to help our communities recover and provide the
Forest Service with additional resources to repair lands and infrastructure
damaged by wildfire and reduce the threat of future wildfires."
Specifically, the Senators called for $200 million in funding for the Forest
Service to restore and repair public lands and infrastructure damaged in this
year's natural disasters. They also called for a $580 million investment in
thinning and other forest management to reduce fire-prone fuels and get ahead of
future fires before the U.S. faces another devastating fire season. "On Forest
Service land alone, 78 million acres are designated as moderate to high risk of
severe wildfires," the Senators noted. "If we do not act quickly to fund the
treatment of fire prone areas, the costs to fight and recover from these extreme
fires will continue to grow."
The Senators also called for a long-term fix to the problem of "fire borrowing,"
in which the Forest Service must rob funds from other programs--including fire
prevention--to pay for the cost of fighting fires in bad fire years.
The full text of the letters follows below:
Dear President Trump:
This year wildfires have rampaged throughout the West, causing extensive damage
from Montana and Idaho to Oregon and California. As we continue to assist Texas,
Puerto Rico and other parts of the country recover from damage caused by
hurricanes so must we assist in the recovery of western states scorched by
wildfire. It is critical to include additional disaster relief funding in the
next aid package to help our communities recover and provide the Forest Service
with additional resources to repair lands and infrastructure damaged by wildfire
and reduce the threat of future wildfires.
First, we must include $200 million in emergency funding to repair and replace
public lands and infrastructure damaged by wildfire and hurricanes. Without this
additional funding, the Forest Service will be forced to postpone or cancel
projects in FY18 to accommodate the recovery effort. This jeopardizes essential
work like the removal of hazardous trees for public safety, road and trail
maintenance, restoring vegetation in watersheds, and rehabilitating wildlife and
fish habitat. Failing to adequately fund recovery now will only lead to more
fire disasters in the future.
Second, we must seize the moment and include $580 million in emergency funding
to get ahead of future fires. Investing in vital forest thinning and hazardous
fuels reduction projects now will make our forests more resilient to
catastrophic wildfire in the future. On Forest Service land alone, 78 million
acres are designated as moderate to high risk of severe wildfires. If we do not
act quickly to fund the treatment of fire prone areas, the costs to fight and
recover from these extreme fires will continue to grow.
Finally, as you are already aware, it is critical that we repay any transferred
funds to cover the cost of suppression and enact a permanent fix to the problem
of fire-borrowing. We cannot provide disaster relief to other parts of the
country without assisting the western states scorched by fire as well.
Sincerely,


Dear Majority Leader McConnell and Minority Leader Schumer:
This year wildfires have rampaged throughout the West, causing extensive damage
from Montana and Idaho to Oregon and California. As we continue to assist Texas,
Puerto Rico and other parts of the country recover from damage caused by
hurricanes so must we assist in the recovery of western states scorched by
wildfire. It is critical to include additional disaster relief funding in the
next aid package to help our communities recover and provide the Forest Service
with additional resources to repair lands and infrastructure damaged by wildfire
and reduce the threat of future wildfires.
First, we need to ensure the communities that have been directly and indirectly
impacted by wildfire have access to programs to help their communities and
economies recover. Programs administered by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), the Department of Agriculture (USDA), the Small Business
Administration (SBA), the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD are
critical to this recovery effort. However, a number of these programs are not
nimble enough to help communities who endure hyper-localized damages. It is
critical that appropriate adjustments are made to ensure these communities
receive the help they deserve.
Second, we must include $200 million in emergency funding to repair and replace
public lands and infrastructure damaged by wildfire and hurricanes. Without this
additional funding, the Forest Service will be forced to postpone or cancel
projects in FY18 to accommodate the recovery effort. This jeopardizes essential
work like the removal of hazardous trees for public safety, road and trail
maintenance, restoring vegetation in watersheds, and rehabilitating wildlife and
fish habitat. Failing to adequately fund recovery now will only lead to more
fire disasters in the future.
Third, we must seize the moment and invest $580 million to make our forests more
resilient to catastrophic wildfire by investing in vital forest thinning and
hazardous fuels reduction projects. On Forest Service land alone, 78 million
acres are designated as moderate to high risk of severe fire. If we do not act
quickly to fund the treatment of fire prone areas, the costs to fight and
recover from these extreme fires will continue to grow.
Finally, as you are already aware, it is critical that we repay any transferred
funds to cover the cost of suppression and enact a permanent fix to the problem
of fire-borrowing. We cannot provide disaster relief to other parts of the
country without assisting the western states scorched by fire as well.
Sincerely,

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              610 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                            June 17, 2009 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire help rushing to province; Firefighters from across Canada, Mexico on
their way

BYLINE: Sarah Mclellan, Edmonton Journal

SECTION: CITYPLUS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 384  words

DATELINE: EDMONTON


More than 180 firefighters and five water-skimming air tankers from across
Canada and Mexico will arrive in Alberta in the next few days to help local
crews contain the 17 out-of-control fires that continue to rage across the
province.

Fires near Highway 63 and Highway 881 remain out of control, said Geoffrey
Driscoll, a wildfire information officer with Sustainable Resource Development.
Highway 63 has reopened to traffic.

Alberta Transportation, however, is advising motorists to take Highway 881
instead.

"With a wildfire, conditions can change very quickly," said Alberta Transpor
tation spokeswoman Heather Kaszuba, noting that Highway 63 could close at any
moment, forcing motorists to divert back to Highway 881.

The fire bordering Highway 881 has reached 350 hectares, while wildfires near
Highway 63 have covered nearly 8,000 hectares. Twelve wildfires in the Fort
McMurray area are out of control, but no homes or communities are threatened.

Thirty-five firefighters from the NorthWest Territories have arrived. The
province is expecting 116 firefighters and three air tankers from Ontario, 10
firefighters from New Brunswick, two air tankers from Quebec and 21 firefighters
from Jalisco, Mexico.

More than 600 Alberta firefighters are already battling the blazes.

There was a sudden spike in the number of wildfires due to warmer temperatures
and lightning strikes, Driscoll said.

There have been 890 wildfires this year in Alberta. In the past five years, the
average has been 715.

The wildfires closed off a 240-kilometre stretch of Highway 63 between Highway
55 and Highway 881 for parts of Monday and Tuesday.

Alex Deen, operator of the Grassland Motel, said the road detours were
eliminating traffic that would usually travel through Grassland, which is a pit
stop for motorists travelling on Highway 55 to Highway 63.

The dangerous road conditions coupled with a poor economy have made the past few
days terrible for business, Deen said.

"It's affected our business traffic substantially," he said.

In Wandering River, north of Grassland and just off Highway 63, the picture is
much the same.

"You can tell traffic is less than normal," Wandering River Motel manager Brandy
Kim.

"We did have a few people staying the night just because the road was closed,"
Kim said.

smclellan@thejournal.canwest.com

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Brian Gavriloff, The Journal; Wildfires like the one in Bruderheim
at the beginning of May are flaring throughout the province. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2009 Edmonton Journal, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              611 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Daily Camera (Boulder, Colorado)

                             April 17, 2017 Monday

CU Boulder researchers: Current wildfire policies can't protect people

BYLINE: Elizabeth Hernandez Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 549 words


The western United States is in uncharted territory when it comes to wildfires,
and University of Colorado Boulder researchers are trying to navigate this new,
charred landscape.


A  paper, led by CU and published Monday in the journal Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, explores the "new era of western wildfires." The
wildfire experts assert current wildfire policies can't properly protect people,
homes and ecosystems from the more intense wildfires caused by climate change.



 "For a long time, we've thought that if we try harder and do better, we can get
ahead of wildfire and reduce the risks," lead author and CU Boulder Institute of
Arctic and Alpine Research Scientist Tania Schoennagel said in a news release.
"We can no longer do that. This is bigger than us, and we're going to have to
adapt to wildfire rather than the other way around."

 The authors began working on the paper last February, driven by the rapid
accumulation of fires in the West.  Nine of the record fire years since 1960 in
the West have all happened since 2000, Schoennagel said. She also said Boulder
County temperatures are expected to increase 2 to 3 degrees by 2030 and 3 to 5
degrees by 2050.

 While working on the paper, Schoennagel and her team couldn't ignore fires that
tore through Colorado,  such as  March's  Sunshine Fire west of Boulder that
prompted more than 400 home evacuations and grew to 74 acres. In addition to
more fires, Schoennagel said in places like Boulder, fire is no longer just a
summertime phenomenon.

 "There's really a marked switch in the amount of wildfire we're seeing in
Colorado and across the West,  and that's what prompted us to take a closer
look," Schoennagel told the Daily Camera.

 Instead of dousing every blaze and decreasing the buildup of dead wood and
forest undergrowth, which the authors said are "increasingly inadequate"
efforts, the paper encourages policy reforms to adapt to the fires and warming
climates.

 "This pattern of bigger, hotter fires, along with the influx of homes into
fire-prone areas -- over 2 million since 1990 -- has made wildfire vastly more
costly and dangerous," the Monday news release said.

 On-the-ground solutions proposed by the paper include allowing more fires to
burn "largely unimpeded" in wildland areas and setting more controlled burns to
reduce natural fuels in more developed areas.

 On the policy side, the scientists argue that states and counties should take
on more of the cost of western wildfire prevention and fighting rather than
federal taxpayers paying the price. They believe that this would spur incentives
to adopt better planning efforts and fire-resistant building codes.

 The authors also suggest  forest thinning efforts in notably high-risk areas,
such as  communities in fire-prone regions.

 Some of these steps, Schoenaggel understood, might be poorly received, but she
hopes people begin to change the way they think about wildfires and prevention.

 "Change is always hard," she said. "But we're really suggesting changes that
are going to help communities become more adapted to wildfires so people and
their homes are going to become safer."

 Elizabeth Hernandez: 303-473-1106, hernandeze@dailycamera.com or
twitter.com/ehernandez

Crews battle the Sunshine Fire west of Boulder on March 19.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Crews battle the Sunshine Fire west of Boulder on March 19.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Prairie Mountain Publishing
                              All Rights Reserved


                              612 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Daily Camera (Boulder, Colorado)

                             April 17, 2017 Monday

CU Boulder researchers: current wildfire policies can't protect people

BYLINE: Elizabeth Hernandez Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 549 words


The western United States is in uncharted territory when it comes to wildfires,
and University of Colorado Boulder researchers are trying to navigate this new,
charred landscape.


A  paper, led by CU and published Monday in the journal Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, explores the "new era of western wildfires." The
wildfire experts assert current wildfire policies can't properly protect people,
homes and ecosystems from the more intense wildfires caused by climate change.



 "For a long time, we've thought that if we try harder and do better, we can get
ahead of wildfire and reduce the risks," lead author and CU Boulder Institute of
Arctic and Alpine Research Scientist Tania Schoennagel said in a news release.
"We can no longer do that. This is bigger than us, and we're going to have to
adapt to wildfire rather than the other way around."

 The authors began working on the paper last February, driven by the rapid
accumulation of fires in the West.  Nine of the record fire years since 1960 in
the West have all happened since 2000, Schoennagel said. She also said Boulder
County temperatures are expected to increase 2 to 3 degrees by 2030 and 3 to 5
degrees by 2050.

 While working on the paper, Schoennagel and her team couldn't ignore fires that
tore through Colorado,  such as  March's  Sunshine Fire west of Boulder that
prompted more than 400 home evacuations and grew to 74 acres. In addition to
more fires, Schoennagel said in places like Boulder, fire is no longer just a
summertime phenomenon.

 "There's really a marked switch in the amount of wildfire we're seeing in
Colorado and across the West,  and that's what prompted us to take a closer
look," Schoennagel told the Daily Camera.

 Instead of dousing every blaze and decreasing the buildup of dead wood and
forest undergrowth, which the authors said are "increasingly inadequate"
efforts, the paper encourages policy reforms to adapt to the fires and warming
climates.

 "This pattern of bigger, hotter fires, along with the influx of homes into
fire-prone areas -- over 2 million since 1990 -- has made wildfire vastly more
costly and dangerous," the Monday news release said.

 On-the-ground solutions proposed by the paper include allowing more fires to
burn "largely unimpeded" in wildland areas and setting more controlled burns to
reduce natural fuels in more developed areas.

 On the policy side, the scientists argue that states and counties should take
on more of the cost of western wildfire prevention and fighting rather than
federal taxpayers paying the price. They believe that this would spur incentives
to adopt better planning efforts and fire-resistant building codes.

 The authors also suggest  forest thinning efforts in notably high-risk areas,
such as  communities in fire-prone regions.

 Some of these steps, Schoenaggel understood, might be poorly received, but she
hopes people begin to change the way they think about wildfires and prevention.

 "Change is always hard," she said. "But we're really suggesting changes that
are going to help communities become more adapted to wildfires so people and
their homes are going to become safer."

 Elizabeth Hernandez: 303-473-1106, hernandeze@dailycamera.com or
twitter.com/ehernandez

Crews battle the Sunshine Fire west of Boulder on March 19.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Crews battle the Sunshine Fire west of Boulder on March 19.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Prairie Mountain Publishing
                              All Rights Reserved


                              613 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The Chronicle (Centralia, Washington)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            April 27, 2016 Wednesday

Fire Marshal's Office Focuses on Wildfire Arson Prevention During Arson
Awareness Week

BYLINE: The Chronicle, Centralia, Wash.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 257 words


April 27--The Washington State Fire Marshal's Office is working to raise
awareness about wildfire arson for National Arson Awareness Week from May 1-7.

According to a press release, 75 percent of all wildland fires in the state in
2015 were caused by humans, even though most residents didn't have any intention
of starting a wildfire.

Last year more than 2,000 reported fires affected 1.1 million acres for a total
cost of $343 million in fire suppression.

"Make it your goal this Arson Awareness Week to consider ways to prevent
devastating wildfires," said Fire Marshal Charles Duffy.

The Fire Marshal's Office is working with the United State Fire Administration
to share information and raise awareness of wildfire arson and provide
strategies for people to combat it.

The Fire Marshal's Office suggest people clean up their neighborhoods by
removing garbage, material, excess vegetation, flammable liquids and abandoned
vehicles and securing abandoned homes which are potential arson targets to
prevent wildfires.

Residents can also prepare for possible wildfires by knowing their risks; making
an emergency plan; building a preparedness kit with a flashlight, batteries,
money and first aid supplies; knowing the local emergency plan; and knowing how
to report arson activity by calling 911, the local fire department or the arson
hotline at 800-55-ARSON.

For more information visit usfa.fema.gov.

___ (c)2016 The Chronicle (Centralia, Wash.) Visit The Chronicle (Centralia,
Wash.) at www.chronline.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160427-1CE-Fire-Marshal-s-Office-Focuses-on-Wildfire
-Arson-Prevention-During-Arson-Awareness-Week-0427-20160427

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CE


                          Copyright 2016 The Chronicle


                              614 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                             August 1, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Early Edition

B.C. must act to reduce wildfire threat; Recommendations from 2003 report only
partially enacted, writes Robert Gray

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 626 words


It's summer in B.C. and wildfires again are destroying homes and threatening
communities.

In the aftermath of the record-breaking 2003 fire season, there was much hype
and promise associated with the Filmon Review, the Liberal government's response
to the wildfires. The province invested millions in planning and fuel treatments
and in return several tens of thousands of hectares of hazardous fuels have been
treated. However, if we step back and look from a provincewide perspective we
see that not a single community has all the identified hazards mitigated - all
are still vulnerable. All still have too many avenues for wildfire to spread
from Crown land to private and municipal land.

Several of the key Filmon Report recommendations, if applied at the appropriate
scale and intensity, would have a significant impact on wildfire behaviour.

These recommendations included changes to the tenure system and management focus
in the wild-land-urban interface, creating incentives for industrial-scale
extraction of low-value biomass, and significantly increasing the use of
prescribed fire as a fuel treatment.

B.C.'s antiquated tenure system prevents entrepreneurial solutions to the
wildfire issue.

At the same time, the management focus adjacent to communities is still
maximizing timber production instead of hazard reduction. This point is
especially critical given the recent noteworthy international wildfires, where
forest plantations right next to communities in Chile and Portugal burned,
leading to catastrophic consequences for local residents.

Incentivizing the removal and treatment of low-value biomass (fuel for wildfires
) would greatly reduce the cost of fuel treatments and increase rural
employment. And, an increased use of prescribed fire will extend the length of
time fuel treatments are effective at reducing fire behaviour.

These critical recommendations were not implemented in a meaningful and
effective way. The program that came out of the Filmon Report, the Strategic
Wildfire Prevention Initiative, is administered by the Union of B.C.
Municipalities and the First Nations Emergency Services Society. It has been
effective at helping communities develop useful Community Wildfire Protection
Plans and carry out some hazardous-fuel treatments. But, nowhere near enough
forest has been treated. A large part of the problem lies in the pervasive idea
that solving the wildfire threat requires local government to lead the effort on
Crown land.

They don't have the legal mandate or capacity to do so at the appropriate scale.
That mandate lies with the provincial Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural
Resource Operations.

Now B.C. has a new government promising to review the situation once the fire
season is over. If they're to transform the current state of emergency into
meaningful and cost-effective actions, they may want to consider two pieces of
advice.

First, seriously consider the key recommendations from the Filmon Report that
weren't implemented. It clearly states solutions to a problem that has only
escalated during a decade of near inaction.

Second, to really gauge what has and hasn't worked over the last 13 years, the
province would be wise to listen to municipal and regional district governments
actively and aggressively engaged in trying to reduce the wildfire threat to
their communities.

The previous administration never discussed the program successes or barriers
with local government. In fact, local governments passed several resolutions to
improve the program at Union of B.C. Municipalities conventions, but each time
their resolutions were ignored by the province. Robert Gray is a fire ecologist
and principal of R.W. Gray Consulting Ltd. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network
Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Calgary Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              615 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 21, 2015 Wednesday

CSU researchers to study health dangers of wildfire smoke, build better warning
system

LENGTH: 746  words

DATELINE: Fort Collins


Colorado State University has issued the following news release:


In 2012, the High Park Fire ripped through the mountains west of Fort Collins,
charring 87,284 acres and hundreds of homes.  Smoke from the fire permeated
Colorado's Front Range and neighboring states for weeks, forcing millions to
breathe particulate-laden air.

Researchers at Colorado State University have received a $1.2 million NASA grant
to study the public health toll from inhaling such dense wildfire smoke and
build an improved air quality forecasting system.High Park smoke NASA

"We are developing a tool that officials can use to evaluate where wildfire
smoke will travel and how bad it is expected to be so they can warn people ahead
of time," said Jeff Pierce, an assistant professor of in the Department of
Atmospheric Science who is leading the project.

Other team members include Emily Fischer, assistant professor of atmospheric
science, Sheryl Magzamen, assistant professor of environmental and radiological
health science, and John Volckens, associate professor of mechanical
engineering.  The researchers came together as part of the School of Global
Environmental Sustainability Global Challenges Research Team program, which
provides funding and other support for interdisciplinary projects.
Long-term health risks?

Exposure to wildfire smoke has been associated with a suite of negative health
effects. Many of those subjected to smoke for even a day or two have reported
increased eye irritation and respiratory symptoms.

But little is known about the long-term health risks and impacts of being
exposed to smoke filled with fine particles and potentially toxic gasses.

"No one is sure about the public health impacts from exposure to wildfire
smoke," said Volckens, the director of the Center for Energy Development and
Health at the CSU Energy Institute. "We have a lot of anecdotal information, but
not a lot of hard data. We need to gather data from several fire episodes to
improve our understanding of the health risks from inhaling wildfire smoke."

Mike Van Dyke with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment
agrees. He said wildfires are a critical public health concern, which is why the
agency is working with CSU on the project.

"We are excited to partner with CSU to help develop improved wildfire smoke
forecasting models that could be used in these emergencies to help inform our
citizens and prevent adverse health issues," he said.
Mining records for data

CSU researchers will comb through hospital records and other data logged during
High Park and two other Colorado wildfires to determine - If there were more
incidents of respiratory and other health-related problems reported during
wildfires?  If so, what kind? And were certain populations -the elderly and/or
those with asthma, for example - more affected than others?

The team will then evaluate that information against satellite images, weather
and atmospheric data from those same fires and time periods. The goal is to
better understand how the smoke travelled and pinpoint which areas were exposed
to different smoke levels and for how long.

"We can compare information and see at what point this smoke starts impacting
public health," Volckens said.
Better models needed

During the second phase of the study, the team will evaluate two existing air
quality/fire emission models to see if they can be adapted to forecast the path
smoke from a wildfire will take and which areas or regions could be subjected to
the most polluted - and potentially hazardous -- air.

"Right now, there is a lot of uncertainty in the current models used," Pierce
said. "We want to improve them."

Volckens agreed, saying people need time to plan and protect themselves.

"A big wildfire like High Park can turn the relatively pristine Front Range air
into Beijing in less than 24 hours," he said.
A hazy future

The need for an air quality warning system for wildfires is only going to grow
in coming years.  Climate models predict that Colorado and other western states
will become more arid and more prone to wildfires. A 2009 study published in the
Journal of Geophysical Research estimates the number of wildfires in the western
United States will grow more than 50 percent by the 2050s.

"Our best guess is that we are going to see more wildfires that are much bigger
in size," Pierce said. "We need to be prepared."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              616 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 17, 2015 Saturday

CSU researchers to study health dangers of wildfire smoke, build better warning
system

LENGTH: 746  words

DATELINE: Fort Collins


Colorado State University has issued the following news release:


In 2012, the High Park Fire ripped through the mountains west of Fort Collins,
charring 87,284 acres and hundreds of homes.  Smoke from the fire permeated
Colorado's Front Range and neighboring states for weeks, forcing millions to
breathe particulate-laden air.

Researchers at Colorado State University have received a $1.2 million NASA grant
to study the public health toll from inhaling such dense wildfire smoke and
build an improved air quality forecasting system.High Park smoke NASA

"We are developing a tool that officials can use to evaluate where wildfire
smoke will travel and how bad it is expected to be so they can warn people ahead
of time," said Jeff Pierce, an assistant professor of in the Department of
Atmospheric Science who is leading the project.

Other team members include Emily Fischer, assistant professor of atmospheric
science, Sheryl Magzamen, assistant professor of environmental and radiological
health science, and John Volckens, associate professor of mechanical
engineering.  The researchers came together as part of the School of Global
Environmental Sustainability Global Challenges Research Team program, which
provides funding and other support for interdisciplinary projects.
Long-term health risks?

Exposure to wildfire smoke has been associated with a suite of negative health
effects. Many of those subjected to smoke for even a day or two have reported
increased eye irritation and respiratory symptoms.

But little is known about the long-term health risks and impacts of being
exposed to smoke filled with fine particles and potentially toxic gasses.

"No one is sure about the public health impacts from exposure to wildfire
smoke," said Volckens, the director of the Center for Energy Development and
Health at the CSU Energy Institute. "We have a lot of anecdotal information, but
not a lot of hard data. We need to gather data from several fire episodes to
improve our understanding of the health risks from inhaling wildfire smoke."

Mike Van Dyke with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment
agrees. He said wildfires are a critical public health concern, which is why the
agency is working with CSU on the project.

"We are excited to partner with CSU to help develop improved wildfire smoke
forecasting models that could be used in these emergencies to help inform our
citizens and prevent adverse health issues," he said.
Mining records for data

CSU researchers will comb through hospital records and other data logged during
High Park and two other Colorado wildfires to determine - If there were more
incidents of respiratory and other health-related problems reported during
wildfires?  If so, what kind? And were certain populations -the elderly and/or
those with asthma, for example - more affected than others?

The team will then evaluate that information against satellite images, weather
and atmospheric data from those same fires and time periods. The goal is to
better understand how the smoke travelled and pinpoint which areas were exposed
to different smoke levels and for how long.

"We can compare information and see at what point this smoke starts impacting
public health," Volckens said.
Better models needed

During the second phase of the study, the team will evaluate two existing air
quality/fire emission models to see if they can be adapted to forecast the path
smoke from a wildfire will take and which areas or regions could be subjected to
the most polluted - and potentially hazardous -- air.

"Right now, there is a lot of uncertainty in the current models used," Pierce
said. "We want to improve them."

Volckens agreed, saying people need time to plan and protect themselves.

"A big wildfire like High Park can turn the relatively pristine Front Range air
into Beijing in less than 24 hours," he said.
A hazy future

The need for an air quality warning system for wildfires is only going to grow
in coming years.  Climate models predict that Colorado and other western states
will become more arid and more prone to wildfires. A 2009 study published in the
Journal of Geophysical Research estimates the number of wildfires in the western
United States will grow more than 50 percent by the 2050s.

"Our best guess is that we are going to see more wildfires that are much bigger
in size," Pierce said. "We need to be prepared."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              617 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     Nanaimo Daily News (British Columbia)

                              July 31, 2015 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Sproat Lake blaze nearly out, but evacuation orders remain

BYLINE: Eric Plummer, Alberni Valley Times

SECTION: REGION; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 461 words


Dog Mountain is no longer considered a "wildfire of note" by the province.

But parts of the forest continue to burn, leaving lasting damage to the area's
slopes.

On Wednesday, the Alberni-Clayoquot Regional District extended its state of
emergency for the mountain near Sproat Lake, continuing with an evacuation order
affecting eight of the area's 21 cabins.

This notice is based on preliminary results of a geohazard assessment
commissioned by B.C.'s Wildfire Management Branch on July 22 and 23. A report on
this investigation has not yet been completed, but early signs show the wildfire
has left behind dangerously unstable slopes.

"Properties within the evacuation area are those subject to moderate to high
rockfall hazard as identified by this assessment," stated the ACRD's latest
notice on the Dog Mountain wildfire. Although flames continue to lick parts of
Dog Mountain, the province reports the wildfire has subsided since it spread to
450 hectares by mid-July. The fire was first discovered July 4, destroying at
least one cabin during its week of expanding across the mountain. Firefighters
are no longer permanently on the site, but routinely check the area to ensure
burning does not leave the wildfire's perimeter. Plans call for sprinklers set
up to protect the cabins to be removed by the weekend.

"Now what they're going to do is allow the fire to continue to consume the
forest fuels within that perimeter," said Marg Drysdale, a fire information
officer with the province's Coastal Fire Centre.

"We expect that people will see open flame, we expect people will see smoke. In
some cases they will see trees go up. So definitely it is an active fire."

The Ministry of Forests approach to the Dog Mountain fire has left several
Sproat Lake residents frustrated, as an air tanker was used for only one day on
July 4 when the blaze was discovered. Bob Cole questions why parts of the forest
are still permitted to burn.

"Can you tell me why we have to suffer day after day of smoke and flames around
the shoreline of Dog Mountain when so little effort would be required to snuff
these dozen or two hot spots out?" he wrote in a letter to the province. "It is
bad enough that we will have to look at this sad testimonial blight around the
shores of our lake for years to come, but to have to watch it continue to gobble
up bits and pieces of shoreline unattended is salt in raw wounds."

Meanwhile the Alberni Valley remains under an "extreme" fire danger rating after
months of scarce rainfall and a weak snowpack that collected in the mountains
over the winter.

An Island-wide campfire ban was lifted this week for northern areas and the fog
zone along the Island's west coast, but a prohibition remains in place for the
Alberni Valley over this long weekend.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Wildfire Management Branch Photo; Firefighters tend to a blaze that
overtook Dog Mountain earlier this month. The wildfire has created lasting
instability on the mountain, prompting the regional district to extend its state
of emergency and evacuation order for the area.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 Nanaimo Daily News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              618 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Las Cruces Sun-News (New Mexico)

                             April 7, 2011 Thursday

Our View: Be careful during tinder-dry fire conditions

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 394 words


According to the U.S. Drought Monitor Map, most of New Mexico, except for a
relatively small area in the northwest corner of the state, is experiencing some
degree of drought.

New Mexico isn't alone, with neighboring Texas and Oklahoma almost completely
caught up in various drought stages along with about half of Colorado and 75
percent of Arizona.

Las Cruces is in an area designated D2, Severe Drought. Neighboring El Paso is
categorized as D3, Extreme Drought.

Of course, one huge danger of severe drought is wildfire, and we've already seen
our share of that in New Mexico. Silver City recently experienced the
destructive Quail Ridge wildfire. A wildfire has been burning near Ruidoso and
destroyed some residences and, according to some sources, as many as 6,900 acres
of woodlands so far.

Electronic information signs along I-10 in El Paso have been warning "Extreme
Wildfire Danger."

As of Thursday, the Lincoln National Forest was operating under Stage 2 Fire
Restrictions.

It doesn't take much to start a wildfire - just a moment of carelessness. And it
doesn't take much to prevent wildfires - just some common sense. Taking just a
few simple precautions, you can help prevent wildfires.

And keep in mind: People living in wooded or overgrown areas must be
particularly vigilant.

Observe wildfire warnings and fire-danger signs in parks and elsewhere.

Wildfires can be started by hot catalytic converters on cars. Don't drive or
park over dry growth.

Don't flick smoking materials out a vehicle window.

No open burning. Don't burn yard waste, leaves or other debris.

Be very careful when using possible ignition sources such as candles, lanterns,
lighters, butane "matches" and real matches.

Clear dry brush and other combustibles from around your house. Keep grass and
weeds cut back. Eliminate other ignition sources around your house Pay attention
to things as seemingly basic as pine needles on the roof and debris in the
gutters.

If you're grilling in the backyard or at a local park, make sure the ashes or
coals are doused and completely out. Don't grill in windy conditions. Keep a
72-hour emergency kit handy in case you have to leave your house quickly, and
know the escape routes from your area.

Get used to it. There doesn't appear to be any appreciable rain in sight, and
drought conditions are predicted to continue and get worse through June.

Be careful.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


        Copyright 2011 Las Cruces Sun-News, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              619 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 6, 2014 Wednesday

Wisconsin: Smokey Bear turns 70 August 9

LENGTH: 582  words

DATELINE: Madison


DNR, The state of Wisconsin has issued the following news release:

Contact(s): Curt Wilson, forestry leader, 920-662-5126 curt.wilson@wi.gov or
John Lubbers, forestry team leader, 920-662-5132 john.lubbers@wisconsin.gov

Green Bay--August 9 marks Smokey Bear's 70th birthday as he continues to
communicate his well-known message: "Only You Can Prevent Wildfires."

Smokey is the center of the longest-running public service advertising campaign
in U.S. history. Since 1944, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, as a
member of the National Association of State Foresters, the Ad Council and the
U.S. Forest Service have been helping Smokey become one of the most recognizable
figures in America, ranking alongside Mickey Mouse and Santa Claus.

Smokey is recognized by 97% of adults and 3 out of 4 adults are able to recall
Smokey's message of "Only You Can Prevent Wildfires" without prompting,
according to an Ad Council tracking survey.

Smokey's message about wildfire prevention has helped to reduce the number of
acres lost annually to wildfires -- from about 22 million (1944) to an average
of 6.7 million annually today. However, wildfire prevention remains one of the
most critical issues affecting our country.

It's always wildfire season somewhere in the U.S. and every region of the U.S.
has wildfires - and calls for assistance are answered

Wisconsin recently sent a 20-person hand-crew of members from various government
agencies to Boise, Idaho to assist with the wildfire suppression efforts in the
western United States. Just as Wisconsin answered this call for help, Wisconsin
also knows if help is needed from other states, that call will be answered.

"We are always prepared for the weather to take a turn for the worst, but if we
do not find ourselves in a critical fire situation at home, we most certainly
are willing to send resources to areas of the country in need," said Curt
Wilson, forestry leader. "This is a two-way street. We send help to other states
when requested. And, if we are facing needs in times of emergencies, we also
will get that extra assistance in return."

Wisconsin's peak fire season typically occurs in the spring shortly after the
snow-cover disappears. This also is the time landowners are outside conducting
property clean-up and choosing to burn ground materials instead of composting or
recycling.

"Many people think that lightening starts most wildfires. In fact, 9 out of 10
wildfires nationwide are started by humans," Wilson said. "Wildfires sparked by
humans in Wisconsin are most commonly caused by debris or trash burning on windy
days. The easiest way to prevent these fires is to simply obtain a burn permit
and follow the rules."

Other common wildfire causes include:

[#xfffd] Campfires left unattended

[#xfffd] Disposing ashes from woodstoves or fireplaces

[#xfffd] Operating hot equipment in dry grassy areas

"The Smokey Bear campaign has helped children and adults throughout the country
understand their role in preventing wildfires," Wilson said. "For 70 years,
Smokey Bear has empowered people to make a difference; his message of personal
responsibility continues to be as critical and relevant now as ever. We look
forward to celebrating many more birthdays of our beloved icon."

Smokey is giving out bear hugs online, using #SmokeyBearHug. He's also directing
fans to his website, www.smokeybear.com, Facebook, YouTube, Instagram, and
Twitter for more information about wildfire prevention.

For further information please visit:
http://www.dnr.wi.gov/

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              620 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 6, 2014 Wednesday

Wisconsin: Smokey Bear turns 70 August 9

LENGTH: 582  words

DATELINE: Madison


DNR, The state of Wisconsin has issued the following news release:

Contact(s): Curt Wilson, forestry leader, 920-662-5126 curt.wilson@wi.gov or
John Lubbers, forestry team leader, 920-662-5132 john.lubbers@wisconsin.gov

Green Bay--August 9 marks Smokey Bear's 70th birthday as he continues to
communicate his well-known message: "Only You Can Prevent Wildfires."

Smokey is the center of the longest-running public service advertising campaign
in U.S. history. Since 1944, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, as a
member of the National Association of State Foresters, the Ad Council and the
U.S. Forest Service have been helping Smokey become one of the most recognizable
figures in America, ranking alongside Mickey Mouse and Santa Claus.

Smokey is recognized by 97% of adults and 3 out of 4 adults are able to recall
Smokey's message of "Only You Can Prevent Wildfires" without prompting,
according to an Ad Council tracking survey.

Smokey's message about wildfire prevention has helped to reduce the number of
acres lost annually to wildfires -- from about 22 million (1944) to an average
of 6.7 million annually today. However, wildfire prevention remains one of the
most critical issues affecting our country.

It's always wildfire season somewhere in the U.S. and every region of the U.S.
has wildfires - and calls for assistance are answered

Wisconsin recently sent a 20-person hand-crew of members from various government
agencies to Boise, Idaho to assist with the wildfire suppression efforts in the
western United States. Just as Wisconsin answered this call for help, Wisconsin
also knows if help is needed from other states, that call will be answered.

"We are always prepared for the weather to take a turn for the worst, but if we
do not find ourselves in a critical fire situation at home, we most certainly
are willing to send resources to areas of the country in need," said Curt
Wilson, forestry leader. "This is a two-way street. We send help to other states
when requested. And, if we are facing needs in times of emergencies, we also
will get that extra assistance in return."

Wisconsin's peak fire season typically occurs in the spring shortly after the
snow-cover disappears. This also is the time landowners are outside conducting
property clean-up and choosing to burn ground materials instead of composting or
recycling.

"Many people think that lightening starts most wildfires. In fact, 9 out of 10
wildfires nationwide are started by humans," Wilson said. "Wildfires sparked by
humans in Wisconsin are most commonly caused by debris or trash burning on windy
days. The easiest way to prevent these fires is to simply obtain a burn permit
and follow the rules."

Other common wildfire causes include:

[#xfffd] Campfires left unattended

[#xfffd] Disposing ashes from woodstoves or fireplaces

[#xfffd] Operating hot equipment in dry grassy areas

"The Smokey Bear campaign has helped children and adults throughout the country
understand their role in preventing wildfires," Wilson said. "For 70 years,
Smokey Bear has empowered people to make a difference; his message of personal
responsibility continues to be as critical and relevant now as ever. We look
forward to celebrating many more birthdays of our beloved icon."

Smokey is giving out bear hugs online, using #SmokeyBearHug. He's also directing
fans to his website, www.smokeybear.com, Facebook, YouTube, Instagram, and
Twitter for more information about wildfire prevention.

For further information please visit:
http://www.dnr.wi.gov/

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              621 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Clearwater Times (N. Thompson)

                              July 9, 2017 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

UPDATE: Little movement on wildfires Sunday

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 684 words


UPDATE: 9:30 p.m.

The wildfire located west and north of Dunn Lake has held at 897 hectares and
zero per cent contained, according to the BC Wildfire Service's evening update.

A total 11 firefighters, one response officer, one helicopter, two pieces of
heavy equipment and six structural protection unit personnel were on scene
battling that blaze today.

The Thuya Lake Road fire has also showed no movement today, still estimated at
315 hectares with no containment.

Ten firefighters, one response officer, a helicopter, one piece of heavy
equipment and two water tenders were on scene today

--

UPDATE: 3 p.m.

The wildfires located west and north of Dunn Lake have grown significantly, now
estimated at 897 hectares and zero per cent contained.

Wells Gray Provincial Park was officially closed to the public Sunday Morning

As a result of the fires, most of Little Fort and the Dunn Lake area were
evacuated Friday night, and more residents are ready to go.

VIDEO

--

UPDATE: July 9 at 9 a.m.

The wildfire located west and north of Dunn Lake has grown signicantly, now
estimated at 897 hectares and zero per cent contained.

According to the BC Wildfire Service, 11 firefighters, one response officer, one
helicopter, two pieces of heavy equipment and six structural protection unit
personnel are on scene battling that blaze today.

"The terrain in this area is very rocky and provides challenging access for
heavy equipment. Smoke is thick is the surrounding area, hampering visibility to
crews and aircraft," writes the BC Wildfire Service.

The Thuya Lake Road fire showed little movement overnight, now estimated at 315
hectares with no containment.

Ten firefighters, one response officer, a helicopter, two pieces of heavy
equipment and two water tenders are on scene today

"Difficult terrain is proving to make access difficult for heavy equipment in
some areas. Smoke is thick is the surrounding area, hampering visibility to
crews and aircraft," adds BC Wildfire.

No public access to Wells Gray Provincial Park will be allowed after 8 a.m. on
Sunday. Anyone currently in the park is required to leave the area.

Tweet

For full details on the evacuation orders and alerts see below.

-

UPDATE: 9 p.m.

No public access to Wells Gray Provincial Park will be allowed after 8 a.m. on
Sunday. Anyone currently in the park is required to leave the area.

The Thuya Lake Road fire is now estimated at 300 hectares and is considered out
of control.

Ten firefighters, one response officer, two pieces of heavy equipment and one
water tender were on scene battling the blaze today.

The wildfire located west and north of Dunn Lake is holding at 120 hectares.

Thirteen firefighters, one response officer, two pieces of heavy equipment and
eight structural protection unit personnel were on scene battling that blaze
today.

For full details on the evacuation orders and alerts see below.

--

ORIGINAL:

A wildfire located west and north of Dunn Lake has hit 120 hectares, with both
fires expected to converge into one large fire today.

The BC Wildfire Service reports three firefighters and six structural protection
personnel are on site today, assisted by one rotary-wing aircraft and an officer
on site.

Local fire departments and authorities are assisting BC Wildfire Service with
these fires.

Most of Little Fort and the Dunn Lake area were ordered evacuated Friday night,
with further evacuations today.

The Thompson-Nicola Regional District issued an evacuation order for residents
in Little Fort, west and south of Lemieux Creek, and everyone north of Dunn
Lake.

An evacuation alert was also issued for properties east of Lemieux Creek in
Little Fort due to the Thuya Lake Road fire.

This wildfire is about 50 hectares in size.

The BC Wildfire Service reports a rotary-wing aircraft and one officer is on
site with more crews en route for that fire.

Local fire departments and authorities are assisting BC Wildfire Service with
this fire as well.

All those evacuated are advised to go to a reception centre set up at the Legion
Hall in Clearwater.

For full details on the evacuation orders and alerts see below.

More to come.

Evac Order

Evac Order 2

Evac Alert

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              622 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                              June 18, 2017 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Returning to the Smokies 6 months after a deadly wildfire

BYLINE:  By KRISTIN M. HALL Associated Press

SECTION: STL LIFE; Pg. H8

LENGTH: 920 words


GATLINBURG, Tenn. - When Dolly Parton dreamed up the idea of an amusement park
in East Tennessee, she said it would be "a fantasy city, a Smoky Mountain
fairyland."

Over the next three decades, Dollywood became the state's biggest ticketed
attraction, with nearly 2.5 million visitors annually. Tourism in Pigeon Forge,
where Dollywood is located, regularly brings in $1 billion a year in revenue.
Nearby Great Smoky Mountains National Park is a massive draw, too, with a record
11.3 million visitors last year.

But a deadly wildfire last November scorched a path through the park and
surrounding Sevier County, threatening to disrupt the only industry the region
has: tourism. Gale force winds spread the fire in a wild, erratic path for 24
hours. Fourteen people died. More than 2,400 structures were damaged or
destroyed.

Images and news of families fleeing the wildfires were terrifying. Growing up in
Tennessee, I was one of those millions who'd vacationed all my life in the
Smokies and at Dollywood. When I was sent to Gatlinburg last year to report on
the aftermath of the fire, I worried that many of the sites of my favorite
childhood memories had gone up in smoke.

But while tourism took a hit, Dollywood and Pigeon Forge, along with most of
downtown Gatlinburg, were mostly unaffected. And in late May, six months after
the fire and just before the start of the busy summer season, I returned for
another visit.

This time, I went as a parent, bringing my own daughter to make new memories.

My family rode the same roller coasters and water rides my brother and I rode as
kids. We saw cowboys and cowgirls at Dollywood's Dixie Stampede show perform the
same amazing tricks on their horses. Three generations of my family including my
parents, my brother and his wife and his daughter, climbed aboard Dollywood's
old steam train.

My 2-year-old daughter laid her head down on my lap as we chugged along slowly
and I felt like time was standing still. My memories were merging with the ones
forming in her young mind of a special moment we could share forever.

All around us there was music. Often it was Parton's signature high-pitched
voice warbling through the Dollywood sound system, or bluegrass or gospel from a
stage. The whole region peddles nostalgia, which felt both delightful and a bit
staged - Dollywood workers dressed in plain gingham dresses or dirty coveralls,
for example, the ostensible uniforms of mountain folk.

In many ways, the Smokies tourism industry goes hand-in-hand with Parton's
famous brand of folksy charm and family friendly entertainment. I was heartened
to see so much of what I remembered from my childhood 20 years ago. And I was
also glad to see that despite the fire, Gatlinburg was busy with tourists window
shopping for T-shirts and hats, handmade candy, artwork and knickknacks, like
carved figurines of black bears.

But tourism officials say the blaze has created a perception problem. Tourism
over the winter and spring was abnormally slow. At Aunt Mahalia's candy store in
Gatlinburg, for example, business is down about 30 percent, with noticeably
fewer weekend customers, according to assistant manager Scott Rowe.

Tourists "see those images, which are devastating, and they think the whole
mountains, Pigeon Forge and Gatlinburg are gone," said Pigeon Forge tourism
director Leon Downey.

The reality is that many tourist businesses, from go-kart parks and mini-golf to
restaurants and theaters, were unscathed. And while hundreds of rental
properties were damaged, plenty of cabins, hotels and other lodging are
available.

Donna Schuster, visiting from Ashburn, Va., in late May, worried about what
she'd find after seeing coverage of the fire, but was pleasantly surprised. "I
really questioned whether we should come because of how devastating it looked on
TV," she said. "But they have really done a great job."

Much of the burned debris has been removed, leaving only concrete pads where
houses or buildings once stood. Foliage is returning to the trees. New
construction is ongoing in downtown Gatlinburg, where a seven-story
Margaritaville resort is rising and a new attraction called Anakeesta is being
built to give tourists an aerial view as they climb into the mountains.

Joe Guenther, owner of the Day Hiker, a hiking supply store in Gatlinburg,
estimates his business is down about 20 percent but said the city's tourism has
dipped before in recession years or when gas prices were high. Day Hiker was
closed for several days after the fire, and some inventory had to be replaced
because of smoke.

Many of Guenther's customers ask about the status of the hiking trails in the
Smokies or whether the fire has ruined the mountains' scenic vistas. "Less than
10 percent of the park was affected, so there's 900 miles of trails that are all
there," Guenther said.

An ad campaign has the tag line: "The place you love is still standing strong."

Still, full economic recovery could take 18 months, according to Mark Adams, CEO
of the Gatlinburg Convention and Visitors Bureau.

Meanwhile the region has one of pop culture's best-known voices as its most
prominent supporter. Parton has raised millions of dollars for fire victims
through a star-studded telethon, as well as her own donations, and handed out
monthly checks to people who lost their homes in the fire.

"We thank her daily for her support, because there's definitely a halo effect,"
Adams said. "Without Dolly, we would have an even tougher battle in recovery."

---

More info

gatlinburg.com mypigeonforge.com dollywood.com

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  In this May 20, 2017 photo, a new chairlift attraction is under
construction in downtown Gatlinburg, Tenn. A deadly wildfire in November of 2016
put a dent in the tourism industry, but signs of growth are returning. (AP
Photo/Kristin Hall)  In this May 20, 2017, people walk through downtown
Gatlinburg, Tenn. A deadly wildfire in November of 2016 put a dent in the
tourism industry, but signs of growth are returning. (AP Photo/Kristin Hall)  In
this May 20, 2017 photo, a concrete pad remains where a building once stood in
Gatlinburg, Tenn. A deadly wildfire in November of 2016 put a dent in the
tourism industry, but signs of growth are returning. (AP Photo/Kristin Hall)  In
this May 20, 2017 photo, a worker at Aunt Mahalia's candy store can be seen
through a store window. A deadly wildfire in November of 2016 put a dent in the
tourism industry, but signs of growth are returning. (AP Photo/Kristin Hall)  In
this May 20, 2017 photo, a handmade sign stands in front of the fire-damaged
Mountain Laurel Chalets. A deadly wildfire in November of 2016 put a dent in the
tourism industry, but signs of growth are returning. (AP Photo/Kristin Hall)  In
this May 20, 2017 photo, people wait to cross the street in Gatlinburg, Tenn. A
deadly wildfire in November of 2016 put a dent in the tourism industry, but
signs of growth are returning. (AP Photo/Kristin Hall)  In this May 20, 2017
photo, Joe Guenther, owner of the Day Hiker store, checks out a customer in
Gatlinburg, Tenn. Guenther said business has been down since a deadly wildfire
in November of 2016 put a dent in the tourism industry, but signs of growth are
returning. (AP Photo/Kristin Hall)  In this May 20, 2017 photo, a fire-damaged
building overlooks cars driving through downtown Gatlinburg, Tennessee. A deadly
wildfire in November of 2016 put a dent in the tourism industry, but signs of
growth are returning. (AP Photo/Kristin Hall)  In this May 20, 2017 photo, cars
travel through downtown Gatlinburg, Tenn. A deadly wildfire in November of 2016
put a dent in the tourism industry, but signs of growth are returning. (AP
Photo/Kristin Hall)  In this May 20, 2017 photo, fencing surrounds areas of the
Laurel Point Resort in Gatlinburg, Tenn., that were damaged in a wildfire in
2016. A deadly wildfire in November of 2016 put a dent in the tourism industry,
but signs of growth are returning. (AP Photo/Kristin Hall)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              623 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    Alberni Valley Times (British Columbia)

                              July 31, 2015 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Dog Mountain cabins unsafe; Blaze considered under control but slope instability
continues state of emergency

BYLINE: Eric Plummer, Alberni Valley Times

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 467 words


Dog Mountain is no longer considered a "wildfire of note" by the province.

But parts of the forest continue to burn, leaving lasting damage to the area's
slopes.

On Wednesday, the Alberni-Clayoquot Regional District extended its state of
emergency for the mountain near Sproat Lake, continuing with an evacuation order
affecting eight of the area's 21 cabins.

This notice is based on preliminary results of a geohazard assessment
commissioned by B.C.'s Wildfire Management Branch on July 22 and 23. A report on
this investigation has not yet been completed, but early signs show the wildfire
has left behind dangerously unstable slopes.

"Properties within the evacuation area are those subject to moderate to high
rockfall hazard as identified by this assessment," stated the ACRD's latest
notice on the Dog Mountain wildfire.

Although flames continue to lick parts of Dog Mountain, the province reports the
wildfire has considerably subsided since it spread to 450 hectares by mid-July.
The fire was first discovered July 4, destroying at least one cabin during its
week of expanding across the mountain. Firefighters are no longer permanently on
the site, but routinely check the area to ensure burning does not leave the
wildfire's perimeter. Plans call for sprinklers set up to protect the cabins to
be removed by the weekend.

"Now what they're going to do is allow the fire to continue to consume the
forest fuels within that perimeter," said Marg Drysdale, a fire information
officer with the province's Coastal Fire Centre.

"We expect that people will see open flame, we expect people will see smoke. In
some cases they will see trees go up. So definitely it is an active fire."

The Ministry of Forests approach to the Dog Mountain fire has left several
Sproat Lake residents frustrated, as an air tanker was used for only one day on
July 4 when the blaze was discovered. Bob Cole questions why parts of the forest
are still permitted to burn.

"Can you tell me why we have to suffer day after day of smoke and flames around
the shoreline of Dog Mountain when so little effort would be required to snuff
these dozen or two hot spots out?" he wrote in a letter to the province. "It is
bad enough that we will have to look at this sad testimonial blight around the
shores of our lake for years to come, but to have to watch it continue to gobble
up bits and pieces of shoreline unattended is salt in raw wounds."

Meanwhile the Alberni Valley remains under an "extreme" fire danger rating after
months of scarce rainfall and a weak snowpack that collected in the mountains
over the winter.

An Island-wide campfire ban was lifted this week for northern areas and the fog
zone along the Island's west coast, but a prohibition remains in place for the
Alberni Valley over this long weekend.

Eric.Plummer@avtimes.net

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Wildfire Management Branch Photo; Firefighters tend to a blaze that
overtook Dog Mountain earlier this month. The wildfire has created lasting
instability on the mountain, prompting the regional district to extend its state
of emergency and evacuation order for the area.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 Alberni Valley Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              624 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                            August 19, 2017 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Agency steps up efforts to promote B.C. tourism amid wildfires

BYLINE: Patrick Johnston, Vancouver Sun

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 459 words


B.C.'s official tourism agency wants travellers to know that even with wildfires
burning in some regions, the province is still open for visitors.

Destination B.C.'s vice-president of global marketing, Maya Lange, said that
while many businesses in the B.C. Interior have been directly affected by
wildfires, there are many which haven't, but are still seeing a drop in
visitors. "B.C. is open to explore," Lange said. "Our thoughts are with all of
those impacted and our first priority is ensuring people are safe and know where
to find information. Many vacation spots have had to close because of the
wildfire situation.

"We are extremely proud of the business owners in the affected areas. They are
resourceful, innovative and resilient, and have helped feed and house emergency
personnel fighting wildfires this summer as well as care for evacuees and
stranded travellers," she said.

Elsewhere, there are businesses that been impacted because of access issues.

But businesses in areas not affected by wildfires, such as the Thompson-Okanagan
or the Kootenays, have also seen a drop in visitors, especially by people who
live in B.C. and Alberta.

Many of those cancellations, Lange said, have been because of misinformation
about the wildfires or the air quality situation. She suggested travellers check
hellobc.com/wildfire for up-todate information. Drivers should check DriveBC.ca
for the latest road conditions. The B.C. Wildfire Service website is also
useful.

Destination B.C. is stepping up efforts to get the word out to locals and to
potential visitors from further afield that "we're still open."

"We are encouraging businesses in non-impacted areas to contact their customers
who have reservations to share updates," Lange said.

A big press is being put on to connect with potential travellers in B.C. and
Alberta through both traditional means - newspapers and billboards, for instance
- and through social media.

On the other hand, there has been a noted surge in tourism in the coastal parts
of the province, especially on Vancouver Island, Lange said.

And Destination B.C. is adding to their traditional push to promote shoulder
season travel.

"We will ensure that impacted areas receive additional marketing support once it
is safe to visit again and capacity has been established," she said.

There are 140 fires burning across the province on Friday, the B.C. Wildfire
Service said. There have been 1,031 fires since the beginning of the 2017 fire
season in April, which have burned more than 9,000 square kilometres of land.
That is now the biggest fire season since records were first kept in the early
1950s.

More than $321 million has been spent by the B.C. Wildfire Service this year.

There are more than 4,000 people involved in fighting fires.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Times Colonist
                              All Rights Reserved


                              625 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              The Vauxhall Advance

                            April 20, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Alberta wildfire protection strengthened with new rules

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 331  words


Albertans are reminded to take precautions to prevent forest fires as new
wildfire protection regulations take effect March 31.

"Last fall, we passed important legislation to help deter unsafe behaviour and
give our wildland firefighters more tools to keep Albertans and their
communities safe," said Oneil Carlier, Minister of Agriculture and Forestry.

"These strengthened regulations send a clear message that we all share a
responsibility to help prevent wildfires."

Enhancements to the Forest and Prairie Protection Act regulations include: New
penalties for infractions such as leaving a campfire unattended or burning
without a permit Restrictions on the use of fireworks or exploding targets in
the Forest Protection Area of Alberta without written permission from a forest
officer Improvements to flammable debris disposal and other industry-based
requirements Individuals who knowingly contravene the Forest and Prairie
Protection Act by starting a wildfire can be fined up to $100,000 or face
imprisonment for up to two years.

Industrial users who knowingly contravene the Act and start a wildfire can be
fined up to $1 million.

Corporations may also face penalties of up to $10,000 per offence per day for
less severe industrial-based violations of the Act and regulations.

Effective May 1, officers will be authorized to issue tickets for
contraventions, like leaving a campfire unattended.

Depending on the infraction, individual fines for specific violations could
result in tickets ranging from between $172 and $575.

Activities that interfere with the fighting of a wildfire, such as the
unauthorized use of drones near a wildfire, are considered more severe offences
and will result in an automatic court appearance.

In 2016, Alberta wildfire crews fought more than 1,300 fires that consumed more
than 600,000 hectares.

About 70 per cent of wildfires over the last five years have been linked to
human activity.

If you see a wildfire, please report it toll-free at 310-FIRE (3473).

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 The Vauxhall Advance
                              All Rights Reserved


                              626 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 25, 2016 Thursday

Fighting Wildfires From Above

LENGTH: 468 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: National Association of State Foresters has issued the following
Press release



    Georgia averages over 8,000 wildfires annually with an average size of four
to five acres per fire. For a fire to burn, three elements are necessary - fuel,
heat and oxygen. The Georgia Forestry Commission says that careless debris
burning is the leading cause of wildfires across the state.





 During fire season months, if the weather conditions are favorable, rangers use
air patrols as the method of choice for detection. Fire towers, once the primary
method of wildfire detection, are still located strategically throughout the
state and staffed as conditions warrant increased detection efforts.



     Chief Pilot Clay Chatham says that it "gives pilots the chance to attack
the fire quickly, especially in areas where access is limited. We work in a lot
of very, very rural areas and in Georgia, there's a lot of places that take an
hour to get to just because of their remoteness so we can attack that fire and
start slowing it down, even suppress it completely before the firefighters
arrive on the scene."



 Whether on the ground or in the air, rangers say that early detection of
wildfires makes the difference in effective wildfire suppression. When rangers
aren't busy fighting fire, they're educating people on fire prevention.



  Georgia averages over 8,000 wildfires annually with an average size of four to
five acres per fire. For a fire to burn, three elements are necessary - fuel,
heat and oxygen. The Georgia Forestry Commission says that careless debris
burning is the leading cause of wildfires across the state.

  During fire season months, if the weather conditions are favorable, rangers
use air patrols as the method of choice for detection. Fire towers, once the
primary method of wildfire detection, are still located strategically throughout
the state and staffed as conditions warrant increased detection efforts.


   Chief Pilot Clay Chatham says that it "gives pilots the chance to attack the
fire quickly, especially in areas where access is limited. We work in a lot of
very, very rural areas and in Georgia, there's a lot of places that take an hour
to get to just because of their remoteness so we can attack that fire and start
slowing it down, even suppress it completely before the firefighters arrive on
the scene."


  Whether on the ground or in the air, rangers say that early detection of
wildfires makes the difference in effective wildfire suppression. When rangers
aren't busy fighting fire, they're educating people on fire prevention.
 - See more at: http://stateforesters.org/news-events/blog/fighting-wildfires
-above#sthash.gCerzcR4.zC2rPRjn.dpuf


 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              627 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Chilliwack Progress

                            August 3, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Mexican firefighters arrive in Chilliwack to join the wildfire battle

BYLINE: Paul Henderson

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 417 words


More than 100 firefighters from Mexico arrived in Chilliwack Wednesday in the
first step en route to the B.C. interior to help battle the wildfires.

The wildfire personnel arrived at the RCMP's Pacific Regional Training Centre
(PRTC), stayed overnight in the hotel, and were set to begin orientation early
Thursday.

The deployment is the latest help from outside the province aimed to help battle
the hundreds of wildfires in what is turning out to be one of the worse wildfire
seasons in B.C. ever .

Since April 1, 491,000 hectares have burned across the province, sending this
season over the 483,000 hectares burned in 1961. Only 1958 was even worse -
855,000 hectares burned that year.

The provincial government announced on Tuesday that because of the sustained hot
and dry weather, which continues to exacerbate the already busy summer wildfire
season, additional firefighting resources from the United States and Mexico were
engaged to assist the BC Wildfire Service.

The 108 wildfire personnel from Mexico are scheduled to be deployed to the
Interior on Friday. This is the first time Mexican personnel have assisted B.C.,
although they have been employed many times in Alberta.

This is in addition to 27 firefighters from Minnesota, Wisconsin and Michigan
who were brought into B.C. in addition to crews from Ontario that arrived last
weekend. These firefighters were imported from Ontario as part of the
cross-border Great Lakes Forest Fire Compact.

"Given the severity of B.C. wildfires this year, we greatly appreciate the
ability to draw on personnel from beyond our borders," said Doug Donaldson,
Minister of Forests, Lands, Natural Resource Operations and Rural Development.
"We thank all incoming crews, as well as all our B.C. crews and contractors in
their ongoing firefighting efforts."

The firefighters from Mexico and the U.S. are trained to the standards of the
Canadian Interagency Forest Fire Centre and will be valuable as they assist with
B.C.'s current wildfire situation. The cost of bringing in the international
resources will be covered by the Province of B.C.

Hot and dry weather conditions have kept a persistently high fire danger rating
throughout B.C. Firefighting crews are on standby in all six of B.C.'s fire
centres in preparation for an anticipated increase in fire starts over the next
few days due to unsettled weather in the forecast, which may bring lightning.

To report a new wildfire or an open burning violation, call 1 800 663-5555
toll-free or *5555 on a cellphone.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              628 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                               Trail Daily Times

                            August 22, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Fire danger remains high

BYLINE: Sheri Regnier

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 763 words


With an evacuation order near Nelway now lifted and two wildfires outside of
Nelson fully contained, the Southeast Fire Centre is reminding the public to
stay alert - because fire danger remains high, and in some pockets, extreme.

"The rain (last week) did not penetrate greatly into the ground ... and we are
going into a drying trend," says Fire Information Officer Carlee Kachman. "So
again, we are still in a time where fires are prevalent on the landscape ... we
are reminding the public to be very vigilant when they are venturing into the
back country and if they see any defined columns of smoke to report it and let
us know."

The McCormick Creek wildfire, burning 20 kilometres southwest of Salmo since
Aug. 9, was 50 per cent contained over the weekend. Nearby properties have been
evacuated since Aug. 11, however on Monday, the Regional District of Central
Kootenay reduced the order to an evacuation alert, effective tonight (Tuesday)
at 6 p.m. The cause of the wildfire remains under investigation.

Heavy equipment, one helicopter and 54 firefighters are focusing efforts on
establishing guard this week, so BC Wildfire Service is advising the public to
stay clear of firefighting aircraft that are collecting water from lakes and
other bodies of water.

Effective Aug. 16, an area restriction is in effect for the Salmo River between
the point where it joins the Pend d'Oreille River and the point of the river
nearest the junction of Hwy 3 and Hwy 6. This area restriction means that no
people or watercraft are allowed to be on that section of the Salmo River at any
time.

The Pend d'Oreille River currently does not have an area restriction in place.
However, the status could change if recreational boaters interfere with fire
suppression activities. Conservation officers are patrolling to patrol the two
rivers to ensure compliance.

When firefighting aircraft, such as air tankers or helicopters, are working on
an active wildfire and picking up water, they need plenty of room to manoeuvre
to do their job safely. Recreational boaters or people using other watercraft
who try to get a close-up look at these aircraft present a serious safety risk
for air crews and anyone else in the area.

This behaviour is dangerous and interferes with the BC Wildfire Service's
ability to fight a fire, since a pilot cannot collect water when a boat is in
its intended flight path.

Reports of boaters getting in the way of an air tanker, helicopter or other
firefighting aircraft will be investigated by Compliance and Enforcement Branch,
the Conservation Officer Service and/or the RCMP.

Under the Wildfire Act, the person responsible could face a violation ticket
fine of $1,150. There is also an option to levy an administrative penalty
instead of a violation ticket. The maximum penalty is $100,000 under the
Wildfire Regulation.

The person could also be charged with an offence under a certain section of the
Wildfire Act, which carries a maximum fine of $100,000.

In addition, there are danger trees (trees that have been damaged by fire to the
point where they may be unstable) along the banks of the Salmo and Pend
d'Oreille rivers, which present a potential threat to the safety of anyone
travelling in those areas.

Off-road vehicles remain prohibited on Crown land throughout the southeast,
Cariboo and Kamloops fire centres, and on-highway vehicles must remain on
defined road surfaces.

This step was taken Aug. 4, to help prevent human-caused wildfires, because the
operation of any off-road vehicles in those regions creates a potential wildfire
risk during the ongoing wildfire situation. While jeeps, trucks and other
on-highway vehicles are permitted on designated roads, they are not allowed
off-road.

Anyone found in contravention of the off-road vehicle prohibition may be issued
a violation ticket in the amount of $767. If the contravention causes or
contributes to a wildfire, the person responsible may be ordered to pay all
firefighting and associated costs.

On Friday, the province extended B.C.'s state of emergency through to Sept. 1.
This is the third time the state of emergency has been extended, with previous
extensions on July 19 and Aug. 4.

This ensures that federal, provincial and local resources can be delivered in a
co-ordinated response to the wildfire situation and continue to ensure public
safety.

To report a wildfire or open burning violation, call *5555 on a cellphone or
1.800.663.5555 toll-free. For the latest information on current wildfire
activity, burning restrictions, road closures and air quality advisories, visit:
www.bcwildfire.ca

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              629 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                               Chatham Daily News

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 341  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country. Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to
press the Portuguese government into taking more decisive action against
wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of mostscorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2017 Chatham Daily News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              630 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             Kingston Whig-Standard

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 341  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country. Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to
press the Portuguese government into taking more decisive action against
wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of mostscorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Armando Franca, The Associated Press; A volunteer uses a water hose to
fight a wild fire raging near houses in the outskirts of Obidos, Portugal.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Kingston Whig-Standard
                              All Rights Reserved


                              631 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Niagara Falls Review

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 341  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country. Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to
press the Portuguese government into taking more decisive action against
wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of mostscorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Armando Franca, The Associated Press; A volunteer uses a water hose to
fight a wild fire raging near houses in the outskirts of Obidos, Portugal.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 Niagara Falls Review
                              All Rights Reserved


                              632 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                North Bay Nugget

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 341  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country. Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to
press the Portuguese government into taking more decisive action against
wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of most-scorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 North Bay Nugget
                              All Rights Reserved


                              633 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Owen Sound Sun Times

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 341  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country. Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to
press the Portuguese government into taking more decisive action against
wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of mostscorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Armando Franca, The Associated Press; A volunteer uses a water hose to
fight a wild fire raging near houses in the outskirts of Obidos, Portugal.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 Owen Sound Sun Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              634 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Packet & Times (Orillia)

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. C7

LENGTH: 341  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country. Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to
press the Portuguese government into taking more decisive action against
wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of mostscorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Armando Franca, The Associated Press; A volunteer uses a water hose to
fight a wild fire raging near houses in the outskirts of Obidos, Portugal.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 The Packet & Times (Orillia)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              635 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           The Peterborough Examiner

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 341  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country. Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to
press the Portuguese government into taking more decisive action against
wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of mostscorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Armando Franca, The Associated Press; A volunteer uses a water hose to
fight a wild fire raging near houses in the outskirts of Obidos, Portugal.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 The Peterborough Examiner
                              All Rights Reserved


                              636 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                   Sault Star

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 340  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country.

Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to press the Portuguese
government into taking more decisive action against wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of mostscorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Sault Star
                              All Rights Reserved


                              637 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Simcoe Reformer

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 341  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
Nation.

The European Union's emergency management service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.
interior minister constanca urbano de sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
minister antonio costa accepted it, the government announced. in a resignation
letter published on the government website, urbano de sousa said she wanted to
quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but costa asked her to
stay. she repeated her request after 42 people died last weekend in another
spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, i came to
the conclusion that i could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country. silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to
press the Portuguese government into taking more decisive action against
wildfires. authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in
the country.

Urbano De Sousa Had Been Under Severe Political Pressure To Quit. Investigations
Into The June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response. urbano de sousa wrote that she has
prepared policy changes on fighting fires expected to be adopted by the
government on saturday.

The EU's emergency management service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016. italy is second on the list of
mostscorched woodlands in the eu this year, with 329,000 acres burned.
!@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Sun Media Corporation. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Armando Franca, The Associated Press; A volunteer uses a water hose to
fight a wild fire raging near houses in the outskirts of Obidos, Portugal.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Simcoe Reformer
                              All Rights Reserved


                              638 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            St. Catherine's Standard

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 341  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country. Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to
press the Portuguese government into taking more decisive action against
wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of mostscorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Armando Franca, The Associated Press; A volunteer uses a water hose to
fight a wild fire raging near houses in the outskirts of Obidos, Portugal.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 St. Catherine's Standard
                              All Rights Reserved


                              639 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                  Sudbury Star

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Pg. B9

LENGTH: 341  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country. Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to
press the Portuguese government into taking more decisive action against
wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of mostscorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Armando Franca, The Associated Press; A volunteer uses a water hose to
fight a wild fire raging near houses in the outskirts of Obidos, Portugal.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2017 Sudbury Star
                              All Rights Reserved


                              640 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Timmins Daily Press

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 341  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country. Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to
press the Portuguese government into taking more decisive action against
wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of mostscorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Armando Franca, The Associated Press; A volunteer uses a water hose to
fight a wild fire raging near houses in the outskirts of Obidos, Portugal.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2017 Timmins Daily Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              641 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Welland Tribune

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Portuguese minister resigns over 106 wildfire deaths

BYLINE: Barry Hatton, The Associated Press

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 340  words

DATELINE: LISBON, Portugal


The Portuguese minister in charge of emergency services resigned Wednesday after
106 people were killed in unprecedented wildfires this year in the Iberian
nation.

The European Union's Emergency Management Service, meanwhile, says the area
burned by wildfires this year in Portugal is the largest on record for the
nation, more than six times the annual average for the last eight years.

Interior Minister Constanca Urbano de Sousa tendered her resignation and Prime
Minister Antonio Costa accepted it, the government announced.

In a resignation letter published on the government website, Urbano de Sousa
said she wanted to quit after 64 people were killed in a June wildfire, but
Costa asked her to stay. She repeated her request after 42 people died last
weekend in another spate of wildfires.

"Although the tragedy (last weekend) was caused by multiple factors, I came to
the conclusion that I could not continue for political and personal reasons,"
she wrote.

The wildfire deaths are by far Portugal's highest annual toll ever and have
stunned the country.

Silent protests are slated for next weekend in an effort to press the Portuguese
government into taking more decisive action against wildfires.

Authorities say arsonists are to blame for starting most wildfires in the
country.

Urbano de Sousa had been under severe political pressure to quit. Investigations
into the June wildfire deaths, which occurred in one night, found numerous
shortcomings in the official response.

Urbano de Sousa wrote that she has prepared policy changes on fighting fires
expected to be adopted by the government on Saturday.

The EU's Emergency Management Service, which compiles wildfire data in the
28-nation bloc, says forest blazes have charred almost 1.3 million acres this
year in Portugal. That compares with an annual average of just over 83,000
hectares (205,000 acres) between 2008 and 2016.

Italy is second on the list of mostscorched woodlands in the EU this year, with
329,000 acres burned. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Armando Franca, The Associated Press; A volunteer uses a water hose to
fight a wild fire raging near houses in the outskirts of Obidos, Portugal.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Welland Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              642 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Mail Tribune (Medford, Oregon)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                              June 12, 2015 Friday

Oregon Deparment of Forestry spokesman earns national award for wildfire
education

BYLINE: Ryan Pfeil, Mail Tribune, Medford, Ore.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 424 words


June 12--The man much of Southern Oregon relies on for updates about wildfires
burning across the region each summer has received a prestigious award from the
U.S. Forest Service for his efforts to educate the public on wildfire
prevention.

Brian Ballou, Oregon Department of Forestry spokesman for the southwest
district, has received the Bronze Smokey Award, described on the USFS website as
"the highest honor given to organizations or individuals for outstanding
wildfire prevention service over at least a two-year period that has impact
within a state."

"I'm still kind of recovering from the shock," Ballou says. "It is quite an
honor. Very few people receive those."

ODF forester Dan Thorpe says the honor stems from Ballou's "innovative" approach
to informing people about fires. In a news release, Thorpe says Ballou created a
blog, www.swofire.com, to give daily updates on wildfire activity around the
region.

"During the record 2013 and 2014 seasons, the blog exceeded 25,000 hits per
day," the release says.

Additionally, Ballou utilizes Twitter to put out breaking updates on new fires,
does home visits to help people evaluate and reduce wildfire risk, and has
published educational brochures on wildfire preparedness and risk management.

Ballou says his approach is to keep it simple.

"I do try to explain things in plain language about what people need to do to
protect themselves and their homes against wildfire," he says, adding he tries
to remove the inside-baseball terminology "and pretend like I'm talking to my
neighbor."

Ballou is a University of Oregon graduate and has a background in journalism. He
has worked for newspapers and has sold several fishing stories to magazines. He
was also the editor of "Wildland Firefighter" magazine. He began work at ODF's
public affairs office in Salem in 1990, then left in 1997 to work for "Wildland
Firefighter" before returning to the agency in 2001 when the magazine was sold.
He transferred to the Medford office in 2004.

Ballou says he stays busy, especially during fire-pocked the summer months, but
that he enjoys the work. He adds that his fellow foresters also deserve
recognition for their ongoing work in fire protection.

"This is not a job I could do alone," he says. "Their efforts are reflected in
this award as well."

Reach reporter Ryan Pfeil at 541-776-4468 or rpfeil@mailtribune.com Follow him
at www.twitter.com/ryanpfeil.

___ (c)2015 the Mail Tribune (Medford, Ore.) Visit the Mail Tribune (Medford,
Ore.) at www.mailtribune.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20150612-ME-Oregon-Deparment-of-Forestry-spokesman-earns-national-award-for-
wildfire-education-0612-20150612

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ME


                          Copyright 2015 Mail Tribune


                              643 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                            August 1, 2012 Wednesday

Google buys Kiwi-founded Wildfire

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY; General

LENGTH: 284 words


Google has bought Kiwi-founded social advertising company Wildfire for a
reported US$250 million.

New Zealander Victoria Ransom started Wildfire with Alain Chuard four years ago
as an adventure travel company in her home country.

Looking to give away a free trip to their fans on Facebook, the couple decided
to create an application.

The software they developed helped them build a 350-strong company now based in
the Redwood City, California.

Widlfire http://blog.wildfireapp.com/2012/07/31/wildfire-is-joining-google/
announced the news today in a company blog .

"Today we are about to start a new chapter of our story and we couldn"t be more
excited to share the news: Wildfire is joining Google!

"We truly could not think of a more perfect home for Wildfire."

http://googleblog.blogspot.co.nz/2012/07/sparking-better-conversation-with.html.
html A Google blog said "with Wildfire, we"re looking forward to creating new
opportunities for our clients to engage with people across all social services.
We believe that better content and more seamless solutions will help unlock the
full potential of the web for people and businesses."

The http://blogs.wsj.com/deals/2012/07/31/google-buys-wildfire
-to-play-more-in-social-media/ Wall Street Journal said Google had acquired the
company for an as yet undisclosed price but its sources were confident of a
figure around US$250 million.

Wildfire helps companies promote themselves through social media platforms such
as Facebook, Twitter and Pinterest.

The company states on its website that it has over 16,000 clients, including 30
of the top 50 global brands.

The Wildfire blog said the company would operate "as usual" and there would be
no changes to its service.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              644 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             July 10, 2012 Tuesday
                                 Every Edition

Wildfire management: a costly oxymoron

BYLINE: Brian Palmer

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. E02

LENGTH: 974 words


The worst wildfire season in decades is not only blackening tens of thousands of
acres in Western states; it is also creating significant environmental damage.

Water quality, for example,  is being compromised up to 100 miles from burn
sites.

Although forest fires are a natural occurrence, recent fires  are more extreme,
and humans can take much of the blame.

"Natural communities are adapted to routine fires," says Scott Anderson, a
professor of environmental sciences at Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff.
"But the catastrophic fires that used to be uncommon are now occurring
regularly. Instead of burning bark and needles, the fires are killing large,
well-established trees."

And while the number of wildfires naturally varied during periods of history,
the arrival of European settlers in the West brought a changed relationship
between fires and the ecosystem.

In a study published this year, Yale University paleoecologist Jennifer Marlon
built a comprehensive fire record for the western United States for the past
3,000 years. She found that hot, dry weather led to increased wildfire activity,
while cold, wet weather suppressed fire. During the medieval warm period, for
example, wildfires surged. Between 1500 and 1800, an era that researchers call
the Little Ice Age, fires subsided.

That intuitive relationship, which held up for nearly three millenniums, was
severed more than 150 years ago.

The arrival of settlers in large numbers in the mid-19th century led to a surge
in wildfires in the West - more than would be expected given the climatic
conditions. Those settlers made campfires and burned brush to clear the land for
farming. Sparks from trains led to countless fires.

Eventually, human activity had an opposite effect and wildfires were suppressed.
Logging and other land-use changes eliminated fuel.  A few massive wildfires -
including the Peshtigo wildfire of 1871, which killed between 1,200 and 2,400
people in Wisconsin and Michigan - terrified settlers.

In response, Americans embarked on a new era of active fire suppression:
Railroads were required to clear trees within 100 feet of the track. The
government built fire-lookout towers and cut fire roads through the forest.
Eventually, modern machines, such as aircraft, were employed to put down fires
wherever they sprang up.

For the first time since we learned to use fire hundreds of thousands of years
ago, humans partially de-linked wildfire frequency and climate changes.

A 'fire deficit'

Although the 20th century was a relatively warm and dry period, Marlon's study
showed that until the end of the century approached, wildfire activity fell to
around the levels last seen during the Little Ice Age. As a result, the western
United States now suffers from what Marlon calls a "fire deficit."

"A fire deficit is a gap between how much fire you would expect to have given
current levels of drought and temperature" and the amount of fire that actually
takes place, she explained.

The 20th-century fire deficit has led to a complicated ecological situation for
the 21st century:  a massive buildup of brush, leaves and twigs - what fire
experts call "understory fuels" - that can turn small wildfires into
conflagrations. The warmer temperatures and altered precipitation patterns
associated with climate change can also contribute to the problem.

Big fires have big consequences, especially for air quality. A series of large
wildfires in Canada in 1995, for example, created massive plumes of carbon
monoxide that drifted south through Boston, New York and Washington.

The 2003 wildfire season in California caused such a substantial increase in
particulate matter, carbon monoxide and nitrous oxide that many experts now
doubt that the typical  advice in such situations - stay indoors - made much of
a difference, since the fires polluted the air inside homes as well.

Forest fires also result in large releases of sediment into rivers and streams,
with effects felt as much as 100 miles from the site of the burn. Sediment can
clog reservoirs and undermine the quality of drinking water.

Broader implications

In extreme cases - and there are more every year - federal wildlife managers
have to rescue members of endangered and threatened species from their natural
habitats.

The fire deficit also has implications for climate change - the biggest
environmental issue of them all. All of the brush, wood, grass and foliage in
the forests of North America makes them enormous carbon-storage facilities.
Ordinary burn-and-growth cycles are carbon-neutral, but allowing a century's
worth of built-up understory fuel to burn away would release massive amounts of
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.

Ironically, there was one benefit of the buildup of understudy fuel: It allowed
native plants to grow tall and thick, blocking sunlight from light-hungry
invasive species - also introduced by humans - on the ground level. Falling
leaves and brush from native plants also suppresses the growth of weeds. As a
result, the Western forests have more successfully resisted the invasion of
nonnative plants than most other areas.

This presents a conundrum for fire management officials. For the past couple of
decades, they have started controlled fires to burn away the excess fuel and
prevent catastrophic wildfires. In the late 1990s, however, officials called off
controlled burns in parts of California after noticing the alarmingly rapid
growth of cheatgrass, an invasive weed. Officials now have to balance between
the risk of destructive wildfires and the effects of invasive plants.

The upshot is that wildfire management is another example of the false hope of
returning to a state of nature. The Western forests, in a sense, are a perfect
manifestation of the famous but apocryphal Pottery Barn rule: "You break it, you
own it."

health-science@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2012 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              645 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    Appeal-Democrat (Marysville, California)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 10, 2008 Thursday

Butte wildfires shock lives

BYLINE: John Dickey, Appeal-Democrat, Marysville, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 786 words


Jul. 10--Choking, bad air blown in from wildfires provided new weather-related
health concerns Wednesday to go along with the sizzling heat.

Area sports events were canceled, Yuba City's Gauche Aquatic Park closed, and
elderly residents, children and people with respiratory ailments were told to
stay indoors after a count of tiny particles released by wildfires jumped from
50 micrograms per cubic meter to 251 micrograms in just about two hours
Wednesday morning.

"It just picked up all of a sudden," said David Valler Jr., air quality control
officer for the Feather River Air Quality Management District.

Valler said the bad air was pushed in from wildfires to the north in Butte
County when a wind shifted and picked up. The air flow brought the particulate
count to the highest levels since the wildfires started burning except for a
brief, fireworks-related spike Friday.

"Basically, the winds shifted about 9 or 10 a.m. and the smoke just started
rolling in," said Valler.

Any count above 35 micrograms per cubic meter for particulates 2.5 microns or
smaller is considered unhealthy.

Microscopic particles given off by wildfires can irritate even the lungs of
healthy people. But they are particularly dangerous for seniors, children and
people with lung and heart disease, according to the district. Ash was seen on
cars in the area.

The air district issued an air quality advisory at 12 p.m. calling for all
nonessential outdoor activities to be suspended after air quality hit the very
unhealthy to hazardous zone.

The National Weather Se vice said light offshore flow and high pressure was
trapping smoke within the valley and surrounding foothills. It issued a special
weather statement calling for smoke to continue through the weekend.

California has a total of 323 wildfires burning. And, with the Concow wildfire
to the north in Butte County, the Government Springs fire to the east in the
mountains south of Interstate 80, and the Mendocino complex to the west,
Yuba-Sutter is in the middle of what Cal Fire Battalion Chief Bill Mendonca
called a "trifecta" of fires that filled the Mid-Valley basin with smoke.

Yuba-Sutter's bad air occurred despite the lack of any fires in Yuba County. Two
small fires started in Nevada County near Penn Valley but were quickly
extinguished before they reached two acres.

Rideout Memorial Hospital and Sutter North Urgent Care both reported typical
numbers of patients with respiratory ailments Wednesday with no surge in people
seeking treatment for smoke-related problems.

"We thought we would see an increase, but so far we have not," said Willie de
Graaf Olson, nurse practitioner with Sutter North Urgent Care.

The only silver lining in the dark cloud that blew in was a high temperature
that was a few degrees cooler than expected. Wednesday's high was 106 degrees
instead of the 110 degrees forecast.

Though it was a bit cooler, Yuba City was taking no chances with the heat
Wednesday. The city set up a cooling shelter with 50 cots at its Senior Center,
777 Ainsley Ave., that will be open nonstop through 5 p.m. Friday.

Brad McIntire, the city's interim parks and recreation director, said the idea
was to give people a place to cool off at night. When the nighttime temperatures
reach 80 degrees, people cannot shed heat and the danger rises.

"We think there is a potential need out there, and we just want to be
proactive," said McIntire.

The National Weather Service is forecasting temperatures of 108 degrees today
with a low of 71 degrees overnight. Highs were expected to hit 101 degrees
Friday and near 100 degrees for Saturday and Sunday.

SMOKE TIPS:

--Stay indoors with windows and doors closed. Run window air-conditioners on the
re-circulate setting, if available.

--Minimize or stop outdoor activities, especially exercise, during smoky
conditions.

--People in a "high risk" group or those who cannot find adequate shelter from
the smoke need to move to an emergency shelter.

--If you must be outside in a smoky area, healthy individuals may wish to wear a
mask called a "particulate respirator."

--Children and older individuals should be especially careful when the threat of
exposure is high.

--It is especially important for people with respiratory or heart disease to
monitor their health.

Source: California Air Resources Board

To see more of the Appeal-Democrat, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.appeal-democrat.com. Copyright (c) 2008, Appeal-Democrat, Marysville,
Calif. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints,
email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send
a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee
Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20080710-MY-WILDFIRES-20080710

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MY


                         Copyright 2008 Appeal-Democrat


                              646 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 23, 2016 Thursday

Washington: Murkowski: We Must Provide Firefighting Resources, End Fire
Borrowing, and Improve Forest Management

LENGTH: 700 words




 Washington: Office of the Senator Lisa Murkowski has issued the following news
release:



 U.S. Sen. Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, today received testimony on a bipartisan
discussion draft entitled the "Wildfire Budgeting, Response and Forest
Management Act", which would address the serious challenges of wildfire funding
and forest management.  Murkowski released the draft bill on May 25, 2016 with
Ranking Member Maria Cantwell, D-Wash., and Sens. Ron Wyden, D-Ore.; Jim Risch,
R-Idaho; and Mike Crapo, R-Idaho."People across the country are realizing that
wildfires are a growing crisis. Alaskans, in particular, know how devastating
wildfires can be. About half of the 10 million acres that burned last year were
in my home state, and we have already seen over 200 more fires this season
alone," Murkowski said. "We have a real and growing problem on our hands, and
resolving it will require a comprehensive approach that addresses both wildfire
funding and forest management."



 Murkowski urged her colleagues to support the draft bill, which would provide
substantial resources for wildfire suppression, permanently end the destructive
practice of fire borrowing, increase preventative measures to reduce the risk of
wildfires, authorize programs to fire-adapt vulnerable communities, and improve
forest management in Alaska and across the nation.





 "The wildfire problem is not just a budget problem - it's also a management
problem," Murkowski said. "Healthy, resilient forests are fire-resistant
forests. And yet, despite knowing the value of fuel reduction treatments in
mitigating wildfire risks, increasing firefighter safety, and restoring the
health of our forests, active management is still often met with a series of
discouraging and near insurmountable obstacles."



 Murkowski, chairman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, also
called out witnesses from the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the U.S.
Department of the Interior on their attempts to undercut the Senate's bipartisan
efforts to provide a long-term solution to the wildfire budgeting issues
plaguing the U.S. Forest Service."The administration claims that it will use the
hundreds of millions of dollars in funding that it wants to move off-budget for
forest restoration and other measures that allow you to get ahead of the
problem," Murkowski said. "Regrettably, however, the President's budget request
for the Forest Service simply doesn't bear this out. The bottom line is that the
administration is saying one thing and doing another."



 Murkowski included $1.6 billion for wildfire suppression in last year's
omnibus, which is $600 million above the average cost over the past ten years,
and may be enough to prevent fire borrowing in FY 2016. Last week, Murkowski
reported her FY 2017 Interior-Environment Appropriations bill to the full Senate
with a fix for fire borrowing and similar funding for wildfire suppression and
preventative measures such as hazardous fuels reductions. Outside of the
appropriations process, Murkowski has led the Senate's effort to enact
stand-alone wildfire budgeting and forestry management legislation based on her
recognition of the need for long-term fixes.



 Murkowski also spoke in strong support of a provision that she included to
ensure that the Forest Service conducts a full inventory of young-growth timber
in the Tongass National Forest in Southeast Alaska.



 "This inventory needs to be real, and not just something that looks good on
paper, because jobs and livelihoods are at stake," Murkowski said. "The Forest
Service needs to do what's right and undertake what the Tongass Advisory
Committee called for in its recommendations - a comprehensive, stand-level
inventory to address the uncertainties that exist in the supply, volume, and
timing of the availability of young-growth to support a transition."



 Click HERE to view the discussion draft and HERE to view a summary of it.



 Murkowski concluded today's hearing by reinforcing her commitment to advance
the bipartisan discussion draft to the Senate floor as quickly as possible.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              647 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              April 3, 2015 Friday

FLORIDA:Commissioner Putnam Reminds Floridians to Be Careful with Outdoor Fires
in Advance of Wildfire Awareness Week

LENGTH: 358  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, The state of Florida has issued
the following news release:

Florida Commissioner of Agriculture Adam H. Putnam and the Florida Department of
Agriculture and Consumer Services' Florida Forest Service are reminding
Floridians to be careful with fire outdoors. Wildfire Awareness Week, April
5-11, was created in memory of Florida's devastating wildfires of 1998, when
more than 500,000 acres and 337 homes and buildings were damaged and destroyed
by wildfires

"The Florida Forest Service remains steadfast in its proactive approach to
mitigate and prevent wildfires in Florida, but it is up to our citizens to keep
wildfires at bay by always being careful with fire outdoors," Commissioner of
Agriculture Adam H. Putnam said.

Since January, 629 wildfires have burned more than 6,900 acres in Florida. Most
of these fires were caused by human carelessness.

"By preventing just one wildfire, we can reduce the risk to life, homes and
property in Florida," State Forester Jim Karels said.

Spring is the most active fire time during Florida's year-round wildfire season.
Typical dry, windy weather makes even the smallest spark potentially hazardous.
The Florida Forest Service is urging residents to use caution when using fire
outdoors and to remember the following:

Check with local city or county officials to see if there are any burn
restrictions in the area.
    Obey Florida's outdoor burning laws and obtain an authorization from the
Florida Forest Service for burn piles greater than 8 feet in diameter.
    Never leave a fire unattended, and make sure it is completely out before
leaving.
    Keep a shovel and water hose handy in case the fire starts to escape.
    Always report suspicious wildfire activity by contacting local law
enforcement or the state's Arson Alert Hotline at (800) 342-5869.

The Florida Forest Service manages more than 1 million acres of public forest
land while protecting 26 million acres of homes, forestland and natural
resources from the devastating effects of wildfire.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:
editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              648 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                          September 21, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

All alerts, evacuation orders lifted as worst wildfire season eases in B.C

SECTION: CITY; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 269 words


For the first time in nearly three months, all wildfire evacuation orders and
alerts have been lifted in British Columbia as the province begins to recover
from its worst wildfire season on record.

The Cariboo Regional District and Thompson-Nicola Regional District say final
alerts affecting southern Interior properties have been rescinded.

The alerts were lifted as the B.C. Wildfire Service reported a 1,900-square
kilometre blaze that broke out near Ashcroft on July 6 and burned almost 100
kilometres northward is 85 per cent contained. A news release from the Cariboo
Regional District says with the entire region deemed "all clear," its emergency
operations centre will close, effective at noon.

The Regional District of East Kootenay lifted its final evacuation orders and
alerts on Monday, three days after the B.C. government rescinded a provincewide
state of emergency that went into effect in early July.

Fourteen wildfires of note still blaze within the Southeast, Cariboo and
Kamloops fire centres but the wildfire service says cooler weather has allowed
crews to make good progress containing flames that have scorched more than
12,000 square kilometres of timber since April 1.

An off-road vehicle ban covering central and southeastern B.C. was removed
Wednesday but campfire bans in those areas remain in effect until further
notice.

More than $510 million has been spent fighting fires that, at the height of the
disaster, chased almost 50,000 people from their communities. Fires are blamed
for destroying 509 structures, including 229 homes. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia
Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Darryl Dyck, The Canadian Press; B.C. Wildfire Service firefighter
Jordain Lamothe takes a break while conducting a controlled burn to prevent the
Finlay Creek wildfire from spreading near Peachland on Thursday.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 The Vancouver Sun
                              All Rights Reserved


                              649 of 987 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                            January 7, 2017 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Fort McMurray wildfires lead to insurance record; Canadian insurance claims hit
$4.9 billion in 2016, prompting a call for better preparedness

BYLINE: Jesse Snyder, London Free Press

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; Pg. NP7

LENGTH: 386 words

DATELINE: CALGARY


The wildfires that tore through Fort McMurray last May helped raise Canada's
insurance claims to a total $4.9 billion in 2016 - the highest year on record,
according to the Insurance Bureau of Canada.

The total damages in 2016 were substantially higher than the previous record of
$3.2 billion set in 2013, the bureau said in report released Friday.

A dry winter and spring helped spread an unusually high number of Alberta
wildfires in the early summer last year, one of which torched some
neighbourhoods of Fort McMurray and forced the evacuation of 80,000 people.

The Insurance Bureau said insurable damages from the wildfire totalled $3.7
billion, more than double the damages from the Alberta floods in 2013, which was
the second most costly natural disaster in Canada's history.

The Slave Lake, Alta., wildfires in 2011, another of the most costly insured
natural disasters on record, caused $700 million in damages.

Fort McMurray community officials are still grappling with the work of
rebuilding of the city that were most severely damaged during the blaze.

The wildfires also spread north of the town and surrounded a handful of major
oilsands leases, some of which were forced to shut down production.

At its peak, roughly one million barrels per day of oilsands production was shut
down, amounting to nearly half of total bitumen production in the province.

The wildfires also sparked debate over what governments and private
organizations could do to lessen the risks of wildfire spread during dry
seasons.

"The reach of these storms and the effect they have on our communities is
staggering," said Don Forgeron, president and CEO of IBC in a written statement.

"Canadians must be prepared both physically and economically for when these
disasters inevitably strike." Federal government spending on damages caused by
disasters has grown sharply over the past few decades.

Annual spending rose from an average $40 million in the 1970s to $100 million in
the '90s.

The trend continued early in the millennium, and in 2013 disaster spending in
Ottawa had reached $1.4 billion, largely due to severe flooding in Ontario and
Alberta.

In 2016, most insured damages from natural disasters occurred in July, as storms
pummelled the prairie provinces and Ontario. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Sun Media
Corporation. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Postmedia Network File Photo; A disaster response worker pauses between
sifting through the remains of a home in Fort McMurray in June. The forest fire
was the prime cause for 2016's record cost of insurance claims.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2017 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              650 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        The East Bay Times (California)

                            October 30, 2017 Monday

UC, CSU extend application deadline for wildfire victims

BYLINE: Emily DeRuy

LENGTH: 501 words



HIGHLIGHT: Students from families who lost homes in the wildfires that tore
through Sonoma County and surrounding areas will have an extra two weeks to
apply to the UC and CSU systems.


The college application process is stressful enough for students on a good day.
But for families who lost homes and livelihoods in the wildfires that ravaged
Wine Country and surrounding areas this month, the task can seem insurmountable.

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

Teen girl dies of burn injuries from North Bay wildfire

Firefighters have effectively contained the Wine Country blazes

Full recovery from California wildfires may take years      In an attempt to
make the process a little easier, the University of California and California
State University systems both announced Monday they will extend their fall 2018
application deadlines  Nov. 30  by more than two weeks to Dec. 15.

The extension will be available for students affected by other recent natural
disasters, such as the floods in Houston or the hurricane that devastated Puerto
Rico last month, too. Each system will also grant students application fee
waivers that will allow them to apply to up to four campuses in each system for
free.

The wildfires that started Oct. 8 in the North Bay burned hundreds of thousands
of acres, destroyed nearly 9,000 structures, many of them homes, and killed at
least 42 people.

Cardinal Newman High School and Roseland Collegiate Prep, both in Santa Rosa,
were each seriously damaged by the fires, and at least two other schools were
destroyed entirely. Its unclear just how many students were displaced, but the
number is well into the thousands, and a number of the teachers and counselors
charged with helping students apply to college have also been affected by the
fires.

On behalf of our faculty, staff and students, the University of California would
like to express profound sympathy and concern to those impacted by the recent
spate of devastating natural disasters, UC said in a statement.

Both freshman and transfer applicants to schools in each system will need to
send an email requesting an extension.

In its announcement, UC encouraged students to make clear in their applications
how theyve been affected by the fires. For instance, if students had to change
schools mid year or drop certain classes because of the fires, they should spell
that out on the Personal Insight section.

The system says it also will take into account how the fires might have
unexpectedly altered families financial stability. Applicants will still need to
fill out a financial aid application by the beginning of March using 2016
income, but students can contact the financial aid offices at individual
campuses if they think the fires have affected their ability to pay for college.

Several other schools in the area, including Stanford University and Santa Clara
University, said Monday they will also extend their application deadlines for
students affected by the fires and other recent natural disasters.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              651 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         The Mercury News (California)

                            October 30, 2017 Monday

UC, CSU extend application deadline for wildfire victims

BYLINE: Emily DeRuy

LENGTH: 501 words



HIGHLIGHT: Students from families who lost homes in the wildfires that tore
through Sonoma County and surrounding areas will have an extra two weeks to
apply to the UC and CSU systems.


The college application process is stressful enough for students on a good day.
But for families who lost homes and livelihoods in the wildfires that ravaged
Wine Country and surrounding areas this month, the task can seem insurmountable.

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

Teen girl dies of burn injuries from North Bay wildfire

Firefighters have effectively contained the Wine Country blazes

Full recovery from California wildfires may take years      In an attempt to
make the process a little easier, the University of California and California
State University systems both announced Monday they will extend their fall 2018
application deadlines  Nov. 30  by more than two weeks to Dec. 15.

The extension will be available for students affected by other recent natural
disasters, such as the floods in Houston or the hurricane that devastated Puerto
Rico last month, too. Each system will also grant students application fee
waivers that will allow them to apply to up to four campuses in each system for
free.

The wildfires that started Oct. 8 in the North Bay burned hundreds of thousands
of acres, destroyed nearly 9,000 structures, many of them homes, and killed at
least 42 people.

Cardinal Newman High School and Roseland Collegiate Prep, both in Santa Rosa,
were each seriously damaged by the fires, and at least two other schools were
destroyed entirely. Its unclear just how many students were displaced, but the
number is well into the thousands, and a number of the teachers and counselors
charged with helping students apply to college have also been affected by the
fires.

On behalf of our faculty, staff and students, the University of California would
like to express profound sympathy and concern to those impacted by the recent
spate of devastating natural disasters, UC said in a statement.

Both freshman and transfer applicants to schools in each system will need to
send an email requesting an extension.

In its announcement, UC encouraged students to make clear in their applications
how theyve been affected by the fires. For instance, if students had to change
schools mid year or drop certain classes because of the fires, they should spell
that out on the Personal Insight section.

The system says it also will take into account how the fires might have
unexpectedly altered families financial stability. Applicants will still need to
fill out a financial aid application by the beginning of March using 2016
income, but students can contact the financial aid offices at individual
campuses if they think the fires have affected their ability to pay for college.

Several other schools in the area, including Stanford University and Santa Clara
University, said Monday they will also extend their application deadlines for
students affected by the fires and other recent natural disasters.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              652 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           December 6, 2007 Thursday
                                 SOUTH EDITION

SCOUTING FAMILY WELCOMES 6TH TO RANKS OF EAGLE SCOUT

BYLINE: Kate McCaffrey

SECTION: METRO; MT. LEBANON; Pg. S-9

LENGTH: 570 words


Anne Wildfire is a typical mom. She's proud of her five sons and, if given the
chance, will recount their accomplishments with zeal.

Less typical are her sons' accomplishments. As of last month, all five are Eagle
Scouts. Add the fact that their father, Chris Wildfire, is too, and the total is
six for this Mt. Lebanon family.

Eagle Scout is the highest rank a Boy Scout of America can achieve. Not many do.
According to Bob DeWitt, spokesman for the Boy Scouts of America, Greater
Pittsburgh Council, only five in 100 Boy Scouts earn the rank of Eagle.

To have six Eagle Scouts in one family "is not unheard of, but it's really
unusual. It's a tremendous achievement," Mr. DeWitt said.

The rank does not come easily. Before appearing before a board of review, a
scout must first serve as a Life Scout for six months, earn a minimum of 21
merit badges, serve in a leadership position and perform a service project.

The Eagle Scout project requires a minimum of 100 service hours. Scouts can use
other volunteers to help.

Before becoming a Life Scout, boys must first rise through the ranks of
Tenderfoot, Second Class, First Class and Star.

The Wildfires' newest Eagle, Jacob, is a junior at Mt. Lebanon High School. A
member of Troop 22, sponsored by Southminster Presbyterian Church, he earned
Eagle rank Sept. 16.

"It's different to say 'I'm an Eagle Scout.' People react differently to it.
They don't think, 'Oh, he just played with fire and knives,' " he said.

Chris Wildfire, 51, began Cub Scouts in 1964, when he was a third-grader in St.
Marys, Pa. Anne Wildfire, 51, who also was raised in St. Marys, was a Girl
Scout. Their sons -- Nate, 25, Joe, 24, Nolan, 21, Luke, 19 and Jacob, 16, each
began as Cubs in the second grade.

"Anyone can go camping if they want. But Chris was always saying that we should
give back to the community, so Scouts was it,'' Mrs. Wildfire said.

The family still gathers for "high adventure" outings, such as rafting trips in
the Adirondacks or on the New and Gauley Rivers in West Virginia.

The Wildfires all say that the road to Eagle Scout isn't paved with s'mores.
During one weekend canoe trip, Nolan's fellow scouts shaved his head. Or tried
to. They only got about halfway through, leaving Nolan to attend Mass one
Saturday night "looking like an animal," Mrs. Wildfire recalled.

Jacob recalls his first camping trip, at age 11, as "terrible."

"I hated it. I was cold and my pack was way too big,'' he said.

For Jacob, achieving Eagle Scout was predictable.

"It was expected of me. I'd be the black sheep of the family," Jacob said.

For his service project, Jacob helped with chores at Southminster Presbyterian
Church, scraping and painting a fence, installing a bench and doing landscaping.

"Normally when a Scout does an eagle project, you might get 20-some people to
come. Jacob had 63," Mr. Wildfire said.

The project took just one day.

To celebrate their latest Eagle Scout, the Wildfires held a party for 120 people
at Mt. Lebanon's recreation center. Mrs. Wildfire made 25 pounds of roast beef,
300 meatballs and three varieties of salad.

"We work really hard and we play really hard," she said.

Al Frioni, Jacob's Scout Master, has known the family since Jacob was 4 years
old.

"There's not a word I can use [to describe the Wildfires] beyond 'tremendous.'
You have five young men there, they're all academically superior, polite and
well-mannered gentlemen. They're outstanding," he said.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Kate McCaffrey is a freelance writer.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The six Eagle Scouts in the Wildfire family, from left: Jacob,
Luke, Nolan, Joey, Nathan and Chris Wildfire, the father.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.


                              653 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       Silver City Sun-News (New Mexico)

                             April 7, 2011 Thursday

Our View: Be careful during tinder-dry fire conditions

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 392 words


According to the U.S. Drought Monitor Map, most of New Mexico, except for a
relatively small area in the northwest corner of the state, is experiencing some
degree of drought.

New Mexico isn t alone, with neighboring Texas and Oklahoma almost completely
caught up in various drought stages along with about half of Colorado and 75
percent of Arizona.

Las Cruces is in an area designated D2, Severe Drought. Neighboring El Paso is
categorized as D3, Extreme Drought.

Of course, one huge danger of severe drought is wildfire, and we ve already seen
our share of that in New Mexico. Silver City recently experienced the
destructive Quail Ridge wildfire. A wildfire has been burning near Ruidoso and
destroyed some residences and, according to some sources, as many as 6,900 acres
of woodlands so far.

Electronic information signs along I-10 in El Paso have been warning Extreme
Wildfire Danger.

As of Thursday, the Lincoln National Forest was operating under Stage 2 Fire
Restrictions.

It doesn t take much to start a wildfire just a moment of carelessness. And it
doesn t take much to prevent wildfires just some common sense. Taking just a few
simple precautions, you can help prevent wildfires.

And keep in mind: People living in wooded or overgrown areas must be
particularly vigilant.

Observe wildfire warnings and fire-danger signs in parks and elsewhere.

Wildfires can be started by hot catalytic converters on cars. Don t drive or
park over dry growth.

Don t flick smoking materials out a vehicle window.

No open burning. Don t burn yard waste, leaves or other debris.

Be very careful when using possible ignition sources such as candles, lanterns,
lighters, butane matches and real matches.

Clear dry brush and other combustibles from around your house. Keep grass and
weeds cut back. Eliminate other ignition sources around your house Pay attention
to things as seemingly basic as pine needles on the roof and debris in the
gutters.

If you re grilling in the backyard or at a local park, make sure the ashes or
coals are doused and completely out. Don t grill in windy conditions.

Keep a 72-hour emergency kit handy in case you have to leave your house quickly,
and know the escape routes from your area.

Get used to it. There doesn t appear to be any appreciable rain in sight, and
drought conditions are predicted to continue and get worse through June.

Be careful.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


        Copyright 2011 Silver City Sun-News, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              654 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Salmon Arm Observer

                             July 5, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

DonÃ¢â[#x201a]¬â[#x201e]¢t be the cause of a wildfire

BYLINE: Barb Brouwer

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 449 words


After the long, dreary spring, summer has arrived.

As lovely as it is to relax at the beach or campsite, there is a scary downside
to the current spell of hot weather.

The combination of high temperatures, several days with high winds and
below-average precipitation in June have led to a high wildfire risk in the
Shuswap and a pocket of extreme risk in Salmon Arm.

A rating of high means the fire hazard is serious and "extreme caution must be
used during any forest activities," notes the Kamloops Fire Centre.

Extreme means there is an extremely high fire hazard. General forest activities
may be restricted, including open burning, industrial activities and campfires.

Whether resident or tourist, all of us need to match our concern with the risk -
that means, be on extreme alert.

Be extremely careful when using equipment outside, including lawn movers. In
this heat, a spark can easily ignite a conflagration, particularly if the wind
is up.

Officials at the Kamloops Fire Centre have already discussed the possibility of
imposing a prohibition on campfires.

These folks understand the iconic place camp fires hold in the hearts of outdoor
enthusiasts and don't take shutting them down lightly.

But how about we take responsibility for protecting our forests ourselves by
buying a propane campfire. If you must have the "real" thing, keep the fire
small, no bigger than a metre by a metre, have eight litres of water or a tool
to put it out and have a fireguard in place.

A small, contained fire is compelling; a huge, out-of-control wildfire is
terrifying.

Every year in British Columbia, on average, we experience more than 2,000
wildfires, reports the Kamloops Fire Centre. Typically, more than half of those
wildfires are caused by lightning and the rest are caused by people.

Let me spell that out very clearly; almost half the wildfires in this province
are human-caused, often by careless campers or partyers who don't take the
proper steps to make sure their campfire has been properly extinguished.

A longtime Wildfire BC official once told me that a campfire is not out until
you can put your hand in among the ashes.

There was frustration in his voice because so many abandoned campfires had been
discovered following a long weekend.

Last year, the province took a tougher stand on irresponsible behaviour that
contributes to increased wildfire risks by increasing fines for a variety of
wildfire-related violations.

To better protect communities, natural resources and infrastructure from
wildfire damage, British Columbia now have some of the highest wildfire-related
fines in Canada.

Let's all take responsibility for preserving our beautiful forests, our
properties and maybe even our lives.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              655 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                           September 8, 2015 Tuesday
                                 Early Edition

Wildfire season illustrates the good, bad side of drones

BYLINE: Kristine Owram, Financial Post

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 652 words


As a wildfire raged near Testalinden Creek in southern British Columbia last
month, threatening award-winning Okanagan vineyards, the B.C. Wildfire Service
put some muscle into the fight, launching eight helicopters and five aircraft to
support fire crews on the ground.

Everything was going as well as could be expected in the midst of an
out-of-control forest fire when suddenly a drone appeared. No one knew where it
had come from or who was piloting it, but there was only one solution - ground
all firefighting aircraft until it was gone.

"That incident had a significant impact on our firefighting suppression efforts
that day," said Noelle Kekula, a fire information officer for the B.C. Wildfire
Service. "I have no idea why someone would do that."

It wasn't the first time it had happened - or even the first time this summer.
In early August, a helicopter supporting ground crews at a wildfire west of
Kelowna was forced to land after multiple drones were spotted in the area.

This prompted the B.C. Wildfire Service to issue a press release pointing out
that Transport Canada explicitly prohibits the use of drones near a wildfire
because they can pose a "significant safety risk to personnel."

If caught - a task that's easier said than done - violators can face fines of up
to $5,000 and up to six months in jail.

But while unknown drone operators were endangering helicopter crews and
hampering firefighting efforts in B.C., a subsidiary of Boeing Co. was proving
that drones can also be a force for good in the fight against wildfires.

Last month, a ScanEagle drone made by Insitu Inc. spent a week at the Paradise
fire in Washington's Olympic National Park.

It used an infrared camera to identify hot spots and pinpoint the exact size and
location of the fire, assisting manned aircraft when the smoke got too thick to
see properly and at night, when they're not permitted to fly.

Although the U.S. government has occasionally used drones in the fight against
forest fires, this was the first time a private company supplied an unmanned
aircraft to assist fire crews, said Charlton Evans, program manager for
commercial and civil unmanned aircraft systems at Insitu.

"This is definitely a historic, watershed event," Evans said in an interview.
"We've finally come to a point where the (government) agencies are seriously
entertaining integrating manned systems with unmanned systems."

He said the goal is to be able to provide fire crews with real-time data on fire
size, growth, behaviour, fuels and hot spots.

"For better or worse, the fires seem to be growing in scope every year, and the
causes of that are left to debate but the reality is that we keep spending more
and more of our time and resources on fighting fires," Evans said.

"This technology is certainly going to make a huge difference in how effectively
we fight fires."

While unmanned aerial vehicles, or UAVs, are used by many Canadian fire
departments to fight burning buildings, a seasoned drone expert said he doesn't
know of any cases where they've been used in forest fires in this country.

However, Canada is considered a leader in the world of drone testing so it's
probably only a matter of time, said Sterling Cripps, founder and president of
UAV training company Canadian Unmanned Inc.

"There are a lot of companies looking at what Canada is doing," Cripps said.
"Just by virtue of our geography, we're a highly sought-after market for using
UAVs."

He added that many of Canada's biggest industries - energy, mining, forestry,
transportation and agriculture - are prime testing grounds for drones.

In May, Transport Canada announced that it would hold consultations on
developing a new regulatory regime for UAVs, proposing "new flight rules,
aircraft marking and registration requirements, knowledge testing, minimum age
limits, and pilot permits for certain UAV operators." !@COPYRIGHT=© 2015
Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sean Gallup, Getty Images; Drones intruding into operational airspace
of aircraft fighting wildfires are increasingly causing concern for the safety
of pilots.; Sean Gallup, Getty Images;  A Parrot Bebop quadcopter drone flies at
a trade fair in Berlin.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2015 Windsor Star
                              All Rights Reserved


                              656 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                            August 17, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

B.C. wildfires burning record amount of land

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 468 words

DATELINE: KAMLOOPS


British Columbia's wildfires have destroyed a record amount of forest, brush and
grassland, surpassing the devastation of nearly 60 years ago.

Kevin Skrepnek with the B.C.

Wildfire Service said 8,944 square kilometres have been scorched by fires,
breaking the previous record of 8,550 square kilometres, set in 1958.

With no rain in the forecast for the wildfire-ravaged southern parts of the
province, Skrepnek said more land will be burned.

"Temperatures should be relatively seasonal going forward, so that's one silver
lining," he said. "But the presence of wind and the lack of rain are going to be
much more critical factors."

A total of 1,029 fires have occurred since the April 1 start of the wildfire
season, and 149 of them are still burning.

A fire that destroyed dozens of homes near Ashcroft six weeks ago has now
consumed even more structures in the Green Lake area almost 100 kilometres away.

Thompson-Nicola Regional District spokeswoman Debbie Sell said crews have not
been able to access the site to determine exactly what has been lost as the
active blaze that is more than 1,600 square kilometres in size continues to pose
a danger.

Sell said affected property owners will be contacted as soon as specifics of
damage are available.

Agriculture officials at the federal and provincial government levels are also
working to tally damages that farmers and ranchers have suffered as a result of
the fires.

Federal Agriculture Minister Lawrence MacAulay and B.C. counterpart Lana Popham
met in Victoria on Tuesday.

Popham said she understands people are facing "extraordinary costs" after their
land, equipment, crops and livestock were destroyed and both levels of
governments are working as quickly as possible to deliver help.

"One of the things we're realizing is that the losses of farms and equipment is
very much weighing on our farmers, but the emotional toll is enormous," she
said.

The extra help could cover everything from costs related to feeding, sheltering,
transporting and ensuring the health of livestock to the expenses of
reestablishing crops and pastures wiped out by the fires.

The exact amount the government will spend on these programs is still being
calculated, but Popham said it will be in the millions of dollars.

RCMP are continuing to investigate human-caused fires and suspected arson.

Spokeswoman Dawn Roberts said charges against four males, all under the age of
18, are pending after a fire was set in a suburb of Williams Lake.

She said the men are also believed to be connected with a series of
break-and-enters in the area that happened at the same time.

A trailer home that was destroyed in a fire 40 kilometres east of Alexis Creek
has also been deemed a suspicious occurrence.

Roberts said the owner was located unharmed and the fire didn't spread to the
surrounding area.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Darryl Dyck, The Canadian Press; A helicopter goes in for another scoop
of lake water while battling a wildfire burning on the top of a mountain near
Ashcroft on July 10. Crews battling aggressive wildfires across B.C. have been
faced with hot weather and difficult conditions.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Times Colonist
                              All Rights Reserved


                              657 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Hutchinson News (Kansas)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           January 17, 2018 Wednesday

BRIEF: Webinar today for Wildfire Preparedness Day grant application

BYLINE: The Hutchinson News, Kan.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 167 words


Jan. 17--To help address the growing challenge of wildfires, the National Fire
Protection Association and State Farm insurance announced the launch of the
application period for its fifth national Wildfire Community Preparedness Day,
which helps communities prepare for and reduce their risk of wildfire damage.

State Farm is providing NFPA funding for 150 neighborhood wildfire
risk-reduction projects being implemented on May 5.

A free webinar on completing the application will be offered at 2:30 p.m. today.
To register, visit http://hutch.news/FireWebinar.

Project applications can be submitted through March 2 at
http://hutch.news/WildfirePreparedness.

For more information about national Wildfire Community Preparedness Day, funding
awards, project ideas and free resources to download, please visit
http://hutch.news/WildfirePreparedness.

___ (c)2018 The Hutchinson News (Hutchinson, Kan.) Visit The Hutchinson News
(Hutchinson, Kan.) at www.hutchnews.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency,
LLC.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20180117-VZ-BRF-Webinar-today-for-Wildfire
-Preparedness-Day-grant-application-0117-20180117

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VZ


                       Copyright 2018 The Hutchinson News


                              658 of 987 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                            January 7, 2017 Saturday
                                 Early Edition

Wildfires lead to record insurance claims; Government spending grows

BYLINE: Jesse Snyder, The Windsor Star

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 369 words

DATELINE: CALGARY


The wildfires that tore through Fort McMurray last May helped raise Canada's
insurance claims to a total $4.9 billion in 2016 - the highest year on record,
according to the Insurance Bureau of Canada.

The total damages in 2016 were substantially higher than the previous record of
$3.2 billion set in 2013, the bureau said in report released Friday.

A dry winter and spring helped spread an unusually high number of Alberta
wildfires in the early summer last year, one of which torched some
neighbourhoods of Fort Mc-Murray and forced the evacuation of around 80,000
people.

The Insurance Bureau said insurable damages from the wildfire totalled $3.7
billion, more than double the damages from the Alberta floods in 2013, which was
the second-most costly natural disaster in Canada's history.

The Slave Lake, Alta. wildfires in 2011, another of the most costly insured
natural disasters on record, caused $700 million in damages.

Fort McMurray community officials are still grappling with rebuilding parts of
Fort McMurray that were most severely damaged during the blaze.

The wildfires also spread north of the town and surrounded a handful of major
oilsands leases, some of which were forced to shut in production.

At its peak, roughly one million barrels per day of oilsands production was shut
down, amounting to nearly half of total bitumen production in the province.

The wildfires also sparked debate over what governments and private
organizations could do to lessen the risks of wildfire spread during dry
seasons.

"The reach of these storms and the effect they have on our communities is
staggering," said Don Forgeron, the president and CEO of IBC in a written
statement. "Canadians must be prepared both physically and economically for when
these disasters inevitably strike."

Federal government spending on damages caused by disasters has grown sharply
over the past few decades.

Annual spending rose from an average $40 million in the 1970s to $100 million in
the 90s. The trend continued early in the millennium, and in 2013 disaster
spending in Ottawa had reached $1.4 billion, largely due to severe flooding in
Ontario and Alberta.

Financial Post !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: / Team Rubicon member pauses between sifting through the remains of a
home on Prospect.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2017 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              659 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Vanderhoof Omineca Express

                            March 22, 2018 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

ORV operators face tough new laws

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 560 words


<p>Tougher off-road rules have been put into place to help reduce the risk of
wildfires stemming from the use of ATVs, Quads, dirt bikes, and other off-road
vehicles (ORV).</p>

<p>Effective immediately, the British Columbia government has increased some
wildfire-related penalties up to $100,000, to assist with fire prevention and
discourage irresponsible off-road vehicle use, Doug Donaldson, Minister of
Forests, Lands, Natural Resource Operations and Rural Development, announced
today</p>

<p>"These changes reflect the tougher stand that our government is taking to
eliminate unnecessary wildfire risks, encourage compliance, protect communities
from harm and help keep British Columbians safe," said Donaldson.</p>

<p>All off-road vehicles are now required to have a spark arrestor installed to
reduce wildfire risks when operating on Crown land.</p>

<p>A spark arrestor is a small screen or other device that is installed in an
exhaust system to stop sparks or other exhaust residue from exiting the
tailpipe. And while many new models of ORV's already have a spark arrestor,
owners of older models that do not have spark arrestors will need to get them
installed if they wish to operate the ORV on Crown land.</p>

<p>A violation of the law could lead to life altering penalties.</p>

<p>A contravention of the law could result in a violation ticket fine of $460 or
an administrative monetary penalty of up to $10,000 if an ORV without a spark
arrestor is operating at a time or place where there is a risk of a wildfire
starting.</p>

<p>As well, if a wildfire starts, the operator could receive a violation ticket
fine of $575, an administrative monetary penalty of up to $10,000, or a court
fine up to $1,000,000 and/or up to three years in jail.</p>

<p>The person responsible could also be ordered to pay all firefighting and
associated costs.</p>

<p>Donaldson also announced other increased and additional fines for wildfire
-related infractions, including:</p>

<p>* An amendment to The Wildfire Regulation to add a new administrative
monetary penalty up to $100,000 for violations related to utility transmission
operations. Examples would include instances where a wildfire is started by a
downed power line, or when vegetation near a utility line has not been
adequately maintained and a tree falls on an energized line, starting a
fire.</p>

<p>Similar provisions are in place for other industrial activities, so this
amendment makes the Wildfire Regulation consistent across the sector.</p>

<p>* The Wildfire Regulation has also been amended to add a new administrative
monetary penalty up to $10,000 for not complying with a stop-work order. This
change will give the Province additional compliance and enforcement options to
deal with people who continue to engage in a high-risk activity after a
stop-work order has been issued.</p>

<p>* The Violation Ticket Administration and Fines Regulation has been amended
to increase three fines for contraventions of the Wildfire Act. The cost of a
contravention will increase from $767 to $1,150 for failing to comply with
restricted area requirements; failing to comply with an order restricting an
activity or use; and failing to comply with an order to leave a specified
area.</p>

<p>More information can be obtained by contacting the Ministry of Forests,
Lands, Natural Resource Operations and Rural Development.</p>

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2018 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              660 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Vancouver Island Free Daily

                             March 19, 2018 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Are Vancouver Islanders ready for the 2018 wildfire season?

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 791 words


<p>Are Vancouver Island residents taking the threat of wildfires seriously
enough, in the face of seemingly ever-more destructive wildfire seasons in the
province?</p>

<p>Fire season in British Columbia officially starts on April 1 and there are
calls for a radically-different approach to managing wildfires.</p>

<p>"It's a topic that far too few of us take seriously, but each year, it seems,
our fire seasons here in B.C. are more dramatic and more destructive," says
Steve Lackey, a member of the <a
href="https://www.campbellrivermirror.com/news/meet-campbell-rivers-forestry-tas
k-force/" target="_blank">Campbell River Forestry Task Force</a>.</p>

<p>Journalist Ed Struzik, author of <em>Firestorm: How Wildfires Shape our
Future</em>, will be in Campbell River <a
href="http://www.crmuseum.ca/firestorm-how-wildfire
-will-shape-our-future-ed-struzik" target="_blank">later this </a><a
href="http://www.crmuseum.ca/firestorm-how-wildfire
-will-shape-our-future-ed-struzik" target="_blank">month</a>, revisiting
scorched earth across the continent and introducing scientists, firefighters and
resource managers who make the case for a radically different approach to
managing wildfires.</p>

<p>"Ed has been watching climate trends in the world's headlines, and what he
sees has him very concerned about how our lives will be affected by wildfires,"
Lackey says. "Warmer temperatures, increased winds and decreased rainfalls in
spring and summer are all risk factors for the kinds of wildfires like we saw in
2017 in B.C.'s Interior and these conditions are becoming more and more
common."</p>

<p><strong>Related: <a
href="https://www.campbellrivermirror.com/news/reporters-reflect-on-the-2017-
wildfire-season/" target="_blank">Reporters reflect on the 2017 wildfire
season</a></strong></p>

<p>"Wildfires help maintain healthy ecosystems in the forests of the northern
United States and Canada, but for more than a hundred years we have practiced
fire suppression to prevent the destruction of forest resources on which forest
industries depend," says Jason Hutchinson, also a member of Campbell River's
Forestry Task Force.</p>

<p>By the 1960s, forest managers started to understand that fire played an
important ecological role, and in some cases they began allowing for fires to
burn &#8211; usually in a controlled setting.</p>

<p>"As human populations have grown, and insect infestations and diseases
destabilized forest ecosystems and created more fuel, we are seeing more large
uncontrollable burns that are threatening people's homes and livelihoods," says
Struzik. "Despite our improved understanding of fires, we are finding ourselves
unable to adequately manage wildfire risks."</p>

<p>He explains, "if the past tells us anything about the future, some place on
Vancouver Island will burn big as it did in 1938, when the Bloedel Fire shrouded
two-thirds of the Island in thick smoke. The difference between the past and the
future, however, points to something more dramatic happening."</p>

<p>With hotter, drier weather over the last decade, more lightning, more
diseased trees and dry forest fuel and more people living, working and using the
forest for recreation &#8211; and people causing more wildland fires than
lightning strikes do &#8211; Struzik continues, "it all adds up to fires burning
bigger, faster and more often, even on the soggy west coast."</p>

<p>Hutchinson, who is a registered professional forester, recommends people take
steps to reduce the threat and be prepared in the event of a wildfire. Families
can take proactive measures with a disaster response kit ready and a family
emergency plan in place</p>

<p>"Have a family meeting to discuss the fire protection and prevention around
your home, family cabin or your time in the forest this season," Hutchinson
suggests. "Ensure that you are prepared and knowledgeable about how to both
prevent forest fires, and how to be prepared to react should you be confronted
with such a disaster."</p>

<p>Homeowners can take steps to reduce fire risk with fireproof roof material,
removing flammable shrubs and firewood piles immediately adjacent to the home,
reducing the amount of fuel on the forest floor in urban-interface forests, and
removing dead trees around urban areas.</p>

<p>"But when these large fires hit, even the most diligent homeowner won't be
able to avoid their destructive force," Hutchinson adds. "Neighbourhoods and
cities need to take steps to reduce their risks, and these kinds of initiatives
take time, money and expertise."</p>

<p>Government of Canada information on wildfire emergency preparedness is
available at <a href="https://www.getprepared.gc.ca/cnt/hzd/wldfrs-en.aspx"
target="_blank">https://www.getprepared.gc.ca/cnt/hzd/wldfrs-en.aspx</a></p>

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2018 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              661 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 4, 2017 Saturday

Washington: Heinrich Urges Trump, Senate Leaders To Prioritize Wildfire Disaster
Response In Next Aid Package

LENGTH: 1158  words



Washington: Office of the Senator Martin Heinrich has issued the following news
release:

U.S. Senator Martin Heinrich (D-N.M) joined U.S. Senator Jeff Merkley (D-Ore.)
and several Western Senators in strongly urging President Donald Trump and
Senate leaders to include funding for wildfire disaster response in the next
disaster aid package.


The letters to the President and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and
Minority Leader Chuck Schumer were also signed by Sens. Kamala Harris
(D-Calif.), Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), Patty Murray (D-Wash.), Dianne Feinstein
(D-Calif.), Maria Cantwell (D-Wash.), Catherine Cortez Masto (D-Nev.), Michael
Bennet (D-Colo.), and Jon Tester (D-Mont.).
The Senators wrote, "As we continue to assist Texas, Puerto Rico and other parts
of the country recover from damage caused by hurricanes so must we assist in the
recovery of western states scorched by wildfire. It is critical to include
additional disaster relief funding in the next aid package to help our
communities recover and provide the Forest Service with additional resources to
repair lands and infrastructure damaged by wildfire and reduce the threat of
future wildfires."
Specifically, the Senators called for $200 million in funding for the Forest
Service to restore and repair public lands and infrastructure damaged in this
year's natural disasters. They also called for a $580 million investment in
thinning and other forest management to reduce fire-prone fuels and get ahead of
future fires before the U.S. faces another devastating fire season.
"On Forest Service land alone, 78 million acres are designated as moderate to
high risk of severe wildfires," the Senators noted. "If we do not act quickly to
fund the treatment of fire prone areas, the costs to fight and recover from
these extreme fires will continue to grow."
Senator Heinrich continues to be a leading advocate for passing a long-term fix
to the problem of "fire borrowing," in which the Forest Service must rob funds
from other programs--including fire prevention--to pay for the cost of fighting
fires in bad fire years.
The letters also calls for this fix. The full text of the letters to President
Trump can found below and here.
Dear President Trump:
This year wildfires have rampaged throughout the West, causing extensive damage
from Montana and Idaho to Oregon and California. As we continue to assist Texas,
Puerto Rico and other parts of the country recover from damage caused by
hurricanes so must we assist in the recovery of western states scorched by
wildfire. It is critical to include additional disaster relief funding in the
next aid package to help our communities recover and provide the Forest Service
with additional resources to repair lands and infrastructure damaged by wildfire
and reduce the threat of future wildfires.
First, we must include $200 million in emergency funding to repair and replace
public lands and infrastructure damaged by wildfire and hurricanes. Without this
additional funding, the Forest Service will be forced to postpone or cancel
projects in FY18 to accommodate the recovery effort. This jeopardizes essential
work like the removal of hazardous trees for public safety, road and trail
maintenance, restoring vegetation in watersheds, and rehabilitating wildlife and
fish habitat. Failing to adequately fund recovery now will only lead to more
fire disasters in the future.
Second, we must seize the moment and include $580 million in emergency funding
to get ahead of future fires. Investing in vital forest thinning and hazardous
fuels reduction projects now will make our forests more resilient to
catastrophic wildfire in the future. On Forest Service land alone, 78 million
acres are designated as moderate to high risk of severe wildfires. If we do not
act quickly to fund the treatment of fire prone areas, the costs to fight and
recover from these extreme fires will continue to grow.
Finally, as you are already aware, it is critical that we repay any transferred
funds to cover the cost of suppression and enact a permanent fix to the problem
of fire-borrowing. We cannot provide disaster relief to other parts of the
country without assisting the western states scorched by fire as well.
Sincerely,
The full text of the letters to Senate Leadership can be found below and here.

Dear Majority Leader McConnell and Minority Leader Schumer:
This year wildfires have rampaged throughout the West, causing extensive damage
from Montana and Idaho to Oregon and California. As we continue to assist Texas,
Puerto Rico and other parts of the country recover from damage caused by
hurricanes so must we assist in the recovery of western states scorched by
wildfire. It is critical to include additional disaster relief funding in the
next aid package to help our communities recover and provide the Forest Service
with additional resources to repair lands and infrastructure damaged by wildfire
and reduce the threat of future wildfires.
First, we need to ensure the communities that have been directly and indirectly
impacted by wildfire have access to programs to help their communities and
economies recover. Programs administered by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), the Department of Agriculture (USDA), the Small Business
Administration (SBA), the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD are
critical to this recovery effort. However, a number of these programs are not
nimble enough to help communities who endure hyper-localized damages. It is
critical that appropriate adjustments are made to ensure these communities
receive the help they deserve.
Second, we must include $200 million in emergency funding to repair and replace
public lands and infrastructure damaged by wildfire and hurricanes. Without this
additional funding, the Forest Service will be forced to postpone or cancel
projects in FY18 to accommodate the recovery effort. This jeopardizes essential
work like the removal of hazardous trees for public safety, road and trail
maintenance, restoring vegetation in watersheds, and rehabilitating wildlife and
fish habitat. Failing to adequately fund recovery now will only lead to more
fire disasters in the future.
Third, we must seize the moment and invest $580 million to make our forests more
resilient to catastrophic wildfire by investing in vital forest thinning and
hazardous fuels reduction projects. On Forest Service land alone, 78 million
acres are designated as moderate to high risk of severe fire. If we do not act
quickly to fund the treatment of fire prone areas, the costs to fight and
recover from these extreme fires will continue to grow.
Finally, as you are already aware, it is critical that we repay any transferred
funds to cover the cost of suppression and enact a permanent fix to the problem
of fire-borrowing. We cannot provide disaster relief to other parts of the
country without assisting the western states scorched by fire as well.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              662 of 987 DOCUMENTS

                       The News Herald, Panama City, Fla.

                            January 8, 2006, Sunday

Blazes created to take fuel away from wildfires

BYLINE: By Paul L. Mikolajczyk

LENGTH: 970 words



hile deadly forest fires continue to scorch the Southwest, Florida forest fire
fighters are taking pre-emptive steps before the peak of wildfire season and are
calling on Bay County residents to do the same. Forecasters are predicting
above-average temperatures and below-normal precipitation in the state during
the winter and spring -- the traditional wildfire season in Florida, according
to the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services Division of Forestry. The
unfavorable weather conditions are especially disconcerting for forestry
officials because they would follow two busy hurricane seasons in the Panhandle.
Storms, officials said, have destroyed a lot of vegetation, uprooted and snapped
trees, and knocked down many limbs, creating fuel for fires and obstructing the
ability of forest fire fighters to move fire-fighting equipment into place.
"They'll just stack up," said Richard Turner, a forest ranger with the Division
of Forestry, who, at the request of landowners, spent Thursday conducting
controlled burns near Bear Creek with rangers Kenny Glass and Sean Legleiter.

"Not only do they lay on top of each other to make a pile ready to burn, but
trees down every which way make it hard to get through with the tractor," Turner
said. "When we can't make fire lines, it's harder to control the fire."

Closely following a controlled burn plan, the fire crew spent the early part of
Thursday using a tractor and plow to clear debris and churn up dirt to make 12-
to 14-foot-wide fire lines or "black lines" in the heavily wooded area
surrounding more than a dozen Bear Creek homes near Ed Lee Road.

Forestry officials then ignited the cordoned area to clear out the highly
flammable debris spread across the eight to 10 acres of forest floor.

"This alleviates a lot of the problem," Turner said as the sound of dry branches
and pine needles crackled a few feet away.

Forest fire fighters say many residents are in the dark when it comes to
controlled burns.

"A lot of people don't understand the full capacity of what we're doing," Turner
said. "But what this does is make a defensible space around houses."

Without eliminating fuel-generating debris in a controlled way, the chances of
losing lives and property to wildfires dramatically increases, he said.

Forest and brush fires in droughtstricken parts of Texas, New Mexico and
Oklahoma have charred more than 600,000 acres, destroyed more than 450 homes and
killed at least four people during a 10-day period, according to forest fire
fighting officials in the Southwest states.

The fires have been so severe that Florida's Division of Forestry has sent 68 of
its forest rangers to Texas and three to Oklahoma to aid in fighting the
wildfires. Of those sent to Texas, 10 came from the Chipola River District.

The forest fire fighters in the Chipola River District are responsible for
wildfire control in Walton, Holmes, Jackson, Washington, Calhoun, Gulf and Bay
counties.

Florida experienced one of its calmest wildfire seasons ever in 2005, according
to records obtained from Division of Forestry.

The most recent data collected by the division shows that 2,213 wildfires burned
about 27,431 acres in Florida last year. Though forestry officials are still
receiving end-of-the-year statistics from its districts, the number suggests
last year is competing with 2003 for the lowest recorded amount of acreage
burned -- about 27,492 acres and 2,077 fires that year.

There is no guarantee of a repeat in 2006. In 2004, for example, the Forestry
Division reported 159,130 acres burned by 3,430 wildfires.

Nothing in the past few years compares to 1998, the worst wildfire season
recorded in Florida in the past three decades. The wildfires of 1998 caused more
than $ 600 million in damages to Northeast and South Florida as flames spread
across more than 500,000 acres.

"Those were some tough fires," said Joe Anderson, manager of the Forestry
Division's Chipola River District.

Anderson said forest fire fighters arriving from Western and Southwestern states
were amazed by the type of wildfires Florida experiences compared to their home
states.

"When they got here they were asking, 'What's here to burn?' because everything
is so green," Anderson recalled.

"We had to tell them that green burns here in Florida," he said, referring to
the palmetto trees, gallberry shrubs and the honey-producing titi plants -- all
flammable even though still alive.

In order to avoid wildfires this year, the Division of Forestry is encouraging
everyone to avoid the most common cause -- unauthorized acreage burns and trash
pile fires.

According to Chipola River District's 2005 records, about 35 percent of the 203
wildfires in the seven-county area were the result of people trying to burn
their own property or rid themselves of trash and debris by igniting
it."(Unauthorized burns) are often our biggest problem," Anderson said.
"(Burning) can be done but it needs to be done properly."

Anderson said preventing unauthorized burns from getting out of control can be
done by getting information from the Division of Forestry in advance of burning.

"That's one of the reasons we are here, to create prescriptions for controlled
burns," Anderson said.

To find out more information on ways to prevent wildfires, to protect your home
from wildfires or conduct burning on your property, contact the Chipola River
District Office at (850) 547-7085 or visit the Division of Forestry's Web site
at www.fl-dof.com.


-----


Copyright (c) 2006, The News Herald, Panama City, Fla.

Distributed by Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News.

For information on republishing this content, contact us at (800) 661-2511
(U.S.), (213) 237-4914 (worldwide), fax (213) 237-6515, or e-mail
reprints@krtinfo.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

KR-ACC-NO: PY-0108-Blazes-created-to-take-fuel-away-from-wildfires

JOURNAL-CODE: PY

               Copyright 2006 Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News
               Copyright 2006 The News Herald, Panama City, Fla.


                              663 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Muskogee Phoenix (Oklahoma)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           January 30, 2008 Wednesday

Wildfire burns 200 acres near Checotah

BYLINE: D. E. Smoot, Muskogee Phoenix, Okla.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 551 words


Jan. 30--Firefighters battled an estimated 200-acre wildfire Tuesday outside
Checotah, saving a number of structures threatened by the wind-whipped blaze.

A fire marshal from the forestry division of the Oklahoma State Agriculture
Department was on the scene trying to determine the fire's origin. McIntosh
County Emergency Management Director Harry Trottier said he believes the fire
was sparked by burning trash.

Another wildfire west of Muskogee kept firefighters busy several hours.
Firefighters were able to spare structures in the path of that fire.

Reports of other wildfires across the state, coupled with weather conditions,
prompted Gov. Brad Henry to issue a statewide burn ban Tuesday. Henry made the
announcement after reviewing weather forecasts and consulting with forestry
officials.

"We need to do everything we can to protect lives and property," Henry said.
"With the dry weather and high winds, conditions are very hazardous and even the
smallest fire can quickly get out of control."

A variety of factors have combined recently, contributing to increased risks of
wildfires across the state. High winds and low humidity create optimum
conditions for wildfires, officials said.

Record rainfall that fell during 2007 also produced an abundance of vegetation,
which now is serving as fuel for fires. Fallen tree limbs from two major ice
storms this past year also have contributed to what could be a dangerous winter
fire season.

The McIntosh County fire, which burned an area about two miles east of U.S. 69
and two miles north of U.S. 266, threatened several structures before the blaze
was contained at about 4:45 p.m.

"We came close to losing one, but we were able to save everything," Trottier
said. "We brought some county road graders in to build a fire line to protect
the houses, and the fire trucks came in behind them to put out the fire."

Trottier said firefighters from about 10 different departments battled the blaze
for most of two hours before they were sent home. Other firefighters remained on
the scene trying to douse the burning hay bales from which embers were being
carried away by the wind.

City of Muskogee Emergency Management Director Jimmy Moore said the fire west of
town threatened one mobile home and a couple of outbuildings, but all were
spared.

Muskogee County Emergency Management Director Eugene Blankenship said there has
been no official determination of the Muskogee County fire's origin, but a spark
from arcing electric lines or a welder is suspected.

Under the governor's executive order, most outdoor burning is banned. Some
exceptions include low-risk activities such as charcoal and gas grilling.
Occupational exemptions also apply provided tradesmen adhere to rules outlined
by the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture.

Anyone cited for violating the ban could face misdemeanor charges punishable by
up to a $500 fine and one year in jail.

To see more of the Muskogee Phoenix or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.muskogeephoenix.com. Copyright (c) 2008, Muskogee Phoenix, Okla.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20080130-XK-0130-Wildfire-burns-200-acres-near-Checotah

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: XK


                                 Copyright 2008


                              664 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                             April 3, 2018 Tuesday
                              Southern WEB Edition

Pope County firefighters offer free wildfire home risk assessments to homeowners

SECTION: HBG; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 803 words


HARRISBURG -- Pope County firefighters are partnering with Shawnee National
Forest to assess the risks of wildfire to Pope County homes, thanks to a grant
from the local nonprofit Shawnee Resource, Conservation & Development Area. "Our
primary goal is to keep Pope County homeowners safe, and we believe the message
of preparing early and making their homes safe from wildfire will help us
achieve that goal,'' Josh Light Rural Pope County Fire Protection District
captain, said. "If we identify risks through an assessment, we then want to
provide the homeowner with options to reduce that risk. Most times, it's a
simple fix like making sure leaves don't accumulate under your home or deck."

In the coming weeks, Pope County firefighters will knock on doors and offer this
free service. Risk assessment allows firefighters to evaluate a home's
particular exposure to fire, as well as the critical factors that increase risk.
Risk is determined by how land nearby is being used, what kind of plant life is
found near the home and from what materials the home is built. "Much of Pope
County is considered a low to moderate fire hazard environment," said Scott
Crist, the fire management officer for Shawnee National Forest. "However,
homeowners living in Pope County's fire risk areas should learn how to live more
safely with the threat from wildfire. The risk assessment will identify what
homeowners can do now -- before a wildfire starts." Homeowners who would like to
request a free assessment or more information should contact
popecountyfire@yahoo.com The Rural Pope County Fire Protection District is able
to offer these assessments free to Pope County homeowners due to funds made
available by Shawnee Resource, Conservation & Development Area. Shawnee RC & D
received a grant from the Forest Service to help implement the Pope County
Community Wildfire Protection Plan. The Pope County Community Wildfire
Protection Plan evaluated wildfire threat to the communities and infrastructure.
It also identified measures that people who own homes and land can take to
reduce the impact of wildfire to life, property and other community values at
risk. The Pope Community Wildfire Protection Plan can be downloaded at
https://www.swca.com/sites/default/files/pope_county_community_wildfire
_protection_plan_cwpp_final.pdf. About Prescribed Fire Prescribed fire is
different from wildfire. It is a planned fire that is overseen by professionals.
It is performed under specific weather conditions and are designed to mimic fire
that historically occurred on the forest. Fire helps maintain healthy oak
forests, according to scientists who study native plants, birds and other
wildlife. That's why conservationists use fire as a tool to restore Southern
Illinois forests. By bringing fire back to the forest, Shawnee National Forest
hopes to: * Encourage the growth of a diverse array of plant life, including
sun-loving plants and grasses. * Ensure oaks remain the keystone species in our
forests. Oaks provide food for about 100 different animals. Using fire to bring
light into our forests helps oaks grow. Without fire, shade-tolerant species
will take over and eventually replace oak as the dominant species in our forest.
* Protect human property by reducing the amount of down, dead wood in the
forest. That way if a wildfire happens, it would be less intense, and
potentially easier to control. * Perpetuate prairie and savannah remnants found
within the forest. These remnant plant communities provide habitat for several
early-successional song bird species, such as prairie warblers and red-headed
woodpeckers. Maintaining these open woodland conditions with prescribed fire
increases biodiversity in both plant and animal species. About Shawnee RC & D
Since its founding in 1967, Shawnee RC & D Area Inc. has served the Southernmost
Illinois region as a source for Resource Conservation, Environmental Education
and Economic Development. The organization believes that our natural resources
are the basis and backdrop for quality living in Southern Illinois and strive to
ensure they are preserved for future generations. More information is available
at: http://shawneercd.org/ About Shawnee National Forest Administered by the
USDA Forest Service, Shawnee National Forest is one of 155 national forests
nationwide. As the only national forest in Illinois, the Shawnee offers numerous
avenues for connecting with the natural world through its 280,000 acres of
varied landscape. Whether your interests lie more in outdoor recreational
activities, such as hiking or camping, or include learning about the unique
natural and cultural heritage of southern Illinois, the fields, forests and
streams of the Shawnee welcome you. To discover more about the Shawnee National
Forest, visit http://www.fs.usda.gov/shawnee.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2018 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                              665 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                             Northumberland Gazette

                              May 12, 2017 Friday

Reducing risk of wildfires

BYLINE: Ben O'connell

LENGTH: 348  words


The Countryside Alliance has launched a new awareness campaign on wildfires,
using two Northumberland case studies.

Wildfires have the capability to devastate farmland, wildlife and protected
habitats, as well as the lives of people living and working in rural
communities.

The risk in springtime is particularly prevalent as dead vegetation left over
from the winter, higher temperatures and lower humidity levels can come together
with deadly effect.

The Countryside Alliance wishes to raise the awareness of the risk and potential
damage of wildfires, and educate on the measures that can be taken to reduce
those risks.

Wildfires in the UK are fortunately few and far between; however, their ability
to start in rural locations under difficult conditions adds a risk for which
rural fire and rescue services have to be prepared.

Successful partnerships and groups have been formed in high-risk areas with
great success to promote cooperation and collaboration on wildfire issues.

Two Northumberland initiatives have been highlighted as case studies for the new
campaign.

The Northumberland Fire Group, which was formed in 2005, was one of the first
multi-agency partnerships set up in the UK to deal with wildfires.

It delivers a range of activities to protect rural communities, the rural
economy and the natural environment in the county.

Meanwhile, the Northumberland Collaborative Burning Project sees partner
organisations share best practice, knowledge and expertise in reducing the
potential risks through prescribed wildfires.

Jack Knott, Countryside Alliance campaigns manager, said: "Wildfires can have
potentially devastating impacts on farming and local communities, wildlife and
protected habitats. It is essential that all steps are taken to reduce the risk,
this includes increasing education for those that enjoy our beautiful
countryside."

He added: "Remaining vigilant, especially during spells of hot dry weather,
while enjoying the British countryside is essential. Furthermore, disposing of
litter correctly, in particularly smoking materials, can help prevent wildfires
."

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NPNG


                       Copyright 2017 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              666 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 21, 2015 Wednesday

CSU researchers to study health dangers of wildfire smoke, build better warning
system

LENGTH: 746  words

DATELINE: Fort Collins


Colorado State University has issued the following news release:


In 2012, the High Park Fire ripped through the mountains west of Fort Collins,
charring 87,284 acres and hundreds of homes.  Smoke from the fire permeated
Colorado's Front Range and neighboring states for weeks, forcing millions to
breathe particulate-laden air.

Researchers at Colorado State University have received a $1.2 million NASA grant
to study the public health toll from inhaling such dense wildfire smoke and
build an improved air quality forecasting system.High Park smoke NASA

"We are developing a tool that officials can use to evaluate where wildfire
smoke will travel and how bad it is expected to be so they can warn people ahead
of time," said Jeff Pierce, an assistant professor of in the Department of
Atmospheric Science who is leading the project.

Other team members include Emily Fischer, assistant professor of atmospheric
science, Sheryl Magzamen, assistant professor of environmental and radiological
health science, and John Volckens, associate professor of mechanical
engineering.  The researchers came together as part of the School of Global
Environmental Sustainability Global Challenges Research Team program, which
provides funding and other support for interdisciplinary projects.
Long-term health risks?

Exposure to wildfire smoke has been associated with a suite of negative health
effects. Many of those subjected to smoke for even a day or two have reported
increased eye irritation and respiratory symptoms.

But little is known about the long-term health risks and impacts of being
exposed to smoke filled with fine particles and potentially toxic gasses.

"No one is sure about the public health impacts from exposure to wildfire
smoke," said Volckens, the director of the Center for Energy Development and
Health at the CSU Energy Institute. "We have a lot of anecdotal information, but
not a lot of hard data. We need to gather data from several fire episodes to
improve our understanding of the health risks from inhaling wildfire smoke."

Mike Van Dyke with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment
agrees. He said wildfires are a critical public health concern, which is why the
agency is working with CSU on the project.

"We are excited to partner with CSU to help develop improved wildfire smoke
forecasting models that could be used in these emergencies to help inform our
citizens and prevent adverse health issues," he said.
Mining records for data

CSU researchers will comb through hospital records and other data logged during
High Park and two other Colorado wildfires to determine - If there were more
incidents of respiratory and other health-related problems reported during
wildfires?  If so, what kind? And were certain populations -the elderly and/or
those with asthma, for example - more affected than others?

The team will then evaluate that information against satellite images, weather
and atmospheric data from those same fires and time periods. The goal is to
better understand how the smoke travelled and pinpoint which areas were exposed
to different smoke levels and for how long.

"We can compare information and see at what point this smoke starts impacting
public health," Volckens said.
Better models needed

During the second phase of the study, the team will evaluate two existing air
quality/fire emission models to see if they can be adapted to forecast the path
smoke from a wildfire will take and which areas or regions could be subjected to
the most polluted - and potentially hazardous -- air.

"Right now, there is a lot of uncertainty in the current models used," Pierce
said. "We want to improve them."

Volckens agreed, saying people need time to plan and protect themselves.

"A big wildfire like High Park can turn the relatively pristine Front Range air
into Beijing in less than 24 hours," he said.
A hazy future

The need for an air quality warning system for wildfires is only going to grow
in coming years.  Climate models predict that Colorado and other western states
will become more arid and more prone to wildfires. A 2009 study published in the
Journal of Geophysical Research estimates the number of wildfires in the western
United States will grow more than 50 percent by the 2050s.

"Our best guess is that we are going to see more wildfires that are much bigger
in size," Pierce said. "We need to be prepared."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              667 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 21, 2015 Wednesday

CSU researchers to study health dangers of wildfire smoke, build better warning
system

LENGTH: 746  words

DATELINE: Fort Collins


Colorado State University has issued the following news release:


In 2012, the High Park Fire ripped through the mountains west of Fort Collins,
charring 87,284 acres and hundreds of homes.  Smoke from the fire permeated
Colorado's Front Range and neighboring states for weeks, forcing millions to
breathe particulate-laden air.

Researchers at Colorado State University have received a $1.2 million NASA grant
to study the public health toll from inhaling such dense wildfire smoke and
build an improved air quality forecasting system.High Park smoke NASA

"We are developing a tool that officials can use to evaluate where wildfire
smoke will travel and how bad it is expected to be so they can warn people ahead
of time," said Jeff Pierce, an assistant professor of in the Department of
Atmospheric Science who is leading the project.

Other team members include Emily Fischer, assistant professor of atmospheric
science, Sheryl Magzamen, assistant professor of environmental and radiological
health science, and John Volckens, associate professor of mechanical
engineering.  The researchers came together as part of the School of Global
Environmental Sustainability Global Challenges Research Team program, which
provides funding and other support for interdisciplinary projects.
Long-term health risks?

Exposure to wildfire smoke has been associated with a suite of negative health
effects. Many of those subjected to smoke for even a day or two have reported
increased eye irritation and respiratory symptoms.

But little is known about the long-term health risks and impacts of being
exposed to smoke filled with fine particles and potentially toxic gasses.

"No one is sure about the public health impacts from exposure to wildfire
smoke," said Volckens, the director of the Center for Energy Development and
Health at the CSU Energy Institute. "We have a lot of anecdotal information, but
not a lot of hard data. We need to gather data from several fire episodes to
improve our understanding of the health risks from inhaling wildfire smoke."

Mike Van Dyke with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment
agrees. He said wildfires are a critical public health concern, which is why the
agency is working with CSU on the project.

"We are excited to partner with CSU to help develop improved wildfire smoke
forecasting models that could be used in these emergencies to help inform our
citizens and prevent adverse health issues," he said.
Mining records for data

CSU researchers will comb through hospital records and other data logged during
High Park and two other Colorado wildfires to determine - If there were more
incidents of respiratory and other health-related problems reported during
wildfires?  If so, what kind? And were certain populations -the elderly and/or
those with asthma, for example - more affected than others?

The team will then evaluate that information against satellite images, weather
and atmospheric data from those same fires and time periods. The goal is to
better understand how the smoke travelled and pinpoint which areas were exposed
to different smoke levels and for how long.

"We can compare information and see at what point this smoke starts impacting
public health," Volckens said.
Better models needed

During the second phase of the study, the team will evaluate two existing air
quality/fire emission models to see if they can be adapted to forecast the path
smoke from a wildfire will take and which areas or regions could be subjected to
the most polluted - and potentially hazardous -- air.

"Right now, there is a lot of uncertainty in the current models used," Pierce
said. "We want to improve them."

Volckens agreed, saying people need time to plan and protect themselves.

"A big wildfire like High Park can turn the relatively pristine Front Range air
into Beijing in less than 24 hours," he said.
A hazy future

The need for an air quality warning system for wildfires is only going to grow
in coming years.  Climate models predict that Colorado and other western states
will become more arid and more prone to wildfires. A 2009 study published in the
Journal of Geophysical Research estimates the number of wildfires in the western
United States will grow more than 50 percent by the 2050s.

"Our best guess is that we are going to see more wildfires that are much bigger
in size," Pierce said. "We need to be prepared."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              668 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 17, 2015 Saturday

CSU researchers to study health dangers of wildfire smoke, build better warning
system

LENGTH: 746  words

DATELINE: Fort Collins


Colorado State University has issued the following news release:


In 2012, the High Park Fire ripped through the mountains west of Fort Collins,
charring 87,284 acres and hundreds of homes.  Smoke from the fire permeated
Colorado's Front Range and neighboring states for weeks, forcing millions to
breathe particulate-laden air.

Researchers at Colorado State University have received a $1.2 million NASA grant
to study the public health toll from inhaling such dense wildfire smoke and
build an improved air quality forecasting system.High Park smoke NASA

"We are developing a tool that officials can use to evaluate where wildfire
smoke will travel and how bad it is expected to be so they can warn people ahead
of time," said Jeff Pierce, an assistant professor of in the Department of
Atmospheric Science who is leading the project.

Other team members include Emily Fischer, assistant professor of atmospheric
science, Sheryl Magzamen, assistant professor of environmental and radiological
health science, and John Volckens, associate professor of mechanical
engineering.  The researchers came together as part of the School of Global
Environmental Sustainability Global Challenges Research Team program, which
provides funding and other support for interdisciplinary projects.
Long-term health risks?

Exposure to wildfire smoke has been associated with a suite of negative health
effects. Many of those subjected to smoke for even a day or two have reported
increased eye irritation and respiratory symptoms.

But little is known about the long-term health risks and impacts of being
exposed to smoke filled with fine particles and potentially toxic gasses.

"No one is sure about the public health impacts from exposure to wildfire
smoke," said Volckens, the director of the Center for Energy Development and
Health at the CSU Energy Institute. "We have a lot of anecdotal information, but
not a lot of hard data. We need to gather data from several fire episodes to
improve our understanding of the health risks from inhaling wildfire smoke."

Mike Van Dyke with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment
agrees. He said wildfires are a critical public health concern, which is why the
agency is working with CSU on the project.

"We are excited to partner with CSU to help develop improved wildfire smoke
forecasting models that could be used in these emergencies to help inform our
citizens and prevent adverse health issues," he said.
Mining records for data

CSU researchers will comb through hospital records and other data logged during
High Park and two other Colorado wildfires to determine - If there were more
incidents of respiratory and other health-related problems reported during
wildfires?  If so, what kind? And were certain populations -the elderly and/or
those with asthma, for example - more affected than others?

The team will then evaluate that information against satellite images, weather
and atmospheric data from those same fires and time periods. The goal is to
better understand how the smoke travelled and pinpoint which areas were exposed
to different smoke levels and for how long.

"We can compare information and see at what point this smoke starts impacting
public health," Volckens said.
Better models needed

During the second phase of the study, the team will evaluate two existing air
quality/fire emission models to see if they can be adapted to forecast the path
smoke from a wildfire will take and which areas or regions could be subjected to
the most polluted - and potentially hazardous -- air.

"Right now, there is a lot of uncertainty in the current models used," Pierce
said. "We want to improve them."

Volckens agreed, saying people need time to plan and protect themselves.

"A big wildfire like High Park can turn the relatively pristine Front Range air
into Beijing in less than 24 hours," he said.
A hazy future

The need for an air quality warning system for wildfires is only going to grow
in coming years.  Climate models predict that Colorado and other western states
will become more arid and more prone to wildfires. A 2009 study published in the
Journal of Geophysical Research estimates the number of wildfires in the western
United States will grow more than 50 percent by the 2050s.

"Our best guess is that we are going to see more wildfires that are much bigger
in size," Pierce said. "We need to be prepared."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              669 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                               Waterloo Chronicle

                             March 1, 2011 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire head to Quebec for playoffs

BYLINE: GREG MACDONALD, Chronicle Staff

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 352  words


The Waterloo Wildfire are looking for a spot in the ringette national
championships when the team heads to Quebec City for playoff action on Saturday.

The Wildfire finished seventh in the Eastern Conference of the National Ringette
League, one point out of sixth place.

That's also one point out of hosting a home playoff series.

But it won't matter if the Wildfire can get through their best of three series
with the Quebec City Cyclones, because the national tournament is being held in
Cambridge this year.

"It would be great to be there," said general manager Gerry Kraemer.

The team is confident going into the series against Quebec City, Kraemer said.

The two teams have met twice this year, and the Wildfire won both games - the
first the Wildfire won 8-2 and the second 8-3.

"On paper, we should beat them," Kraemer said.

"But when you go into Quebec with their referees it can be a wild card." The
Wildfire are still expecting to win and earn a berth to the nationals.

There are two keys to the series, Kraemer said - beating the refs and beating
the Cyclones hot goalie.

"We have to stay out of the penalty box, which can be tough with their
referees," Kraemer said.

The Cyclones also feature one of the league's hottest goalies, but the Wildfire
have managed to fling a few past her this season.

"She seems a bit vulnerable," Kraemer said.

He's more worried about the Wildfire's goaltending.

"It hasn't been consistent," he said. "It's been hot and cold all season." As
hosts, the Cambridge Turbos get an automatic bye in to the playoffs while the
Montreal Mission earned a berth for being second to Cambridge in the regular
season.

That leaves four eastern conference spots up for grabs for the nationals.

Other playoff series include: Ottawa Ice versus Gatineau Fusion; Gloucester
Devils vs. Rive Sud Revolution and Richmond Hill Lightning vs. Whitby Wild.

The Wildfire leave for Quebec City Friday afternoon following a morning practice
at Lions Arena in Kitchener.

Their first game against the Cyclones is Saturday at 1:30 p.m.

Game two goes at 6:30 p.m. and if necessary, the final game will be played
Sunday morning.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2011 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              670 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                           August 16, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

B.C. wildfire season poised to surpass 1958 as worst year on record

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 466 words


British Columbia is poised to face its worst wildfire season on record as flames
scorch thousands of hectares of land and costs rise to deal with the
devastation. B.C. Wildfire Service spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said since the start
of the wildfire season on April 1, an estimated 8,450 square kilometres of
forest, brush and grassland has been burned, an area three times the size of
Metro Vancouver.

That compares with a record loss of 8,550 square kilometres in 1958.

"(It's) safe to say we are on track for this to be the worst season on record
for that area burned," Skrepnek said.

He said 154 wildfires are burning across the province and the firefighting price
tag has reached $309 million, though that figure does not include costs for the
loss of 71 homes and 118 outbuildings.

The largest wildfire, in Hanceville, southwest of Williams Lake, now covers
2,120 square kilometres, Skrepnek said.

"We're urging people to be extremely careful with any activity that could spark
a wildfire," he said.

"We're continuing to see the increased likelihood of lightning-caused fires,
which makes it even more critical to avoid any human-caused incidents."

Skrepnek also urged people to report fires. More than 4,100 people, including
about 760 people recruited from outside the province, are working on
firefighting efforts, Skrepnek said.

Chris Duffy, executive director of operations for Emergency Management B.C.,
says nearly 9,300 people remain out of their homes as 40 evacuation orders are
still in place.

"Our priority remains public safety, first responders'safety and support to
local authorities and First Nations," he said.

He said 31,000 people are on evacuation alert, meaning they must be ready to
leave at a moment's notice.

Evacuation orders in parts of the Cariboo have been downgraded to alerts in some
areas, including the area from Alexis Creek to Riske Creek after residents were
forced to leave Sunday.

However, officials with the Cariboo Regional District said ongoing fire control
activities mean access to some areas may be limited and access is at the
discretion of checkpoint personnel.

"We would still urge the public to remain vigilant," Duffy said, adding the fire
risk remains high.

"Have an emergency plan, an emergency kit, report fires and in particular,
respect orders and alerts and instructions from first responders, fire crews,
highways (officials) and RCMP who are working around these fire sites."

Many returning residents have had to power wash off red fire retardant that
covered their property in efforts to protect structures.

The B.C. Centre for Disease Control says anyone removing coloured fire retardant
should avoid eye contact and wash hands when removing coloured or gel fire
retardant from structures. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 The Vancouver Province
                              All Rights Reserved


                              671 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                          February 17, 2016 Wednesday
                                 Early Edition

Wildfire season to start March 1

SECTION: CITY; Briefs; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 149 words


Alberta is starting its wildfire season a month early after flames last year
torched almost 5,000 square kilometres. Forestry Minister Oneil Carlier says the
extra time provided with the March 1 launch will ensure that crews are
recruited, trained and positioned to respond quickly to any wildfires that break
out in early spring and through the year. The province has been starting its
wildfire season a month early since the year after the May 2011 fire that
destroyed part of the town of Slave Lake and forced thousands of people from
their homes. Last year, there were 1,786 wildfires in Alberta - more than twice
the 25-year average. Crews managed to contain 93 per cent of wildfires within
about a day and prevented flames from entering any communities. The cost wasn't
cheap. Alberta spent $474 million on wildfires last year. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2016
Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Edmonton Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              672 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 15, 2014 Tuesday

SENATORS McCAIN, BARRASSO AND FLAKE INTRODUCE LEGISLATION TO FULLY FUND WILDFIRE
SUPPRESSION AND BOOST PROACTIVE FOREST MANAGEMENT

LENGTH: 941  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator John McCain, U.S Government has issued the following news
release:

U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ), John Barrasso (R-WY), and Jeff Flake (R-AZ)
have introduced legislation (S. 2593, the FLAME Act Amendments of 2014) that
would allow for the full funding of wildland firefighting budgets for the U.S.
Forest Service (FS) and U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI) as well
dramatically increase resources for forest restoration programs.

"Congress must fully fund our fire suppression needs, but to reduce wildfire
costs over time we must also thin our fire-prone forests," said Senator McCain.
"There are similar proposals in Congress that support suppression spending but
don't as clearly guarantee funding for forest treatment programs, put an end to
fire-borrowing or promote the utility of private timber industry. We need to
rethink the current practice of throwing billions of taxpayer dollars at
wildfires year after year and begin aggressively treating our forests."

"It's crucial that our federal, state and local agencies have all the resources
they need to fight fires and ultimately save lives, homes and property across
Wyoming and the West," said Senator Barrasso. "We also must end the
unsustainable practice of 'fire-borrowing' and prioritize funding for active
management activities that will help prevent large scale forest fires in the
future. Our bill gives land managers the tools and resources they desperately
need to invest in hazardous fuels reduction and disease treatment projects. This
will go a long way in preventing forest fires and saving taxpayer dollars."

"This bill aims to get ahead of the massive wildfire threat that plagues
communities throughout the country by making fire suppression and proactive
forest management priorities," said Senator Flake. "Enacting this measure would
prohibit the crippling practice of fire borrowing, while responsibly budgeting
for wildfire management at levels commensurate with the size of the problem."

Rather than budgeting for wildfires using just 70 percent of a 10-year historic
average of suppression expenditures as the Obama Administration recently
proposed, this bill requires the Forest Service and the Interior Department to
budget for 100 percent of their suppression costs using the most accurate budget
forecast model available (known as the "FLAME regression model"). The bill also
prohibits federal agencies from raiding non-wildfire accounts to pay for
wildfires, a practice known as "fire-borrowing."

While the Administration's proposal would allow wildfire spending to
automatically exceed statutory budget caps on disaster funding, S. 2593 would
establish a limited process for accessing emergency funds in the event of a
catastrophic wildfire, while investing aggressively in suppression and forest
management programs. Finally, this bill would establish a streamlined
environmental review process to expedite forest treatment projects across 7.5
million acres of federal land and promote the use of private industry under
forest stewardship contracts. (See also: S. 1966, National Forest Jobs
Management Act of 2014 by Senator Barrasso and S. 1300, Stewardship Contracting
Reauthorization and Improvement Act by Senator Flake).

If this bill had been enacted for Fiscal Year 2014, the Forest Service could
have on hand about $1.9 billion that they predict is needed to fight this year's
fires compared to the $1.3 billion appropriated by Congress. The Forest Service
would also be allowed to access up to $1 billion in emergency spending for
suppression while dedicating $950 million for hazardous fuel management,
landscape scale forest restoration, and treating insect infested areas. Out of
the Forest Service's $4.9 billion request for fiscal 2014, only $201 million was
requested by the Administration for hazardous fuels removal around rural
communities.

SUMMARY OF McCAIN-BARRASSO-FLAKE WILDFIRE BILL

Prohibits Forest Service and the Interior Department from "fire-borrowing" from
all accounts not connected to wildfire management.

Requires FS/DOI to use the best available budget forecast model to plan its
wildfire season and fully fund its suppression operations at 100 percent.
Currently, FS uses a 10-year historic average of past wildfire spending to
predict its future needs, which isn't keeping pace with the increase in size and
cost of wildfires.

Establishes a narrowly tailored process to access emergency funds in the event
of a catastrophic wildfire that exhausts suppression accounts, but also requires
Appropriators to invest in hazardous fuels reduction projects and insect disease
treatment projects.

In order to access this emergency process for catastrophic wildfires, two things
must happen: (1) 100 percent of the suppression needs must be funded; and (2) a
number equal to 50 percent of the suppression costs must go to hazardous fuel
reduction projects like those authorized under the Healthy Forest Restoration
Act (HFRA) of 2003, the Tribal Forests Protection Act, and landscape scale
forest restoration.

Incentivizes more funding to the HFRA (which is authorized at $760 million a
year) to prevent future wildfires near rural communities and bring down forest
suppression costs over the long term.

Requires Forest Service to treat 7.5 million acres of federal land designated as
"Forest Management Emphasis Areas" within 15 years under an expedited
environmental review process.

Promotes the use of private industry to help the Forest Service to thin our
forests by enhancing existing forest stewardship contracting law.


For further information please visit: http://www.mccain.senate.gov

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              673 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 19, 2014 Monday

Arizonans leverage local resources to prevent wildfire

LENGTH: 1084  words

DATELINE: Flagstaff


Northern Arizona University has issued the following news release:

While last week the federal government predicted a major budget shortfall for
fighting wildfire, some groups are looking for innovative ways to fund wildfire
prevention at the local level instead of waiting for the feds to pick up the
bill.

The latest Department of Interior and Forest Service forecasts for wildfire
suppression expenditures are higher than ever, and the agencies will likely need
to spend $1.8 billion fighting fires this year - about $470 million more than
the available federal budget. The primary culprit making fires more severe and
intense - and hence more expensive to fight - is climate change: This week's
National Climate Assessment from the White House hammers home the point that
wildfires are only getting worse as the climate warms. "Wildfires start earlier
in the spring and continue later into the fall," John Holdren, Obama's science
adviser, said in a video that summarizes the assessment. "Rain comes down in
heavier downpours. ...Drought and increased warming in the southwest foster
wildfires, and increased competition for scarce water resources for people and
for ecosystems."

8447728603_a24255b2dd_z.jpg
    The steep forested hillside overlooking Flagstaff is being mitigated and
restored wholly through a $10 million municipal bond. Photo courtesy of the
Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project.

But innovative local investment in preventing wildfires could help offset the
projected shortage of federal funds to fight them. Last week, more than 100
people - mostly Arizona land managers, scientists, policy-makers and people from
the private sector - attended a workshop, "Investing in Restoration: Arizona's
Forests and Watersheds," in Tempe, Arizona to brainstorm on how local
communities can mitigate for wildfire by keeping their ecosystems healthy. The
key goal, said co-organizer Diane Vosick, was to identify local-scale funding
mechanisms that could fast-track fire risk reduction measures, which have become
particularly urgent in the face of the looming shortage of federal funds.

Vosick represents the Ecological Restoration Institute of Northern Arizona
University, a co-organizer of the Tempe workshop alongside the Salt River
Project utility company, which provides electricity to nearly a million people
in the state. Both groups approach wildfire from an ecosystems standpoint: The
forest, the watershed, wildlife habitat and quality of life are intertwined, and
reducing risk of catastrophic fire means protecting that entire ecosystem.
"We're trying to be agile," Vosick said, by tackling forest restoration and
wildfire mitigation in tandem, and helping more communities to adopt (and
finance) the approach.


This whole-ecosystem approach to reducing fire risk isn't brand new, but the
workshop was an important step toward spreading it beyond the handful of
communities who have adopted it, which tend to be exceptionally resource-rich
and fire-aware. By the end of the workshop, these local-scale funding ideas
emerged as the most promising:

Municipal water fees. Either on a statewide, regional or local level, a small
fee would be added to electricity bills to fund wildfire mitigation and
watershed protection. This idea has been implemented in Santa Fe, New Mexico,
and is garnering wide attention in fire-plagued Arizona.
    Biomass burning. In the Prescott National Forest area, where pinyon-juniper
and shrubs dominate the landscape, slash from forest thinning could be sold to a
private sector biomass energy facility, ridding the forest of dangerous wildfire
fuel while raising revenue to continue fire mitigation.
    Revenue bonds. Some communities want to explore the option of using
tax-exempt revenue bonds to fund infrastructure - such as roads and bridges,
among other possibilities - whose tolls, charges or rents could in turn help
fund forest health restoration and wildfire mitigation.
    Corporate donors. Since businesses, like all community members, depend on
the ecosystem services - like watershed protection, erosion control and clean
air - local communities could run campaigns to garner financial support for
mitigation from local businesses and larger corporate sponsors.

At least one community is already successfully addressing watersheds and
wildfire in an integrated whole-ecosystem approach and at the local level. The
Flagstaff Watershed Project, one of the only forest restoration projects in the
country on National Forest land that's being fully funded by a municipality. Its
funds are being used to restore forest health in hillsides above the city, where
steep and rocky terrain, the presence of threatened species and other
complications make mitigation -- such as tree thinning -- costly and complex.

flagstaffhillside.jpg
    The Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project team visits a test site above the
city to test the viability of tree thinning equipment on steep rocky slopes.
Photo courtesy of the FWPP.

Flagstaff is already particularly wildfire savvy, said Wally Covington, director
of the Ecological Restoration Institute, and a number of other wildfire efforts
have emerged in the city over the past 20 years. But broad support for the
project was spurred in part by Flagstaff's 2010 Schultz Fire, which made the
links between wildfire and watersheds abundantly clear: The fire was followed by
severe flooding that destabilized an alluvial fan (a cone-shaped deposit of
sediment and debris) that will now likely be eroding for thousands of years to
come, affecting the water supply and threatening homes. The fire spared the
city, but the flood caused tens of millions of dollars in damage and threatened
the city's water resources.

A new report by Headwaters Economics, highlighting the need to leverage local
resources to reduce fire risk, points to Flagstaff as having "taken and funded
more measures to reduce the costs and risks of wildland fires than most
communities in the West." Yet ultimately not even the model communities are
doing enough, according to the report, and a lack of resources and political
will to mitigate characterizes the majority of the fire-prone West.

But as for the conference attendees in Arizona, many representing more rural,
more conservative and less fire-aware places than Flagstaff, "they're in it for
the long haul," Vosick said; they're committed to taking the workshop ideas back
to their local communities and officials to set them in motion.

For more information please visit: http://www.nau.edu

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              674 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                   The Star Phoenix (Saskatoon, Saskatchewan)

                             May 28, 2015 Thursday
                                 Early Edition

Alberta fire season 'hectic,' destructive; Crews facing dry conditions, shifting
winds

BYLINE: Otiena Ellwand And Alexandra Zabjek, Edmonton Journal

SECTION: CANADA; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 548 words

DATELINE: EDMONTON


Alberta's wildfire season is only three months in and already it has consumed
significantly more forest than last year.

So far, there have been 720 wildfires in the province, burning just under 30,000
hectares of forest, compared to 400 fires at this time last year that burned
about 700 hectares.

"The actual amount of forest that's been consumed is dramatically different. ...
It's been a significant increase in terms of activity," said wildfire
information officer Richard Horne, adding that the majority of those have been
caused by people.

The wildfire season, which began March 1, has been "very, very hectic," with
some firefighters working up to 24 days straight, said Horne.

"The forested areas of the province have been incredibly dry, so much so that
our meteorologists are talking about this being almost unprecedented," he said
at the Lesser Slave Lake Fire Centre on Wednesday.

All evacuation orders related to wildfires raging in Alberta were lifted as of
Wednesday afternoon, but 15 wildfires are still burning out of control,
including one that has been creeping toward oil and gas infrastructure near Cold
Lake, Scott Long from the Alberta Emergency Management Agency told a news
conference. Cenovus and CNRL both have operations in the area.

"There's no rain; that's the biggest concern certainly for the foreseeable
future.

"The conditions remain dry and there is the possibility of further lightning
strikes in the coming days," Long said, adding that shifting winds could further
complicate the situation for fire crews.

"They're doing their best to make sure it does not impinge on any oil and gas
infrastructure."

Wildfire information manager Geoff Driscoll said the fire had grown to about
17,000 hectares as of Wednesday, from 10,000 hectares on Tuesday.

However, the blaze remained five kilometres away from oil operations, the same
distance it was before.

As of Wednesday morning, about 250 firefighters and 10 helicopters were fighting
the blaze, which is still considered out of control and is expected to keep
growing in the days ahead.

At least some of 150 extra firefighters coming to Alberta from other provinces
are expected to be deployed to the Cold Lake fire.

"We have been increasing the amount of resources at this fire each day,"
Driscoll said.

Further west, a wildfire near Wabasca that forced the evacuation of almost 5,000
people is now "being held."

Long credited "numerous and significant perimeter guards" that firefighters have
worked on over the last 72 hours on the west, south and east sides of the fire.

The reception centres in Athabasca and Calling Lake are still open, but he said
there is a co-ordinated "reentry" for residents. Premier Rachel Notley is
getting briefed on the wildfire threats daily.

"Of course, we're very concerned. We know that Albertans across the province are
concerned," Notley said in Calgary.

She said she was pleased to learn evacuation orders were lifted for residents.

"But we know this is a critical issue, that it requires constant attention and
oversight and that's why I've asked to be briefed every day," she said.

The Alberta government's provincial operations centre is up and running in
Edmonton, for the first time since the 2011 Slave Lake fire disaster.
!@COPYRIGHT=© 2015 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ryan Jackson, Edmonton Journal; A helicopter drops water on a hot spot
along the edge of a contained wildfire east of Slave Lake, Alta., Wednesday.
Alberta has seen 720 wildfires already this season, compared to just 400 fires
at this time last year.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 The Star Phoenix
                              All Rights Reserved


                              675 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                             August 7, 2009 Friday

Spread caution like wildfire

BYLINE: Deseret News editorial

LENGTH: 343 words


According to the National Interagency Fire Center, Utah had 999 wildfires in
2008. Given the wet months of May and June this year, don't be surprised if the
dry grass pushes the number to more than a thousand in 2009. Still, Utah wasn't
even among the wildfire leaders last year. California had 5,814 fires. Georgia
had 5,454. And Texas ruled the roost with a whopping 16,713 wildfires.

Causes for such fires vary, of course. Some are started by lightning, some by
arsonists. But the sobering truth is four out of every five wildfires are
started by human beings. And most of those are ignited by human beings who are
being, well, a little too human. This year, National Wildfire Week will run from
Oct. 4-11. But if past years are a barometer, by the time the week rolls around
there will already have been hundreds of wildfires that could have been
prevented. For 50 years Smokey has been saying, "Only you can prevent wildfires
." This year the message is the same. And as with drunken driving, smoking and
other problems, the best way out of the wildfire predicament is through
education. So as the timber turns to tinder this month, here are several
suggestions from smokeybear.com on what to remember as you head into the wild.
Don't park on dry grass. Smoke only where you have a three-foot clearing in all
directions. Have a spark arrester on your ORV. Know the fire regulations for an
area. Never pull burning sticks from a fire. Never ignite fireworks in the
wilds. Store flammable liquids safely. Never use stoves or lanterns inside a
tent. And inspect, inspect, inspect ? upon arriving and upon leaving. Anyone who
doubts the need for such precautions has only to remember the Milford Flat
wildfire of 2007. Gov. Jon Huntsman claimed it was the biggest fire burning in
the world at the time. Before dying out, the fire consumed 363,052 acres. The
scars ? both on nature and on the emotions of Utah residents ? still exist. The
sad fact is it could all happen again. The good news, however, is, with thought
and care by Utahns, it doesn't have to.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2009 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                              676 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                           August 16, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

B.C. nears worst wildfire season with 8,450 square kilometres hit

SECTION: CITY; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 402 words


British Columbia is poised to face its worst wildfire season as flames scorch
thousands of hectares of land and costs rise to deal with the devastation. B.C.
Wildfire Service spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said that since the start of the
wildfire season on April 1, an estimated 8,450 square kilometres of forest,
brush and grassland has been burned, an area three times the size of Metro
Vancouver.

That compares with a record loss of 8,550 square kilometres in 1958.

"(It's) safe to say we are on track for this to be the worst season on record
for that area burned," Skrepnek said.

He said 154 wildfires are burning across the province and the firefighting price
tag has reached $309 million, though that figure does not include costs for the
loss for 71 homes and 118 outbuildings.

The largest wildfire, in Hanceville, southwest of Williams Lake, now covers
2,120 square kilometres, Skrepnek said.

"We're urging people to be extremely careful with any activity that could spark
a wildfire," he said. "We're continuing to see the increased likelihood of
lightningcaused fires, which makes it even more critical to avoid any
humancaused incidents."

Skrepnek also urged people to report fires.

Over 4,100 people, including about 760 people recruited from outside the
province, are working on firefighting efforts, Skrepnek said.

Chris Duffy, executive director of operations for Emergency Management B.C.,
says nearly 9,300 people remain out of their homes as 40 evacuation orders are
still in place. He said 31,000 people are on evacuation alert, meaning they must
be ready to leave at a moment's notice.

Evacuation orders have been downgraded to alerts in some areas of the Cariboo,
including Alexis Creek to Riske Creek, after residents were forced to leave
Sunday.

However, officials with the Cariboo Regional District said ongoing fire-control
activities mean access to some areas may be limited and is at the discretion of
checkpoint personnel.

"We would still urge the public to remain vigilant," Duffy said, adding the fire
risk remains high.

Many returning residents have had to power wash off red fire retardant that
covered their property in efforts to protect structures.

The B.C. Centre for Disease Control says anyone removing coloured fire retardant
should avoid eye contact and wash hands when removing coloured or gel fire
retardant from structures. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 The Vancouver Sun
                              All Rights Reserved


                              677 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The Columbian (Vancouver, Washington)

                             June 30, 2015 Tuesday

Wildfire, wind strike Wenatchee

BYLINE: NICHOLAS GERANIOS ?and DONNA BLANKINSHIP Associated Press; Don Seabrook,
The Wenatchee World

SECTION: REGIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 708 words



HIGHLIGHT: A Douglas County firefighter sprays the back of a home Sunday as
embers fly off a neighboring house in Wenatchee. A wildfire fueled by high
temperatures and strong winds roared into Central Washington.

A Chelan County Sheriff's deputy races to check that all residents have left
their homes Sunday as flames approach houses in Wenatchee.



WENATCHEE - From just across the Wenatchee River, Dominick Bonny watched a
whole neighborhood in his Central Washington town burn as a wildfire destroyed
two dozen homes and forced hundreds to flee.
"With the wind blowing away from us, it was like we were watching a natural
disaster within arm's reach," he said.

The wildfires hit parts of Central and Eastern Washington over the weekend as
the state is struggling with a severe drought. Mountain snowpack is at
extremely low levels, and about one-fifth of the state's rivers and streams are
at record low levels.
Eastern Washington has been experiencing temperatures into the 100s, and last
week Washington
Gov. Jay Inslee
issued an emergency proclamation that allows state resources to quickly be
brought in to respond to wildfires.
Washington's struggles with wildfires come as Alaska, its fellow Pacific
Northwest state, is facing more and harsher wildfires this year.
In Wenatchee, the wildfire fueled by high temperatures and strong winds roared
into town Sunday afternoon. The blaze ignited in brush just outside Wenatchee,
quickly burning out of control about 120 miles east of Seattle.
Rainfall on Monday provided relief, but hot, dry conditions and wind could
challenge crews trying to get a handle on the flames that burned more than an
estimated 4 square miles, officials said. Three firefighters suffered minor
injuries, but no injuries to residents were reported.
Fire crews were concentrating on preventing any more homes from being burned
Monday, State Patrol Trooper Brian Moore said. Crews were working to put out
hot spots in already burned areas, while keeping an eye on winds that were
expected to reach 15 to 20 mph Monday evening and could fan flames again.
Tom Bryant surveyed the smoldering ruins of his home in the hills above
Wenatchee and said he and his wife had to race out of the house at the last
minute as the fire advanced Sunday night.
On Monday, he pointed to a Mustang sports car that was a burned wreck and to
his BMW motorcycle that was destroyed in the garage.
"It's going to be tough to replace," Bryant said. "It hurts, but it's just
stuff. It's painful."
He was unable to save photographs and important documents, Bryant said. "That's
where all our stuff is," he said, pointing to a burned file cabinet.
Evacuations were mainly in the north end of town and included a Wal-Mart store,
the Chelan County Emergency Management office said.
The store did not burn, but several commercial buildings were near the blaze,
Washington State Patrol Trooper Darren Wright said.
Emergency management officials late Monday morning also briefly issued a
shelter-in-place order after ammonia started leaking from a fruit warehouse.
They later said it had dissipated and was no longer a threat.
The Blue Bird warehouse, which uses ammonia for cold storage, was among a few
commercial buildings to burn.
Bonny, who lives just outside Wenatchee, called the speed of the blaze "just
mind-blowing."
Phil Bentz, who lives on the same side of the river as the fire, said his home
hadn't been evacuated. "We were waiting for someone to knock on the door, but
they didn't come. So far, so good," Bentz said.
About noon Monday, fire trucks poured water on a burning warehouse in downtown
Wenatchee, sending big black clouds into the air over the city. Farther north
of town, scorched hillsides showed where the flames were stopped just short of
irrigated apple orchards and residential subdivisions.
Officials know the fire started in brush on the edge of town, but they are
still trying to determine what sparked it.
Sweltering heat above 100 degrees, tinder-dry brush and strong winds helped
fuel it.
Last month, Inslee declared a statewide drought emergency.
The railroad helped battle the blaze by spraying water from tank cars and
transferring water to firefighting trucks, he said.
Hilda Emerson, 37, was among the people who fled the flames Sunday.
"I went and grabbed what I could - my computers, irreplaceable stuff, toys for
my daughter - and I left," she said. "I never had to do this before."
She and her 4-year-old daughter, Nissa, spent the night on cots set up by the
Red Cross in the gymnasium of Eastmont High School in East Wenatchee. She
planned to check on her home later in the day.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2015 The Columbian Publishing Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              678 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           October 31, 2013 Thursday
                                 SECOND EDITION

Smoke from wildfires affects health here Illinois, Missouri are among hardest
hit.

BYLINE:  By Blythe Bernhard bbernhard@post-dispatch.com 314-340-8129

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 482 words


People in Missouri and Illinois breathe in high levels of wildfire smoke, even
though the fires burn in distant states.

Nearly all residents in both states lived in areas with wildfire smoke
conditions in 2011, making Illinois the second most affected by population and
Missouri the fourth most affected state in the country, according to a new
report from the Natural Resources Defense Council, a New York-based
environmental advocacy group.

Wildfire smoke travels hundreds of miles from the western and southwestern
states, and the tiny particles are not visible. The St. Louis area gets smoke
particles from wildfires in Colorado and agricultural fires in Texas. Smoke from
wildfires can spread throughout an area 50 times larger than the area that
actually burned, according to the research led by the group's senior scientist
Kim Knowlton.

"Until now we've thought about fire as being unhealthy mainly for people
fighting the fires and people directly affected by the flames and smoke," said
Patrick Kinney, a professor of environmental health at Columbia University who
reviewed the report. "What it illuminates is that the smoke from fires can be a
health issue for people who live pretty far away."

Climate change and subsequent droughts will only make the wildfires more common
and severe, according to the researchers. The smoke poses health risks,
including asthma attacks, pneumonia and other lung conditions. People without
lung disease can also experience symptoms similar to allergies.

Using data from weather satellites and air quality monitors in cities including
St. Louis, Knowlton and colleagues tracked the spread of smoke across the U.S.
in 2011, a record year for wildfires in Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico and Texas.
Two-thirds of the country lived in areas affected by smoke conditions. Residents
of six states including Missouri and Illinois dealt with wildfire conditions for
more than a week that year, despite a lack of fires inside the states. The St.
Louis area was among the hardest hit, with more than 12 days of medium to high
density smoke conditions.

Asthma rates are above average in St. Louis, where one in eight people have the
chronic breathing disorder, and local emergency rooms log more than 12,000
visits from asthma patients each year. Some local schools report 1 in 4 students
with an asthma diagnosis. High pollen counts and smoking rates were thought to
be the main culprits, but wildfire smoke could also be playing a role.

Health experts recommend that everyone get flu shots, a particularly important
preventive measure in households with breathing troubles. Watch the National
Weather Service for poor air quality alerts and avoid outdoor activity on those
days. During warm weather, keep windows closed and set the air conditioner to
recirculate. Asthma attacks and allergies tend to spike in spring and summer,
which correlates with wildfire season.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  A firefighter watches for spot fires during a burnout operation while
battling the Rim Fire near Yosemite National Park, Calif., on Sunday, Aug. 25,
2013. Fire crews are clearing brush and setting sprinklers to protect two groves
of giant sequoias as a massive week-old wildfire rages along the remote
northwest edge of Yosemite National Park. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              679 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      October 26, 2017 Thursday 11:07 EST

Wildfires at Your Doorstep;
Op-Ed Contributor

BYLINE: MICHAEL KODAS

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 1004 words



HIGHLIGHT: More than one-third of American homes are in what firefighters call
the "wildland urban interface," where they risk burning in wildfires.


Boulder, Colo. -- This year has seen an explosion of wildfires that have set
records for death and destruction from California to Kansas. As the smoke
continues to clear from the deadly flames that swept across parts of
California's wine country, history and the reality on the ground suggest the
threat will grow only worse, not only for California, the most fire-prone state,
but throughout the West.

In 2015, for the first time since at least 1960, more than 10 million acres of
land burned in wildfires, three times what burned in an average year in the
1970s. Scientists in the United States Forest Service predict that by the middle
of this century, twice that acreage will burn. That's an area nearly the size of
the state of Maine.

The Forest Service reports that more than a third of American homes, some 44
million residences, are in what firefighters call the "Wildland Urban
Interface," where they risk burning in wildfires. Many of those homes, like
those that caught fire within the city limits of Santa Rosa earlier this month,
are inhabited by people who have no idea they face a wildfire threat. The fuel
surrounding their homes is largely the vegetation they planted there. Yet when a
wind-driven fire pushes "ember attacks" into neighborhoods deep inside a
community, the fires they ignite don't discriminate between woodlands and
landscaping. And the thousands of new homes that are being built each year
deeper into flammable forests and brushlands are at even greater risk.

The fire season is also expanding and is now on average 78 days longer than it
was in 1970, a consequence of a warmer and dryer climate. Adding to the problem,
mountain snowpack that used to keep forests moist has been in decline in some
Western ranges and melts earlier than it did during the previous century. After
sundown, higher temperatures and lower humidity increasingly drive fires to rage
through the night, when their spread used to slow. Wintertime wildfires are no
longer rare occurrences.

Failed firefighting policies from the past century are also contributing to the
explosion of wildfires today. The "10 a.m." policy that the Forest Service
instituted in the 1930s required that every natural wildfire be contained and
controlled by the morning after it was reported. This quick response to
extinguishing blazes meant that some woodlands that had been naturally thinned
by fires every 10 years or so might go decades or more without them. Small
trees, shrubs and fallen timber filled those forest floors, and once widely
spaced treetops closed into dense canopies, thick with needles. Some forests
thickened with as much as 40 times more woody fuel than they held before the
zero tolerance policy toward wildfire.

Ground fires that once burned slow and low through the grasses on the forest
floor grew bigger in the unnaturally heavy load of scrub and timber. Branches
known as "ladder fuels" carried the flames high into the trees, where winds
could blow them into crown fires that raced through the tightly clustered
treetops. While it's a minority of the nation's forests that show increased fire
severity because of this past policy, these forests tend to be adjacent or
within housing developments.

Budgets are also going up in flames. Even before the Northern California fires,
theForest Service had spent $2.35 billion fighting wildfires in the fiscal year
that ended last month -- $650 million more than fiscal year 2015, which had been
its costliest year for firefighting. The rising costs are turning the Forest
Service into the "Fire Service." In 1995, the agency spent 16 percent of its
budget on wildfires. This year wildland blazes are on track to consume 56
percent of those funds, and by 2021 the Forest Service anticipates that fires
will burn through two-thirds of its funding.

Other federal agencies that fight wildfires, such as the National Park Service,
the Bureau of Land Management and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, are also
seeing their budgets burned, as are states and local firefighting agencies.

With seven times the number of homes burning in wildfires today compared with
the 1970s, wildland firefighters with little more than the fire resistant
clothes on their backs, the chain saws and axes in their hands and the fire
shelters strapped to their waists increasingly are called up to somehow stand up
to the flames. And as was the case in the 2013 fire near Yarnell, Ariz., that
claimed the lives of 19 firefighters, members of the Granite Mountain Hotshots,
many of the homes and communities firefighters are being asked to protect have
done little to prepare themselves for wildfires, magnifying the danger.

To some commanders, sending firefighters to protect homes and communities
unprepared for the clear threat is effectively subsidizing a lifestyle with the
lives of young men and women. They're increasingly refusing to do that. That's
an important first step toward lowering the death toll, at least among emergency
responders. Focusing forest thinning operations and prescribed burns on
overgrown woodlands near communities is another. Modernizing the airpower used
to hold back wildfires and carefully considering when and how to use it will
make airborne firefighting safer and more effective, as will new technologies
aiding the firefight every year. Building codes, land-use planning, insurance
rates that reward wise construction and development, and community wildfire
protection plans can also make a real difference.

Most important, however, is an "all hands on deck" engagement from everyone who
lives or works in our nation's increasingly fire-prone lands. We'll never reduce
the destruction of wildfires if we leave the task to "only the brave."

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion),
and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Michael Kodas is associate director of the Center for Environmental Journalism
at the University of Colorado, Boulder, and author of "Megafire: The Race to
Extinguish a Deadly Epidemic of Flame."

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              680 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           February 28, 2017 Tuesday
                                CA CHASE EDITION

Study: People start 84% of U.S. wildfires;
Climate change still a factor but humans lengthen fire season

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, @usatodayweather, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 380 words


The horrific wildfire that scorched Gatlinburg, Tenn., in November, killing 14
people, was human-caused -- and that's not unusual: Whether deliberate or
accidental, a whopping 84% of all wildfires in the U.S. are started by people,
says a new study.

The remaining 16% are started naturally, by lightning, according to the report,
one of the most comprehensive to date.

The study also found that humans have added almost three months to the national
fire season on average. "Thanks to people, the wildfire season is almost
year-round," said study lead author Jennifer Balch of the University of
Colorado. Humans also account for nearly half the acreage burned each year.

Balch and her study co-authors looked at 1.5 million wildfires from 1992 to 2012
and found that the human-ignited fire season was three times longer than the
lightning-ignited fire season and also added an average of 40,000 wildfires per
year.

"Fires are burning earlier in the spring in the Southeast and later in the fall
in the West," Balch said. Fighting wildfires in the U.S. has exceeded $2 billion
in recent years, the study said.

"Although considerable fire research in the United States has rightly focused on
increased fire activity (larger fires and more area burned) because of climate
change, we demonstrate that the expanded fire niche as a result of human-related
ignitions is equally profound," the study said.

Catastrophic fires have scorched the Western U.S. over the past decade. Several
states, such as Washington and California,  have seen some of their largest
wildfires ever recorded.

"We have known for a long time that fires set by people are an extremely
important factor in wildfire problems, but this study shows in detail how
important people are in lengthening the fire season and contributing to
increasing numbers of large wildfires," said Thomas Swetnam of the University of
Arizona, who was not involved in this research.

It's not that people are becoming more careless or  more arson is occurring, he
said. He said lightning-caused fires are  increasing in the West because of
warming temperatures, earlier springs and  droughts, which mean "that climate
change is still a primary driver of the trends."

The study appeared in the  journal Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Brandon Reese, The Tennessean

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2017 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              681 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                           October 20, 2007 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Surviving wildfires goal of program; Remote properties face increased response
times

BYLINE: Gerald Vander Pyl, For The Calgary Herald

SECTION: RECREATION & INVESTMENT PROPERTIES; Pg. K6

LENGTH: 836  words


The news images are often disturbing.

Thick smoke darkening the sky; flames racing from treetop to treetop through a
mountain valley; the anxious faces of people awaiting word on whether they will
be forced to flee their homes and cabins.

Each year in Western Canada, wildfires threaten areas where forests provide a
dangerous supply of fuel, and the ruggedness of many regions makes fighting
fires a daunting task.

With so many cabins located in wooded areas of Alberta and B.C., owners of
recreation property face additional challenges when it comes to fire safety
compared to a home in the city.

Although the fire season is winding down with the approach of winter, it's never
to early to get a head start before next summer.

There are several safety-related concerns recreation property owners should
think about, says Anastasia Drummond, a wildfire information officer with the
forestry division of Alberta Sustainable Resource Development.

The first is the increased risk of large-scale wildfires in many forested areas,
and the potential for these wildfires to affect homes and property, she says.

Another concern is the additional response time associated with sending
firefighting resources to remote areas, says Drummond.

For these reasons, property owners should seriously consider implementing the
FireSmart program on their recreation property, she says.

The program was created by Partners in Protection, which is a collection of
organizations that promote safer communities in areas where forests meet homes.

A FireSmart homeowners' manual was put together so that homeowners can take
proactive steps to protect their property from wildfires, says Drummond.

The manual has information on reducing the hazards of wildfires by taking simple
preventative steps.

It also includes a FireSmart assessment checklist that can help determine how
prepared your property is for successfully surviving a wildfire.

While many people want privacy at their cabin, keeping it surrounded by trees
and other landscaping, Drummond says it is a bad idea in terms of fire
prevention.

Managing the space around cabins and buildings is critical because trees,
shrubs, grasses and woodpiles provide fuel for wildfires, she says.

By removing these flammable materials from around buildings, homeowners can
create fuel breaks that can help slow or stop the progression of a wildfire, she
says.

Clearing the space around a home is also safer for firefighters and will give
them a better chance at saving a home threatened by wildfires.

Another aspect of the FireSmart initiative involves urging people building or
renovating a cabin to use more fire-resistant materials.

By making smart choices up front, like opting for metal or asphalt roofing
rather than using wooden shakes, homeowners increase the overall fire resistance
of their property, says Drummond.

Besides preventative measures on the property, itself, there are other things a
homeowner can do, she says.

She reminds people to always have adequate insurance on their homes and
properties, have an evacuation plan, and ensure that simple firefighting
equipment such as shovels, rakes, buckets and hoses are easily accessible.

While the threat of natural wildfires may seem to be the greatest concern in
cabin country, there is also the threat of blazes carelessly started by cabin
owners, themselves.

The Alberta Fire Commissioners Office puts together an annual Fire Safety
Campaign publication with tips on everything from proper use of barbecues to the
safe use and storage of gasoline.

While some of the advice seems to be simple common sense, such as not checking
for a leaky propane line with a match or lighter, there are actually people who
do such things, says Trent West, fire safety officer with the Alberta Fire
Commissioner's Office in Calgary.

"Do we see a lot of silly things? Absolutely," he says. "There's nothing common
about common sense."

There are so many cases where people's claims they didn't realize what they were
doing was dangerous, that "ignorance of hazard" has its own code number on
reports filled out

by West's office.

Thoughtless errors include driving an off-road vehicle with a hot exhaust system
into tall grass, starting a fire, he says.

Other incidents have included placing a huge stack of firewood on wooden decks
right next to houses made of wood, ensuring a huge supply of fuel that could
turn even a small fire into a catastrophe, says West.

Even if a property owner conforms to the FireSmart program, he or she will need
to consider what other cabin owners are doing.

A careless fire could spread and affect you.

With that in mind, it is important to have an emergency plan if something does
happen -- one that includes an exit strategy from your cabin and a meeting place
for all family members, says West.

Because saving lives is the first priority for firefighters, if they cannot
quickly determine that everyone is out of the house, precious time could be
spent searching for victims rather than trying to save a property from
destruction, he says.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Calgary Herald Archive, Reuters; A china vase is all that remains
of a home destroyed by wildfires. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2007 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              682 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            Revelstoke Times Review

                             July 20, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

How ready is Revelstoke for a wildfire?

BYLINE: Alex Cooper

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 903 words


In Revelstoke, it can be easy to be complacent about the threat of wildfires.
Given our wet environment in an interior rainforest, and the relative lack of
major fires around here while others have burned as of late, I've heard people
call the community "fireproof."

Ask the experts, and they're not so confident. "Revelstoke will likely be
threatened by wildfire in the future - the question is not IF this will happen,
the question is WHEN?" says a 2015 report on wildfire fuel breaks around the
community.

The Revelstoke Community Wildfire Protection Plan makes a similar statement in a
section looking at historic wildfires . "Even in Revelstoke's relatively wet
climate, during extreme fire seasons, when high winds occur, there is a
significant risk that wildfires in this area can become uncontrollable and
threaten property and lives," the authors wrote.

How is Revelstoke at risk? The wildfire protection plan says the water treatment
plant faces the biggest threat, with a mixture of high probability of fire and
extreme consequence. Other areas with high fire probability where a fire could
have consequences are the Bridge Creek watershed in Mount Revelstoke National
Park, Alpine Lane above the Trans-Canada, parts of the Big Eddy, most of the
Begbie Bench and the forests on Revelstoke Mountain Resort and BC Hydro lines.

Fortunately, most of the community is surrounded by natural and man-made fuel
breaks. The 2015 report on fuel breaks says the community is generally well
protected by things like highways, avalanche paths, hydro lines and rivers. Fuel
breaks are lacking in the South Revelstoke area, and the north slope of Mount
Revelstoke, directly above town.

Shelly Bird, the spokesperson for Mount Revelstoke National Park, said they were
working on removing fuels around the base of the mountain. They are also
planning a prescribed burn along the frontside of the mountain to help prevent
fires from spreading.

"It's helping prevent the spread of wildfire so if a wildfire did ignite on the
mountain, it wouldn't be likely to spread down the front face of the mountain,"
said Bird.

The front face of Mount Revelstoke is considered an "intensive zone" for
wildfire response.

"In the intensive zone, we're going to hit it with everything we've got because
it's a priority to protect the assets in the surrounding communities," said
Bird.

What would happen if a wildfire threatened Revelstoke? On Friday, I visited the
city's emergency operations centre with Dwayne Voykin, the emergency management
program coordinator, and Gary Sulz, the manager of Emergency Social Services.

"This room is a war room where everybody can come here and we have all the
documents required to put a major event in order," said Sulz.

The centre isn't much - a few phones, a TV, maps and lots of binders filled with
various plans - but if a fire or other emergency threatened the community, this
is where emergency personnel and city staff would go to run things.

"We are prepared to jump on anything right away. That would be the key - to get
a handle on it quickly," said Voykin. "We'd be calling on BC Wildfire to assist
right away."

A few things would happen if there was a risk of an evacuation. The EOC would be
activated and evacuation alerts would be sent out via the media, the city
website, and social media. An alert means you should get ready to leave. I was
given a set of pamphlets from PreparedBC on what to do in the case of an
emergency, including an extensive list on what to do in case of an evacuation
alert:

- Gather your essential items such as medication, glasses, important documents
and any valuable keepsakes you couldn't live without;

- Make sure you know where everyone in your family is and plan a meeting place
if you're apart. If your kids aren't with you and you can't get them, find
someone who can;

- Prepare to evacuate people with disabilities, elderly and children;

- Ensure you have a way to get your pets to safety;

- Find lodging with a family member, if possible;

- Keep a full tank of gas in your car;

- If you don't have a car, the evacuation alert will include information on how
to be picked up.

The pamphlets included a list of items everyone should have ready in case of an
evacuation, including four litres of water per person per day, three-days of
non-perishable food, medication, clothing, toiletries, a battery-powered radio,
a fully-charged cellphone, First Aid kit, copies of important documents and
more.

An evacuation order, the next step up, would be issued if people needed to leave
part of all of the communit. Emergency personnel would go door to door telling
people to leave, and assisting if needed, while individuals would be expected to
gather their items and proceed to the nearest evacuation site to register with
authorities.

"People should be prepared to look after yourself for 72 hours," said Voykin.

In the event of an evacuation, people would be expected to register at the
community centre - or another location if it wasn't accessible. Residents could
be housed there or placed in hotels if they had nowhere else to go.

Meanwhile, the EOC would be communicating with personnel on the ground to find
out what resources are needed, and vice versa.

"If it's to the point where we need to get people out of the community, then
we'd be coordinating with another community about where we can send people,"
said Sulz. "What we're dealing with would determine where we need to go."

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              683 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 29, 2016 Monday

Oregon: Increasing size and complexity of wildfires straining Oregon Department
of Forestry

LENGTH: 780  words




 Salem: The State of Secretary, Oregon has issued the following news release:



 With Oregon's wildfire season in effect across the state, the Secretary of
State's office released an audit today showing that the increasing number and
severity of wildfires in recent years is taxing the Department's other critical
missions and programs. The report details how the agency and legislative leaders
have not yet adjusted management systems and planning to adequately account for
the rapidly growing demand for fire response.  The Secretary of State recommends
improved data collection and personnel planning to help state leaders better
address the changing wildfire landscape.





 "Across western states right now, we see forest fires threatening homes and
destroying valuable timber and wildlife habitat in record numbers," Secretary of
State Jeanne P. Atkins said.  "In the last three years, the damage from
wildfires managed by the state forestry department has increased ten-fold. As
fire seasons lengthen and intensify, ODF needs long-term workforce planning to
address its firefighting and fire-prevention missions, while still maintaining
broader forest management responsibilities. According to our audit, the
Department is fighting more severe fires with about the same full-time
equivalent employees as it had 20 years ago."



 Like other wildfire organizations across the nation, ODF is facing difficult
challenges. Fires have grown in size, complexity, and cost, which demands more
staff resources. Prior to 2013, the seven-year average gross cost to ODF for
suppressing large fires was $9.7 million per year. Since 2013, the average gross
cost has climbed to $92.4 million per year. As of Aug. 22, 547 fires have burned
over 4,302 acres on ODF-protected lands so far this year. ODF's jurisdiction
only covers about half of the state's forest and grasslands, and the
comprehensive costs of wildfires across the state are not covered by this audit.




 "Many ODF employees work long hours away from home during fire season," said
Atkins. "Our audit shows that employees from across the agency move away from
their usual responsibilities and their families to help protect Oregonians
during fire season. It is understandable how other core missions of the agency
could suffer when the priority each summer shifts to fighting raging wildfires
and protecting Oregonians."



 ODF has three operating programs: Fire Protection, State Forests, and Private
Forests. Wildfire mitigation is an important proactive strategy the agency uses
to reduce risks to forests and communities and the audit recommends that it
increases its wildfire mitigation efforts on both public and private lands.
Despite efforts to reduce the risk of fires, Oregon has millions of acres of
land at high risk of wildfires and in need of restoration. Current resources are
unlikely to meet this challenge.



 This increased wildfire risk puts a burden on employees throughout the agency.
The audit released today reports that not only are more permanent employees
across programs participating in fire assignments, but these employees are
working much longer hours. Overtime hours spent on fire protection by permanent
employees has increased 197 percent in recent years.



 Among the steps the auditors recommended to ODF to reduce the impact of forest
fires on personnel and programs:



     Track costs, staffing, funding and workload impacts on programs unrelated
to firefighting to reach and communicate to state leaders a better understanding
of agency operations as a whole.

     Track data on strategies used to detect and prevent wildfires to guide
decision-making and allow prioritization of the most cost-effective and
successful methods.

     Develop a systematic workforce planning strategy to ensure the agency can
meet current and emerging needs.



 "Forests are an important part of our state's economy and cultural identity,"
Atkins said. "A healthy and sustainable forestry department will help ensure a
healthy and sustainable Oregon. More and more severe wildfires are a reality the
agency must take into account as it tries to meet its larger mission."



 Despite efforts to reduce the risk of large wildfires, there are millions of
acres in Oregon at high risk across all ownerships, including federal, state and
private lands. ODF and the Legislature have partnered with federal officials to
mitigate wildfire risk on federal forests, but there are also unmet needs on
state forest land. This could lead to loss in timber revenue, threatened
watersheds, and mounting environmental costs.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              684 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 29, 2016 Monday

Oregon: Increasing size and complexity of wildfires straining Oregon Department
of Forestry

LENGTH: 780  words




 Salem: The State of Secretary, Oregon has issued the following news release:



 With Oregon's wildfire season in effect across the state, the Secretary of
State's office released an audit today showing that the increasing number and
severity of wildfires in recent years is taxing the Department's other critical
missions and programs. The report details how the agency and legislative leaders
have not yet adjusted management systems and planning to adequately account for
the rapidly growing demand for fire response.  The Secretary of State recommends
improved data collection and personnel planning to help state leaders better
address the changing wildfire landscape.





 "Across western states right now, we see forest fires threatening homes and
destroying valuable timber and wildlife habitat in record numbers," Secretary of
State Jeanne P. Atkins said.  "In the last three years, the damage from
wildfires managed by the state forestry department has increased ten-fold. As
fire seasons lengthen and intensify, ODF needs long-term workforce planning to
address its firefighting and fire-prevention missions, while still maintaining
broader forest management responsibilities. According to our audit, the
Department is fighting more severe fires with about the same full-time
equivalent employees as it had 20 years ago."



 Like other wildfire organizations across the nation, ODF is facing difficult
challenges. Fires have grown in size, complexity, and cost, which demands more
staff resources. Prior to 2013, the seven-year average gross cost to ODF for
suppressing large fires was $9.7 million per year. Since 2013, the average gross
cost has climbed to $92.4 million per year. As of Aug. 22, 547 fires have burned
over 4,302 acres on ODF-protected lands so far this year. ODF's jurisdiction
only covers about half of the state's forest and grasslands, and the
comprehensive costs of wildfires across the state are not covered by this audit.




 "Many ODF employees work long hours away from home during fire season," said
Atkins. "Our audit shows that employees from across the agency move away from
their usual responsibilities and their families to help protect Oregonians
during fire season. It is understandable how other core missions of the agency
could suffer when the priority each summer shifts to fighting raging wildfires
and protecting Oregonians."



 ODF has three operating programs: Fire Protection, State Forests, and Private
Forests. Wildfire mitigation is an important proactive strategy the agency uses
to reduce risks to forests and communities and the audit recommends that it
increases its wildfire mitigation efforts on both public and private lands.
Despite efforts to reduce the risk of fires, Oregon has millions of acres of
land at high risk of wildfires and in need of restoration. Current resources are
unlikely to meet this challenge.



 This increased wildfire risk puts a burden on employees throughout the agency.
The audit released today reports that not only are more permanent employees
across programs participating in fire assignments, but these employees are
working much longer hours. Overtime hours spent on fire protection by permanent
employees has increased 197 percent in recent years.



 Among the steps the auditors recommended to ODF to reduce the impact of forest
fires on personnel and programs:



     Track costs, staffing, funding and workload impacts on programs unrelated
to firefighting to reach and communicate to state leaders a better understanding
of agency operations as a whole.

     Track data on strategies used to detect and prevent wildfires to guide
decision-making and allow prioritization of the most cost-effective and
successful methods.

     Develop a systematic workforce planning strategy to ensure the agency can
meet current and emerging needs.



 "Forests are an important part of our state's economy and cultural identity,"
Atkins said. "A healthy and sustainable forestry department will help ensure a
healthy and sustainable Oregon. More and more severe wildfires are a reality the
agency must take into account as it tries to meet its larger mission."



 Despite efforts to reduce the risk of large wildfires, there are millions of
acres in Oregon at high risk across all ownerships, including federal, state and
private lands. ODF and the Legislature have partnered with federal officials to
mitigate wildfire risk on federal forests, but there are also unmet needs on
state forest land. This could lead to loss in timber revenue, threatened
watersheds, and mounting environmental costs.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              685 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 27, 2016 Saturday

Oregon: Increasing size and complexity of wildfires straining Oregon Department
of Forestry

LENGTH: 780  words





 Salem: The State of Secretary, Oregon has issued the following news release:



 With Oregon's wildfire season in effect across the state, the Secretary of
State's office released an audit today showing that the increasing number and
severity of wildfires in recent years is taxing the Department's other critical
missions and programs. The report details how the agency and legislative leaders
have not yet adjusted management systems and planning to adequately account for
the rapidly growing demand for fire response.  The Secretary of State recommends
improved data collection and personnel planning to help state leaders better
address the changing wildfire landscape.





 "Across western states right now, we see forest fires threatening homes and
destroying valuable timber and wildlife habitat in record numbers," Secretary of
State Jeanne P. Atkins said.  "In the last three years, the damage from
wildfires managed by the state forestry department has increased ten-fold. As
fire seasons lengthen and intensify, ODF needs long-term workforce planning to
address its firefighting and fire-prevention missions, while still maintaining
broader forest management responsibilities. According to our audit, the
Department is fighting more severe fires with about the same full-time
equivalent employees as it had 20 years ago."



 Like other wildfire organizations across the nation, ODF is facing difficult
challenges. Fires have grown in size, complexity, and cost, which demands more
staff resources. Prior to 2013, the seven-year average gross cost to ODF for
suppressing large fires was $9.7 million per year. Since 2013, the average gross
cost has climbed to $92.4 million per year. As of Aug. 22, 547 fires have burned
over 4,302 acres on ODF-protected lands so far this year. ODF's jurisdiction
only covers about half of the state's forest and grasslands, and the
comprehensive costs of wildfires across the state are not covered by this audit.




 "Many ODF employees work long hours away from home during fire season," said
Atkins. "Our audit shows that employees from across the agency move away from
their usual responsibilities and their families to help protect Oregonians
during fire season. It is understandable how other core missions of the agency
could suffer when the priority each summer shifts to fighting raging wildfires
and protecting Oregonians."



 ODF has three operating programs: Fire Protection, State Forests, and Private
Forests. Wildfire mitigation is an important proactive strategy the agency uses
to reduce risks to forests and communities and the audit recommends that it
increases its wildfire mitigation efforts on both public and private lands.
Despite efforts to reduce the risk of fires, Oregon has millions of acres of
land at high risk of wildfires and in need of restoration. Current resources are
unlikely to meet this challenge.



 This increased wildfire risk puts a burden on employees throughout the agency.
The audit released today reports that not only are more permanent employees
across programs participating in fire assignments, but these employees are
working much longer hours. Overtime hours spent on fire protection by permanent
employees has increased 197 percent in recent years.



 Among the steps the auditors recommended to ODF to reduce the impact of forest
fires on personnel and programs:



     Track costs, staffing, funding and workload impacts on programs unrelated
to firefighting to reach and communicate to state leaders a better understanding
of agency operations as a whole.

     Track data on strategies used to detect and prevent wildfires to guide
decision-making and allow prioritization of the most cost-effective and
successful methods.

     Develop a systematic workforce planning strategy to ensure the agency can
meet current and emerging needs.



 "Forests are an important part of our state's economy and cultural identity,"
Atkins said. "A healthy and sustainable forestry department will help ensure a
healthy and sustainable Oregon. More and more severe wildfires are a reality the
agency must take into account as it tries to meet its larger mission."



 Despite efforts to reduce the risk of large wildfires, there are millions of
acres in Oregon at high risk across all ownerships, including federal, state and
private lands. ODF and the Legislature have partnered with federal officials to
mitigate wildfire risk on federal forests, but there are also unmet needs on
state forest land. This could lead to loss in timber revenue, threatened
watersheds, and mounting environmental costs.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              686 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 27, 2016 Saturday

Oregon: Increasing size and complexity of wildfires straining Oregon Department
of Forestry

LENGTH: 780  words




 Salem: The State of Secretary, Oregon has issued the following news release:



 With Oregon's wildfire season in effect across the state, the Secretary of
State's office released an audit today showing that the increasing number and
severity of wildfires in recent years is taxing the Department's other critical
missions and programs. The report details how the agency and legislative leaders
have not yet adjusted management systems and planning to adequately account for
the rapidly growing demand for fire response.  The Secretary of State recommends
improved data collection and personnel planning to help state leaders better
address the changing wildfire landscape.





 "Across western states right now, we see forest fires threatening homes and
destroying valuable timber and wildlife habitat in record numbers," Secretary of
State Jeanne P. Atkins said.  "In the last three years, the damage from
wildfires managed by the state forestry department has increased ten-fold. As
fire seasons lengthen and intensify, ODF needs long-term workforce planning to
address its firefighting and fire-prevention missions, while still maintaining
broader forest management responsibilities. According to our audit, the
Department is fighting more severe fires with about the same full-time
equivalent employees as it had 20 years ago."



 Like other wildfire organizations across the nation, ODF is facing difficult
challenges. Fires have grown in size, complexity, and cost, which demands more
staff resources. Prior to 2013, the seven-year average gross cost to ODF for
suppressing large fires was $9.7 million per year. Since 2013, the average gross
cost has climbed to $92.4 million per year. As of Aug. 22, 547 fires have burned
over 4,302 acres on ODF-protected lands so far this year. ODF's jurisdiction
only covers about half of the state's forest and grasslands, and the
comprehensive costs of wildfires across the state are not covered by this audit.




 "Many ODF employees work long hours away from home during fire season," said
Atkins. "Our audit shows that employees from across the agency move away from
their usual responsibilities and their families to help protect Oregonians
during fire season. It is understandable how other core missions of the agency
could suffer when the priority each summer shifts to fighting raging wildfires
and protecting Oregonians."



 ODF has three operating programs: Fire Protection, State Forests, and Private
Forests. Wildfire mitigation is an important proactive strategy the agency uses
to reduce risks to forests and communities and the audit recommends that it
increases its wildfire mitigation efforts on both public and private lands.
Despite efforts to reduce the risk of fires, Oregon has millions of acres of
land at high risk of wildfires and in need of restoration. Current resources are
unlikely to meet this challenge.



 This increased wildfire risk puts a burden on employees throughout the agency.
The audit released today reports that not only are more permanent employees
across programs participating in fire assignments, but these employees are
working much longer hours. Overtime hours spent on fire protection by permanent
employees has increased 197 percent in recent years.



 Among the steps the auditors recommended to ODF to reduce the impact of forest
fires on personnel and programs:



     Track costs, staffing, funding and workload impacts on programs unrelated
to firefighting to reach and communicate to state leaders a better understanding
of agency operations as a whole.

     Track data on strategies used to detect and prevent wildfires to guide
decision-making and allow prioritization of the most cost-effective and
successful methods.

     Develop a systematic workforce planning strategy to ensure the agency can
meet current and emerging needs.



 "Forests are an important part of our state's economy and cultural identity,"
Atkins said. "A healthy and sustainable forestry department will help ensure a
healthy and sustainable Oregon. More and more severe wildfires are a reality the
agency must take into account as it tries to meet its larger mission."



 Despite efforts to reduce the risk of large wildfires, there are millions of
acres in Oregon at high risk across all ownerships, including federal, state and
private lands. ODF and the Legislature have partnered with federal officials to
mitigate wildfire risk on federal forests, but there are also unmet needs on
state forest land. This could lead to loss in timber revenue, threatened
watersheds, and mounting environmental costs.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              687 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 25, 2016 Thursday

Oregon: Increasing size and complexity of wildfires straining Oregon Department
of Forestry

LENGTH: 780  words




 Salem: The State of Secretary, Oregon has issued the following news release:



 With Oregon's wildfire season in effect across the state, the Secretary of
State's office released an audit today showing that the increasing number and
severity of wildfires in recent years is taxing the Department's other critical
missions and programs. The report details how the agency and legislative leaders
have not yet adjusted management systems and planning to adequately account for
the rapidly growing demand for fire response.  The Secretary of State recommends
improved data collection and personnel planning to help state leaders better
address the changing wildfire landscape.





 "Across western states right now, we see forest fires threatening homes and
destroying valuable timber and wildlife habitat in record numbers," Secretary of
State Jeanne P. Atkins said.  "In the last three years, the damage from
wildfires managed by the state forestry department has increased ten-fold. As
fire seasons lengthen and intensify, ODF needs long-term workforce planning to
address its firefighting and fire-prevention missions, while still maintaining
broader forest management responsibilities. According to our audit, the
Department is fighting more severe fires with about the same full-time
equivalent employees as it had 20 years ago."



 Like other wildfire organizations across the nation, ODF is facing difficult
challenges. Fires have grown in size, complexity, and cost, which demands more
staff resources. Prior to 2013, the seven-year average gross cost to ODF for
suppressing large fires was $9.7 million per year. Since 2013, the average gross
cost has climbed to $92.4 million per year. As of Aug. 22, 547 fires have burned
over 4,302 acres on ODF-protected lands so far this year. ODF's jurisdiction
only covers about half of the state's forest and grasslands, and the
comprehensive costs of wildfires across the state are not covered by this audit.




 "Many ODF employees work long hours away from home during fire season," said
Atkins. "Our audit shows that employees from across the agency move away from
their usual responsibilities and their families to help protect Oregonians
during fire season. It is understandable how other core missions of the agency
could suffer when the priority each summer shifts to fighting raging wildfires
and protecting Oregonians."



 ODF has three operating programs: Fire Protection, State Forests, and Private
Forests. Wildfire mitigation is an important proactive strategy the agency uses
to reduce risks to forests and communities and the audit recommends that it
increases its wildfire mitigation efforts on both public and private lands.
Despite efforts to reduce the risk of fires, Oregon has millions of acres of
land at high risk of wildfires and in need of restoration. Current resources are
unlikely to meet this challenge.



 This increased wildfire risk puts a burden on employees throughout the agency.
The audit released today reports that not only are more permanent employees
across programs participating in fire assignments, but these employees are
working much longer hours. Overtime hours spent on fire protection by permanent
employees has increased 197 percent in recent years.



 Among the steps the auditors recommended to ODF to reduce the impact of forest
fires on personnel and programs:



     Track costs, staffing, funding and workload impacts on programs unrelated
to firefighting to reach and communicate to state leaders a better understanding
of agency operations as a whole.

     Track data on strategies used to detect and prevent wildfires to guide
decision-making and allow prioritization of the most cost-effective and
successful methods.

     Develop a systematic workforce planning strategy to ensure the agency can
meet current and emerging needs.



 "Forests are an important part of our state's economy and cultural identity,"
Atkins said. "A healthy and sustainable forestry department will help ensure a
healthy and sustainable Oregon. More and more severe wildfires are a reality the
agency must take into account as it tries to meet its larger mission."



 Despite efforts to reduce the risk of large wildfires, there are millions of
acres in Oregon at high risk across all ownerships, including federal, state and
private lands. ODF and the Legislature have partnered with federal officials to
mitigate wildfire risk on federal forests, but there are also unmet needs on
state forest land. This could lead to loss in timber revenue, threatened
watersheds, and mounting environmental costs.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              688 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 25, 2016 Thursday

Oregon: Increasing size and complexity of wildfires straining Oregon Department
of Forestry

LENGTH: 780  words




 Salem: The State of Secretary, Oregon has issued the following news release:



 With Oregon's wildfire season in effect across the state, the Secretary of
State's office released an audit today showing that the increasing number and
severity of wildfires in recent years is taxing the Department's other critical
missions and programs. The report details how the agency and legislative leaders
have not yet adjusted management systems and planning to adequately account for
the rapidly growing demand for fire response.  The Secretary of State recommends
improved data collection and personnel planning to help state leaders better
address the changing wildfire landscape.





 "Across western states right now, we see forest fires threatening homes and
destroying valuable timber and wildlife habitat in record numbers," Secretary of
State Jeanne P. Atkins said.  "In the last three years, the damage from
wildfires managed by the state forestry department has increased ten-fold. As
fire seasons lengthen and intensify, ODF needs long-term workforce planning to
address its firefighting and fire-prevention missions, while still maintaining
broader forest management responsibilities. According to our audit, the
Department is fighting more severe fires with about the same full-time
equivalent employees as it had 20 years ago."



 Like other wildfire organizations across the nation, ODF is facing difficult
challenges. Fires have grown in size, complexity, and cost, which demands more
staff resources. Prior to 2013, the seven-year average gross cost to ODF for
suppressing large fires was $9.7 million per year. Since 2013, the average gross
cost has climbed to $92.4 million per year. As of Aug. 22, 547 fires have burned
over 4,302 acres on ODF-protected lands so far this year. ODF's jurisdiction
only covers about half of the state's forest and grasslands, and the
comprehensive costs of wildfires across the state are not covered by this audit.




 "Many ODF employees work long hours away from home during fire season," said
Atkins. "Our audit shows that employees from across the agency move away from
their usual responsibilities and their families to help protect Oregonians
during fire season. It is understandable how other core missions of the agency
could suffer when the priority each summer shifts to fighting raging wildfires
and protecting Oregonians."



 ODF has three operating programs: Fire Protection, State Forests, and Private
Forests. Wildfire mitigation is an important proactive strategy the agency uses
to reduce risks to forests and communities and the audit recommends that it
increases its wildfire mitigation efforts on both public and private lands.
Despite efforts to reduce the risk of fires, Oregon has millions of acres of
land at high risk of wildfires and in need of restoration. Current resources are
unlikely to meet this challenge.



 This increased wildfire risk puts a burden on employees throughout the agency.
The audit released today reports that not only are more permanent employees
across programs participating in fire assignments, but these employees are
working much longer hours. Overtime hours spent on fire protection by permanent
employees has increased 197 percent in recent years.



 Among the steps the auditors recommended to ODF to reduce the impact of forest
fires on personnel and programs:



     Track costs, staffing, funding and workload impacts on programs unrelated
to firefighting to reach and communicate to state leaders a better understanding
of agency operations as a whole.

     Track data on strategies used to detect and prevent wildfires to guide
decision-making and allow prioritization of the most cost-effective and
successful methods.

     Develop a systematic workforce planning strategy to ensure the agency can
meet current and emerging needs.



 "Forests are an important part of our state's economy and cultural identity,"
Atkins said. "A healthy and sustainable forestry department will help ensure a
healthy and sustainable Oregon. More and more severe wildfires are a reality the
agency must take into account as it tries to meet its larger mission."



 Despite efforts to reduce the risk of large wildfires, there are millions of
acres in Oregon at high risk across all ownerships, including federal, state and
private lands. ODF and the Legislature have partnered with federal officials to
mitigate wildfire risk on federal forests, but there are also unmet needs on
state forest land. This could lead to loss in timber revenue, threatened
watersheds, and mounting environmental costs.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              689 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 24, 2016 Wednesday

Oregon: Increasing size and complexity of wildfires straining Oregon Department
of Forestry

LENGTH: 780  words




 Salem: The State of Secretary, Oregon has issued the following news release:



 With Oregon's wildfire season in effect across the state, the Secretary of
State's office released an audit today showing that the increasing number and
severity of wildfires in recent years is taxing the Department's other critical
missions and programs. The report details how the agency and legislative leaders
have not yet adjusted management systems and planning to adequately account for
the rapidly growing demand for fire response.  The Secretary of State recommends
improved data collection and personnel planning to help state leaders better
address the changing wildfire landscape.





 "Across western states right now, we see forest fires threatening homes and
destroying valuable timber and wildlife habitat in record numbers," Secretary of
State Jeanne P. Atkins said.  "In the last three years, the damage from
wildfires managed by the state forestry department has increased ten-fold. As
fire seasons lengthen and intensify, ODF needs long-term workforce planning to
address its firefighting and fire-prevention missions, while still maintaining
broader forest management responsibilities. According to our audit, the
Department is fighting more severe fires with about the same full-time
equivalent employees as it had 20 years ago."



 Like other wildfire organizations across the nation, ODF is facing difficult
challenges. Fires have grown in size, complexity, and cost, which demands more
staff resources. Prior to 2013, the seven-year average gross cost to ODF for
suppressing large fires was $9.7 million per year. Since 2013, the average gross
cost has climbed to $92.4 million per year. As of Aug. 22, 547 fires have burned
over 4,302 acres on ODF-protected lands so far this year. ODF's jurisdiction
only covers about half of the state's forest and grasslands, and the
comprehensive costs of wildfires across the state are not covered by this audit.




 "Many ODF employees work long hours away from home during fire season," said
Atkins. "Our audit shows that employees from across the agency move away from
their usual responsibilities and their families to help protect Oregonians
during fire season. It is understandable how other core missions of the agency
could suffer when the priority each summer shifts to fighting raging wildfires
and protecting Oregonians."



 ODF has three operating programs: Fire Protection, State Forests, and Private
Forests. Wildfire mitigation is an important proactive strategy the agency uses
to reduce risks to forests and communities and the audit recommends that it
increases its wildfire mitigation efforts on both public and private lands.
Despite efforts to reduce the risk of fires, Oregon has millions of acres of
land at high risk of wildfires and in need of restoration. Current resources are
unlikely to meet this challenge.



 This increased wildfire risk puts a burden on employees throughout the agency.
The audit released today reports that not only are more permanent employees
across programs participating in fire assignments, but these employees are
working much longer hours. Overtime hours spent on fire protection by permanent
employees has increased 197 percent in recent years.



 Among the steps the auditors recommended to ODF to reduce the impact of forest
fires on personnel and programs:



     Track costs, staffing, funding and workload impacts on programs unrelated
to firefighting to reach and communicate to state leaders a better understanding
of agency operations as a whole.

     Track data on strategies used to detect and prevent wildfires to guide
decision-making and allow prioritization of the most cost-effective and
successful methods.

     Develop a systematic workforce planning strategy to ensure the agency can
meet current and emerging needs.



 "Forests are an important part of our state's economy and cultural identity,"
Atkins said. "A healthy and sustainable forestry department will help ensure a
healthy and sustainable Oregon. More and more severe wildfires are a reality the
agency must take into account as it tries to meet its larger mission."



 Despite efforts to reduce the risk of large wildfires, there are millions of
acres in Oregon at high risk across all ownerships, including federal, state and
private lands. ODF and the Legislature have partnered with federal officials to
mitigate wildfire risk on federal forests, but there are also unmet needs on
state forest land. This could lead to loss in timber revenue, threatened
watersheds, and mounting environmental costs.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              690 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         The Mercury News (California)

                             July 18, 2017 Tuesday

Update: Wildfire near Mountain Winery 40 percent contained, concert on for
tonight

BYLINE: Mark Gomez

LENGTH: 515 words



HIGHLIGHT: Weather conditions Tuesday - lack of winds and high moisture content
- should help firefighters make progress in containing the blaze, which has
burned 10 acres.


SARATOGA  Firefighters on Tuesday lowered their containment estimate of a
slow-moving wildfire in the steep terrain near the Mountain Winery but added
forward progress of the blaze has stopped.

Where theres smoke, theres (potential) wildfire

Commentary: Wildfires remind us of past mistakes

Felipe Fire still burning south of San Jose

Map: Where Californias biggest wildfires are burning

Wildfires are raging all over California      Monday night, fire officials
reported the fire was 70 percent contained and had burned 10 acres. Tuesday, the
containment estimate was changed to 40 percent with 10 acres burned.

But the blaze is not threatening any structures and is not expected to spread.

Firefighters have a non-continuous hand line around 75 percent of the blaze, but
with gaps in the line, there is potential for the blaze to get through,
according to Chief Fire Investigator Ryan Cronin of the Santa Clara County Fire
Department.

So fire officials are counting the 40 percent containment fire line established
by bulldozers, Cronin said.

Explaining the non-continuous hand line, Cronin likened it to a a bucket with a
hole.

There are gaps in that line, Cronin said. The fire could potentially get through
there.

The weather is in the firefighters favor.

Cronin said weather conditions Tuesday  lack of winds and high moisture content
are ideal for battling the blaze. There are 75 firefighters on the ground
Tuesday, and the hope crews gain a continuous fire line around as much of the
blaze as possible.

Although the fire is burning near the Mountain Winery, the blaze is not expected
to cancel a Lyle Lovett concert Tuesday night at the popular music venue.

The fire is burning in another ridge over from the Mountain Winery, Cronin said.

The blaze  dubbed the Eden fire  was reported Monday about 3:10 p.m. near Mt.
Eden Road and Orchard Meadow Drive in Saratoga, Cronin said. Flames were burning
uphill away from homes and toward the vineyards of Mount Eden Vineyards. Power
was knocked out to the Orchard Meadow Drive neighborhood, but no injuries were
reported and no structures were damaged or threatened.

Monday, a a fire helicopter was forced to land after a drone was spotted in the
area. Authorities confiscated the drone, Cronin said.

Please remember, if you fly, we cant, the Santa Clara County Fire Department
said via Twitter.

Mt. Eden Road residents received an erroneous alert to shelter in place just
after 5 p.m., Cronin said. Instead, they were asked to avoid the narrow roadway
because of fire equipment.

Cronin said the county fire department did not ask for the alert to be sent.
Asked who sent the alert, which lit up cellphones across Silicon Valley, Cronin
said he didnt know, but added, well figure that out.

It was an erroneous alert, Cronin said. It did go out broader than expected. We
dont use the Santa Clara County alert system often.

At the time we wanted people to stay off the roadway. The verbiage, were not
sure where that came from. Well work with all the players and figure it out and
fix it.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              691 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                 The North Jefferson News (Gardendale, Alabama)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            July 16, 2008 Wednesday

BRIEF: Wildfire wins season opener

BYLINE: The North Jefferson News, Gardendale, Ala.

SECTION: SPORTS

LENGTH: 214 words


Jul. 16--The expansion Warrior Wildfire won their home opener in the Southern
Football League on Saturday night before an estimated home crowd of 800 people.

The semi-pro Wildfire dominated the East Alabama Raiders, 31-2, behind 205 yards
rushing. Former University of Alabama product Eric Grey led the way with 78
yards on 14 carries. Derrian Gee added 39 yards on four carries.

The Wildfire used two quarterbacks in the romp, as Brian Balazick went 8-of-11
for 49 yards and Daniel Dennis went 6-of-8 for 31 yards.

Ray Branham led the Wildfire defensive unit with 19 solo tackles and a
quarterback sack. Demarcus Rogers had 12 solo tackles. Lamond Williams had nine
solo tackles and two sacks . He also one forced fumble.

Cedrick Austin returned an interception for a 87-yard touchdown.

The Wildfire host the North Georgia Bulldogs, Saturday at 7 p.m.

To see more of The North Jefferson News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://njeffersonnews.com/. Copyright (c) 2008, The North Jefferson News,
Gardendale, Ala. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20080716-JH-BRF-Wildfire-wins-season-opener-0716

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JH


                                 Copyright 2008


                              692 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Williams Lake Tribune Advisor

                           September 7, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Insurance issues challenge realtors during wildfire crisis

BYLINE: Gaeil Farrar

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 589 words


Between wildfire evacuations, alerts, road closures and complications with
getting insurance needed to secure a mortgage many people wanting to sell or buy
property in the Cariboo had to put their plans on hold for most of the summer.

Typically insurance companies will not write policies for the transfer of
properties that are within an active wildfire area, because the risk of fire is
known and insurance is issued on the basis of unforeseen risk, said Aaron
Sutherland, vice-president of the Insurance Bureau of Canada Western and Pacific
branch.

"Wildfires are a very real and knowable risk," Sutherland said, noting that
policy renewals are not affected by wildfires.

As of 2015 he said there are 116 carriers of home and business insurance
operating in B.C. and each company has its own criteria around issuing insurance
when it comes to a property's proximity to wildfires.

Distance from the wildfire, evacuation orders, and alerts may all be considered
by a company and may be quite different from one company to the other which is
why the bureau encourages people to shop around when they are looking for
insurance.

"It is a very active and competitive market place," Sutherland said. "Just
because one company says no doesn't mean they will all take that position."

Court Smith, vice-president of the B.C. Northern Real Estate Board and a
realator in Williams Lake, said that while things are not back to normal yet,
the insurance issues that came with the wildfires in the Williams Lake area
during July and August are slowly subsiding.

"Insurance companies are starting to write policies again depending on where
properties are located," Smith said.

In his office at Sutton Cariboo Realty he said they had to extend the closing
dates on the sale of about 35 properties that were in progress when Williams
Lake was evacuated and the purchasers were unable to secure insurance.

But he said they didn't have anyone cancel a purchase because of the delay in
getting insurance.

He said insurance will continue to be difficult to get around active wildfires.

In the short term he didn't think the wildfires will have a negative impact on
the local real estate market but it is too early to determine what the long term
impact of the fires will be on the local economy.

Diane Buchanan an independent mortgage broker with 17 years of experience with
Dominion Lending Centre-Canadian Mortgage Experts said she only had one or two
lenders who put the breaks on lending because they were afraid that Williams
Lake would turn into another Fort McMurray.

"Even with our extreme situation most lenders were still willing to lend, so it
all came down to house insurance because you can't get a mortgage without house
insurance," Buchanan said.

On the flip side she said lenders were very empathetic with existing clients who
were adversely impacted by the wildfires, given the added costs of being
evacuated and losing time off work.

"I provided lender contact information for my clients and the lenders were able
to defer mortgage payments for two to six months depending on the impact of the
wildfires on the client."

"It was a scary time," Buchanan said of the city's wildfire evacuation and alert
orders. "Basically everything was on hold for July.

She found that while some insurance companies wouldn't insure new purchases
within 25 kilometres of an active fire while for others the range was 50
kilometres. Insurance was not available while communities were under evacuation
orders and in some cases not available under evacution alerts as well.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              693 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Aberdeen Press and Journal

                            March 19, 2015 Thursday

Fire chief's wildfire warning

BYLINE: Ashleigh Barbour

SECTION: NEWS; OTHER; Others; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 244 words


Communities across the north have been urged to play their part in keeping the
countryside safe as wildfire season approaches.

The new chairman of the Scottish Wildfire Forum (SWF), Andy Coueslant, said it
was everyone's responsibility to protect where they live from potentially
devastating blazes as demand on the fire service begins to increase.

Mr Coueslant - deputy assistant chief officer of the Scottish Fire and Rescue
Service - recently took over as leader of the organisation, and yesterday said
he was committed to ensuring that the rate of open-air blazes continues to fall.

In 2014 there was a 61% reduction in wildfires across Scotland, saving £278,000.

With many blazes started deliberately due to "careless, reckless or
irresponsible behaviour", he said, it is essential that every precaution is
taken.

"As we are now entering what has historically been seen as wildfire season, I am
keen to stress that everyone has a responsibility to protect our countryside,
people and property for the devastating effects of wildfire," he said.

Mr Coueslant said there were a number of "proactive" steps land owners could
take to help prevent wildfires, including strict adherence to the Muirburn Code,
which applies to the controlled burning of heather.

Mr Coueslant said it was essential to properly dispose of smoking materials to
prevent fires happening in the first place.

For further advice and information visit www.firescotland.gov.uk/your-safety/
wildfires.aspx

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BLAZE: Many wildfires are started by careless, reckless or
irresponsible behaviour

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PJ


                      Copyright 2015 Aberdeen Journals Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              694 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                     PR.com

                      October 1, 2016 Saturday 6:30 AM EST

Forestry Commission Warns of Increased Fall Wildfire Risk

BYLINE: Mississippi Forestry Commission

LENGTH: 672  words


Jackson, MS,  October 01, 2016 --(PR.com)-- As the weather transitions from
summer to fall, dry vegetation and lower humidity have the potential to increase
wildfire activity statewide.

Since June 1, 2016 the Mississippi Forestry Commission (MFC) has responded to
and suppressed 259 wildfires that burned 2,363 acres in the state of
Mississippi. MFC wildland firefighters were able to save 348 structures from
being damaged or destroyed. During the 2015 fall wildfire season, MFC wildland
firefighters responded to and suppressed 1,195 wildfires that burned 14,144
acres. As a result, Governor Bryant enacted the first Statewide Burn Ban issued
in Mississippi since 2010.

"We would like to ask the public to exercise caution with any outdoor
recreational burning, such as campfires and outdoor grills this fall. Wildfires
can start with just a spark and spread quickly to endanger forestland, personal
property, and lives," said Charlie Morgan, State Forester. "Please do your part
to help prevent wildfires by observing local burn bans and exercising proper
fire safety."

To see a complete list of burn bans in Mississippi, please visit:
www.mfc.ms.gov/burn-bans

Burn bans are subject to change at any time. Please check the website frequently
to stay up-to-date on any new burn bans that are issued.

The Keetch-Byram Drought Index (KBDI) is 500 - 700 in most areas of the state.
The KBDI measures the water content of the soil and duff layers, the scale
ranges from 0 - 800 with 800 meaning there is no soil moisture available for
vegetation. The index increases for each day an area does not experience rain.
High values on the KBDI means that the area is experiencing a severe draught and
conditions are favorable for an increase in wildfire activity. In order to view
a current KBDI map, visit: bit.ly/KBDIMap

Wildfire prevention tips:

Find out if there is a burn ban in effect for your area before burning. For a
complete list of burn bans, visit: www.mfc.ms.gov/burn-bans

Check the local weather forecast - do not burn on dry, windy days. Wind carries
embers long distances, which can cause spot fires as far away as one-half mile
from the burning area.

Choose a safe burn site for outdoor recreational burning - keep campfires small,
only burn untreated wood debris (waste, plastic, rubber tires, and other
manufactured products may not be burned), and keep a garden hose or source of
water easily accessible. To view the Mississippi Department of Environmental
Quality standards regarding outdoor burning, visit: bit.ly/MDEQOpenBurning

The same preventive measures apply when using charcoal grills. When you are
finished using a charcoal grill, always let the coals cool completely and douse
in water before disposing of them in a metal container. Never leave a grill
unattended.

To report a wildfire, dial 911 or call the Central Dispatch Center for your
area, visit: www.mfc.ms.gov/wildfire-report

Nationwide, nine out of ten wildfires are caused by people and could have been
prevented with proper care. Please do your part to help prevent wildfire
activity by checking burn bans and weather conditions before doing any
recreational outdoor burning.

For more information, please visit our website: www.mfc.ms.gov

Established in 1926, the Mississippi Forestry Commission (MFC) protects the
state's valuable forest resources from wildfire, manages approximately 480,000
acres of forested School Trust Land, and delivers quality forest management
services and assistance to both rural and urban landowners. Our mission is to
provide active leadership in forest protection, forest management, forest
inventory, and effective forest information distribution, necessary for
Mississippi's sustainable forest-based economy.

There are approximately 19.8 million forested acres in Mississippi. The forestry
and forest products industry has a $12.3 billion economic impact on the state of
Mississippi and represents almost 70,000 jobs.

Mississippi Forestry Commission Contact

Brighton Forester

bforester@mfc.state.ms.us

(601) 359-2821; (601) 500-0489

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


               Copyright 2016 PR.com, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              695 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Daily Camera (Boulder, Colorado)

                           December 2, 2010 Thursday

Boulder County seeks input on wildfire protection plan

BYLINE: Laura Snider Camera Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 531 words


How to participate

Boulder County is asking for public input on the development of its Community
Wildfire Protection Plan. Anyone can give recommendations on what should be in
the plan by visiting bouldercounty.org/lu/cwpp and filling out an electronic
form.



 The county is also putting together a citizen advisory team to guide the plan's
creation. No previous wildfire experience is necessary to serve on the team.
Applications are also available online at bouldercounty.org/lu/cwpp and must be
turned in by Jan. 12.

 Boulder County is seeking public input on the creation of a countywide wildfire
protection plan, which will assess the existing fire danger and outline ways to
mitigate those risks.



 The county began working on the plan months before the Fourmile Fire burned
through the mountains west of Boulder on Labor Day, scorching more than 6,000
acres and destroying 169 homes. But that fire and the two smaller fires that
followed -- which both caused evacuations but did not damage any buildings --
may have increased the feeling of urgency and the public interest in the plan,
said Jim Webster, the county's community wildfire protection planner.



 "We're really asking people to give their recommendations -- what they think,
their ideas," he said. "Because of the Fourmile Fire, a lot of people have had
had personal experiences with evacuation or loss of a home, and people have good
insights or ways to improve our programs. So this is a chance to give their
recommendations."



 The county is also recruiting about 10 people to serve on an advisory team. The
volunteers, who don't need to have previous knowledge of wildfires, will help
sift through recommendations from the public.



 The county was awarded $102,700 from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
in May to develop a Community Wildfire Protection Plan as defined by the federal
Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003.



 Already, 10 local communities have wildfire protection plans, including most of
the mountain fire protection districts, Allenspark and Boulder. The county plan
will not replace those.



 "The purpose is not necessarily to change or make all those local Community
Wildfire Protection Plans consistent -- each was done at a different period by
different groups" Webster said. "Those will be maintained, and those are
important for those specific locations. The countywide CWPP will serve as an
umbrella."



 All Community Wildfire Protection Plans in Colorado have some commonalties,
according to the Colorado State Forest Service, including an assessment of
existing wildfire risks and the community's preparedness to deal with those
risks. They also outline mitigation strategies that can reduce risks in the
future.



 "The CWPPs are required to have three components," said Allen Owen, Boulder
district forester. "One is a discussion of structure ignitability, the other is
you've got to have community collaboration, and the third -- kind of the bottom
line for me -- is looking at and prioritizing the fuel treatment
recommendations."



 The county hopes to finish its wildfire protection plan by September 2011.



 Contact Camera Staff Writer Laura Snider at 303-473-1327 or
sniderl@dailycamera.com

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Prairie Mountain Publishing
                              All Rights Reserved


                              696 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Daily Camera (Boulder, Colorado)

                           December 2, 2010 Thursday

Boulder County seeks input on wildfire protection plan

BYLINE: Laura Snider Camera Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 530 words


How to participate

Boulder County is asking for public input on the development of its Community
Wildfire Protection Plan. Anyone can give recommendations on what should be in
the plan by visiting bouldercounty.org/lu/cwpp and filling out an electronic
form.

The county is also putting together a citizen advisory team to guide the plan's
creation. No previous wildfire experience is necessary to serve on the team.
Applications are also available online at bouldercounty.org/lu/cwpp and must be
turned in by Jan. 12.

Boulder County is seeking public input on the creation of a countywide wildfire
protection plan, which will assess the existing fire danger and outline ways to
mitigate those risks.

The county began working on the plan months before the Fourmile Fire burned
through the mountains west of Boulder on Labor Day, scorching more than 6,000
acres and destroying 169 homes. But that fire and the two smaller fires that
followed -- which both caused evacuations but did not damage any buildings --
may have increased the feeling of urgency and the public interest in the plan,
said Jim Webster, the county's community wildfire protection planner.

"We're really asking people to give their recommendations -- what they think,
their ideas," he said. "Because of the Fourmile Fire, a lot of people have had
had personal experiences with evacuation or loss of a home, and people have good
insights or ways to improve our programs. So this is a chance to give their
recommendations."

The county is also recruiting about 10 people to serve on an advisory team. The
volunteers, who don't need to have previous knowledge of wildfires, will help
sift through recommendations from the public.

The county was awarded $102,700 from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
in May to develop a Community Wildfire Protection Plan as defined by the federal
Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003.

Already, 10 local communities have wildfire protection plans, including most of
the mountain fire protection districts, Allenspark and Boulder. The county plan
will not replace those.

"The purpose is not necessarily to change or make all those local Community
Wildfire Protection Plans consistent -- each was done at a different period by
different groups" Webster said. "Those will be maintained, and those are
important for those specific locations. The countywide CWPP will serve as an
umbrella."

All Community Wildfire Protection Plans in Colorado have some commonalties,
according to the Colorado State Forest Service, including an assessment of
existing wildfire risks and the community's preparedness to deal with those
risks. They also outline mitigation strategies that can reduce risks in the
future.

"The CWPPs are required to have three components," said Allen Owen, Boulder
district forester. "One is a discussion of structure ignitability, the other is
you've got to have community collaboration, and the third -- kind of the bottom
line for me -- is looking at and prioritizing the fuel treatment
recommendations."

The county hopes to finish its wildfire protection plan by September 2011.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Laura Snider at 303-473-1327 or
sniderl@dailycamera.com

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Prairie Mountain Publishing
                              All Rights Reserved


                              697 of 987 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    February 21, 2005, Monday, FINAL EDITION

Wildfire forecast fuels concern for Fla. disaster zones

BYLINE: Patrick O'Driscoll

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 600 words

Florida, which suffered four killer hurricanes last year, could see more
dangerous wildfires this spring because of the storms.

Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne blew down millions of trees and
destroyed other vegetation. Since then, unusually dry weather has turned much of
the debris into kindling.


But Florida isn't the only state to have extraordinarily wet weather turn into
dangerous wildfire conditions later, according to the National Interagency Fire
Center, a Boise-based center for federal agencies that fight wildfires.

The center's preliminary forecast for the nation's wildfire season indicates
that heavy rain and snow in the West have prompted an overabundance of wild
grass to sprout in the desert valleys of Nevada and California.

If the summer turns out to be dry, the grass could create more fuel for
wildfires, according to the forecast that federal fire managers use to post
crews and equipment near likely hotspots.

Wildfires damage or destroy hundreds of homes and millions of acres of forest,
range and croplands each year. During the past decade, federal agencies have
spent an average of more than $750 million a year fighting them.

In 1998, Florida's last major year for wildfires, the state suffered $600
million in economic losses. In 2003, huge fires in Southern California left up
to $3.5 billion in damage, the costliest wildfires ever. They destroyed more
than 3,600 homes and killed more than 20 people.

Fire season in Florida runs January through June. Crews are clearing debris left
from the hurricanes in hopes of avoiding the worst season since 1998. So far
this year, about 400 fires have charred 3,117 acres.

"Unfortunately, a lot of the vegetation was blown down very close to structures
and main roads that serve as evacuation routes," says Gerry Lacavera, a wildfire
specialist for the Florida Division of Forestry. "It's really causing us quite a
bit of extra concern."

With so much other hurricane recovery work underway, Lacavera says, efforts to
clear trees are short of staff and money. Also, equipment to grind trees can't
handle timber with trunks more than 2 feet thick. In some areas, log piles are
bulldozed away from dwellings to give firefighters a buffer if fire strikes.

Another concern: Many homes that once had fire-resistant roofs lost them in the
storms and still have only temporary tarps on them as they await roofs.

Elsewhere, the early outlook for wildfires this year is mixed:

 * A dry winter in the Pacific Northwest and northern Rockies could combine with
long-term drought and trees killed by insects to make the fire danger worse in
much of Washington, Oregon, Idaho and Montana.

 * Heavy rain in the Southwest should delay and possibly lower the risk of
wildfires this summer for Arizona, New Mexico and parts of Colorado and Utah.

 * California and Nevada, which received record rain and snow in December and
January, could see less hazardous conditions in the mountains but more "fuel"
for fires at lower elevations.

"It's kind of a two-edged sword," says wildfire weather expert Rick Ochoa, fire
weather program manager at the National Interagency Fire Center and one of the
authors of the center's fire forecast. The heavy precipitation "actually make
things worse at lower elevations" because it grows more brush. In a hot, dry
summer, that vegetation becomes tinder for brushfires sparked by lightning.

Basins and rangelands in Nevada are a particular worry, Ochoa says. In
1999-2000, wildfires scorched more than 1 million acres of sagebrush.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, S.K. Vemmer, Pensacola News Journal, via AP; Aftereffects:
Florida's dry conditions following the 2004 hurricanes have turned much of the
debris into kindling, setting the stage for a dangerous wildfire season.

                      Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              698 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Burns Lake Lakes District News

                            April 19, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Early wildfire season expected in northern B.C.

BYLINE: Flavio Nienow

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 393  words


According to the B.C. Wildfire Service, below-normal snowpack levels seen in
some parts of northern B.C. indicate that the wildfire season will likely have
an early start this year.

While near-normal levels range from 90 to 110 per cent, the Upper Fraser West
basin - which includes the communities of Burns Lake, Fort St. James and
Vanderhoof - has its snowpack at 71 per cent of normal.

Although the B.C. Wildfire Service expects an early season, it's still too early
to predict its intensity, according to Kevin Skrepnek, chief fire information
officer for the B.C. Wildfire Service.

"We look at lots of factors going into the spring to try to get an idea of what
the season will look like," he explained. "Snowpack is definitely an indicator
we keep a close eye on, but it really depends on short-term weather."

Seasonal forecasts from Environment and Climate Change Canada indicate an
increased likelihood of above-normal temperatures over the April-June period,
particularly for northern B.C.

"We can have a fairly warm summer, but if it's raining on a regular basis, that
will keep the fire danger down," he added.

As of April 11, the Northwest Fire Centre had not seen any wildfires and fire
danger rating across the region was "low." The province as a whole had seen 13
wildfires.

Skrepnek said none of those wildfires have been "major." However, since all of
those fires were preventable, he said people should not be complacent just
because it's still early in the season. In fact, April 18 was the busiest fire
day of the 2016 season.

In April 2016, the B.C. Wildfire Service responded to 79 fires that ended up
burning over 14,000 hectares. Skrepnek said the grass that hasn't turned green
is more flammable than the green grass seen later in the season. He reminded the
public to be extra cautious with any open burning.

"Almost all of them [wildfires] at this time of the year are human caused," he
explained. "We don't have a lot of lightening at this time of the year in B.C."

By mid-May, a little over 1000 firefighters are expected to be working across
B.C.

"Those are seasonal positions, so we typically see a 20 per cent turnover rate
from year to year," said Skrepnek.

The B.C. Wildfire Service received approximately 1000 applications to fill the
approximately 200 positions that were available this year. Recruitment and
training are still ongoing.





LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              699 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    Prince George Citizen (British Columbia)

                            April 16, 2016 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Residents urged to be FireSmart

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 245 words


The provincial government is urging British Columbians to do their part to help
prevent wildfires and reduce fire risks.

BC Wildfire Service crews have responded to 59 wildfires since April 1, almost
all of which were caused by people. Fires in the Prince George Fire Centre have
burned 88 hectares since April 1. Homeowners are encouraged to safeguard their
properties from wildfire threats by using FireSmart principles.

By reducing the amount of flammable material around their homes and providing
more open space where firefighters can work, private property owners can help
slow the spread of an approaching wildfire. The recently updated FireSmart
Homeowner's Manual is available online at: bit.ly/1RQXFzd.

Up-to-date information about current wildfire activity and burning restrictions
is available online at: www.bcwildfire.ca.

The latest wildfire news can also be found on Twitter at:
twitter.com/BCGov-FireInfo and on Facebook at: facebook. com/BCForestFireInfo.

Anyone found in contravention of an open fire prohibition may be issued a ticket
for $1,150 or, if convicted in court, be fined up to $100,000 and sentenced to
one year in jail.

If the contravention causes or contributes to a wildfire, the person responsible
may be subject to a penalty of up to $10,000 and be ordered to pay all
firefighting and associated costs.

Anyone who spots a wildfire, unattended campfire or burning violation should
immediately call *5555 on a cellphone or 1-800-663-5555 toll-free.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2016 Prince George Citizen
                              All Rights Reserved


                              700 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Lithgow Mercury

                            November 3, 2017 Friday
                           Print & Internet Editions

Western Wildfire's takes first state title

BYLINE: Barry Fitzgerald

SECTION: SPORT; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 347 words


The Western Wildlife Senior cricket team has claimed its very first state senior
cricket title.

The team competed in the NSW Over 50's State Championship at Armidale from
October 27-29.

The Wildfires competed in the Conference Two section, which comprised team from
eight regional areas.

To win the Conference, the team must continue to win each match to progress to
the carnival final.

Wildfires played their first game against New England, which amassed 185 runs.

Wildfire's top order batsmen applied their skills and passed the total with
several overs still to be bowled.

This was a game that provided a platform for proactive and positive cricket to
be played during the entire carnival.

The second game was against the highly fancied team of Lismore.

Once again Lismore batted first and scored 144 on a pitch where runs were not
easy to accumulate.

In a nail-biting finish the Wildfire top order and middle order chased down the
score with only four balls remaining.

Come Sunday morning Wildfires and Narrabri, both undefeated, played off the
title.

Narrabri amassed 183, batting on a friendly wicket and on a large oval where
fielding was of a prime importance.

Once again the top order and middle order batsmen knuckled down and, with only a
couple of overs remaining, the winning runs were hit. A NSW State title had been
achieved by the Wildfires for the first time in a senior cricket carnival.

Captain Kim Taylor congratulated the carnival championship committee for the
professional manner in which everything was organised and implemented.

He also thanked all of the competing teams and highlighted that the Wildfires
team possessed a very balanced and talented cricket side with every player
providing something special during the carnival.

The Wildfires players complimented all of the teams on their competitiveness,
friendly rivalry and after game fellowship shown throughout the carnival.

The Australian Over 50's National Championships will be held in Orange in March
2018. The Wildfires are hopeful that several of their players will be selected
in the NSW representative sides.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              701 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              June 22, 2015 Monday

FLORIDA:Commissioner Putnam Thanks the Legislature for Firefighter Raises as
Florida Hits High Wildfire Danger Levels

LENGTH: 467  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, The state of Florida has issued
the following news release:

In anticipation of the Legislature's passage of the 2015-2016 budget and
coinciding with the Florida Forest Service's warning to Floridians that there
are high wildfire danger levels, Florida Commissioner of Agriculture Adam H.
Putnam thanks the Florida Legislature for providing $1.6 million for $2,000
raises for the 606 Florida Forest Service firefighters who risk their lives to
protect Floridians. Additionally, the Legislature has provided for $2 million in
funding to replace some of the oldest and most unreliable fire suppression
equipment, including dozers, tractors and transports.

Lightning from scattered thunderstorms has triggered 122 wildfires so far in
June, doubling last year's numbers. Despite recent rainfall, wildfire danger
remains high in the Panhandle and North Florida, and along Florida's Atlantic
coast. Increased lightning activity continues to be a concern through the
weekend.

"Our brave firefighters risk their lives for the safety of others, and I thank
the Florida Legislature for recognizing the tremendous sacrifice that they make,
as well as their families," stated Commissioner of Agriculture Adam H. Putnam.
"This year's active wildfire season is a testament to the fact that there are no
days off or breaks when fire threatens our communities and a raise is the least
we can do to appreciate them for their service."

"With the recent increase in lightning-caused wildfires, any additional
human-caused wildfires add unnecessary strain on fire personnel and equipment.
We ask the public to help the Florida Forest Service by stopping human-caused
wildfires," said Jim Karels, Florida State Forester.

The Florida Forest Service is urging residents to use caution when using fire
outdoors and to remember the following:

Call 911 or the local Florida Forest Service field unit immediately if you see a
wildfire.
    Check with your local city or county officials to see if there are any burn
restrictions in the area.
    Obey Florida's outdoor burning laws.
    Never burn on windy days.
    Never leave a fire unattended and make sure it is completely out before
leaving.
    Keep a shovel and water hose handy in case the fire starts to escape
containment.

There are approximately 90 active wildfires currently burning throughout
Florida. Since January, the Florida Forest Service and its partners have
responded to 1,440 wildfires that have burned 31,180 acres.

The Florida Forest Service manages more than 1 million acres of public forest
land while protecting 26 million acres of homes, forestland and natural
resources from the devastating effects of wildfire.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:
editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              702 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      Barriere Star Journal (N. Thompson)

                             March 7, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

B.C. streamlines online hunting forms, wildfire investigations

BYLINE: Staff Writer

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 455  words


VICTORIA - Legislative amendments introduced last week will make it easier for
hunters to complete licensing, permitting and reporting activities online, and
also will give wildfire investigators more time to complete their work and
streamline the cost-recovery process associated with human-caused wildfires.

With the Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations Statutes
Amendment Act, 2017 (Bill 5), the B.C. government is acting on previous
commitments to streamline processes and move more services online.

Specifically, the proposed amendments to the Wildlife Act would:

* Support the launch of a new online licensing system for hunters.

* Allow for the submission of required reports electronically through a new
online system.

* Reduce the number of authorizations hunters are required to carry while
hunting.

* Enhance compliance and enforcement by allowing conservation officers to
request photo ID from all hunters, anglers and trappers.

The new online licensing system for hunters would:

* Give resident hunters the option of obtaining their hunting licences online
at: www.gov.bc.ca/hunting

* Implement redesigned species licences that hunters would be required to carry
at all times while hunting, allowing for more accurate tracking and improved
overall management of wildlife.

* Enable certain permits and licences to be issued on the same day that the
applications are submitted.

The B.C. government also intends to give the BC Wildfire Service and other
government agencies more time to investigate wildfires, since those sorts of
investigations can be both complex and time-consuming.

The extra time will allow them to better determine whether the government should
pursue the recovery of costs associated with fire suppression, fire damage, or
contraventions of wildfire-related legislation.

The proposed Wildfire Act amendments reinforce the government's commitment to
public safety and dealing appropriately with people or companies that violate
this legislation.

Specifically, the proposed amendments to the Wildfire Act would:

* Implement a standardized limitation period of three years to give wildfire
investigators more time to complete their work and initiate any required
enforcement proceedings.

* Give the government more time to recover costs associated with wildfire
control, to levy penalties or to require violators to undertake remediation
activities.

* Provide more time and flexibility for the government to consider charges
related to damage, reforestation and remediation related to wildfire activity.

To follow this bill's progress through the legislature, visit:
https://www.leg.bc.ca/parliamentary-business/legislation-debates-proceedings/40t
h-parliament/6th-session/bills/progress-of-bills



LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              703 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Springfield News-Sun, Ohio

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            December 5, 2016 Monday

Family who fled wildfires send photos from Gatlinburg

BYLINE: Katherine Collins, Springfield News-Sun, Ohio

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 296 words


Dec. 05--UPDATE @ 2 p.m.

The Fox family, who relocated from Logan County to Gatlinburg where they fled
the deadly wildfire, has been allowed back into their neighborhood today to see
what's left of their property and belongings.

It's the first time Henry Fox, his wife, Casie, and their 5-year-old son are
seeing the devastation left by the wildfires. The trio fled their Gatlinburg
home just as the wildfires were nearing their neighborhood.

The family sent this newsroom photos of what they are seeing today. Some
buildings were reduced to piles of rubble that are still smoking. Other homes
and structures are gutted, with charred and blackened outer walls still
standing.

EARLIER

A former Logan County family has been displaced from their Gatlinburg home
because of wildfire.

Henry Fox, his wife and 5-year-old son moved to Tennessee from Bellefontaine
about two months ago. It was Monday evening when they realized they needed to
leave their Gatlinburg home, he said.

>>RELATED: Gatlinburg wildfires: 3 dead; over 14,000 evacuated

"It was like driving into hell," Fox said. "It was the scariest moment of my
life."

The family is now staying at a hotel in Pigeon Forge, he said, but isn't sure
how long it will be before they can return to Gatlinburg.

The fire has destroyed more than 150 homes and businesses and displaced more
than 14,000 people.

>>DETAILS: Wildfires in, near Gatlinburg leave Miami Valley residents devastated

It started Nov. 23 and is believed to have been the result of arson, according
to Great Smoky Mountain National Park officials.

Three deaths have been reported because of the fire, the Associated Press
reports.

___ (c)2016 Springfield News-Sun, Ohio Visit Springfield News-Sun, Ohio at
www.springfieldnewssun.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20161205-1SP-Family-who-fled-wildfires
-send-photos-from-Gatlinburg-1205-20161205

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1SP


                   Copyright 2016 Springfield News-Sun, Ohio


                              704 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                              June 20, 2016 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Rainfall reduces fire chances, but vigilance urged;
Rainfall helping reduce wildfire chances;
Lightning could still produce wildfires, officials caution.

BYLINE:  By Julius Whigham II   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 678 words


A wetter-than-normal dry season did more than soak yards and cause headaches for
commuters, area forestry officials say. The rainfall provided a measure of
relief from the threat of wildfires.

That relief, however, is no reason to become complacent, officials say. They are
urging residents of Palm Beach County and the Treasure Coast to act now to
protect their homes from lightning strikes in storms this summer.

From January through May, the Florida Forest Service responded to three
wildfires in Palm Beach County, compared to 15 over the same period this past
year, said Scott Peterich, a wildfire-mitigation specialist for the Forest
Service.

Just 2.1 acres burned during that stretch compared to 13,291 acres in 2015, a
total that included a single fire that burned 13,000 acres in the Everglades in
a conservation area near the Marshall Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge west
of Boynton Beach.

A combination of significant rainfall and a series of prescribed burns --
intentionally set fires that reduce excessive brush -- helped reduce the
tinderbox conditions that fuel wildfires and brush fires, Peterich said.

January and February brought "excessive rainfall," he said, adding, "Usually,
these are our driest months resulting in an increase in our drought index and
stress on the vegetation."

According to the South Florida Water Management District, 9 inches of rain fell
in January across the 16 counties in its territory, more than five times the
historic average.

The month of February produced above average rainfall districtwide, SFWMD
officials said. Peterich said the rains limited "wildfire activity to almost
zero."

But the five-month rainy season started May 16 and brings concerns about
lightning strikes along with showers and thunderstorms.

"As we transition into summer, our biggest concern will be lightning storms
where there is limited rainfall," he said. "Last year, the transition was very
slow and we had numerous wildfires started by lightning."

This past week, Palm Beach County Fire Rescue and forestry crews battled a
7-acre brush fire in a nature preserve area off Military Trail and Indian Creek
Parkway in Jupiter.

That fire was started by someone with a cigarette, Peterich said.

Melissa Yunas, a wildfire mitigation specialist for the Florida Forest Service
Okeechobee District -- which covers six counties including Martin and St. Lucie
-- said dry conditions remain a threat even during the rainy season.

"All we need is two weeks without rain and it's ripe for ignition," Yunas said.

Yunas said the early year rainfall helped to limit the threat of wildfires along
the Treasure Coast, which has more undeveloped land and typically sees more
wildfire activity than Palm Beach County.

"We went into dry season very wet," she said. "It took us probably until late
February or March for us to actually start drying out in our area. ... We didn't
really see wildfire activity until February."

In the months following, wildfire activity has accompanied off-and-off periods
of rainfall in Martin and St. Lucie counties.

In early May, a wildfire sparked by lightning burned 120 acres near Indrio Road
and and Tree Top Trail in northern St. Lucie County.

Yunas said the many of preparations that homeowner's make for hurricane season,
such as pruning trees and removing dead vegetation, can also help reduce the
risk of wild- fires.

jwhigham@pbpost.com Twitter: @JuliusWhigham

SAFETY STEPS

The Florida Forest Service suggests these steps to protect your home from brush
fires.

~HOA~128~128~Create at least a 30-foot defensible space by clearing brush away
from your home.

~HOA~128~128~Take some time to pick up your yard and clean your roof so you
don't invite a wildfire to your home

~HOA~128~128~Use fire-resistant landscaping and harden your home with fire-safe
construction measures.

~HOA~128~128~Assemble emergency supplies and belongings in a safe spot.

~HOA~128~128~Closely watch for any sparks that might fly from equipment you
might be using. This includes not only grinding tools and torches, but also any
lawn-care equipment and off-road vehicles.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2016 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              705 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Himalayan Times

                             April 9, 2016 Saturday

Sindhuli wildfire yet to come under control

BYLINE: Min Kumar Dahal/Himalayan News Service

LENGTH: 575  words


Sindhulimadhi, April 9: Dor Bahadur Bayalkoti of Bubaneshwori VDC, Sindhuli, and
his family have been living under the open sky since yesterday after the
wildfire that spread to human settlement gutted his house.

"It is uncertain how long we will have to stay under the open sky as the
wildfire has yet to be brought under control," he said. Bayalkoti along with his
wife and two kids have been living under the open sky since yesterday. He
informed that not all fire victim families had received the tents offered by Red
Cross Society, Sindhuli after the incident. "The uncontrolled inferno might have
destroyed the tents," he said.

Besides Bayalkoti, around 40 families in ward no 1, 7 and 9 of the VDC have been
spending nights under the open sky for the last two days. "We have not been able
to sleep due to the fear of the raging wildfire," said Buddhi Raj Karki, another
fire victim. He wondered how he would be able to rebuild his house and run the
family as his house and property were gutted in the wildfire.

Another fire victim Kumar Bayalkoti said even the water pipes had burnt down. He
added that the victims were suffering from acute shortage of drinking water due
to the same. "The uncontrolled fire coupled with rising mercury leaves us
thirsty," he added.

The wildfire had spread from Tangre National Forest on Friday morning. Raging
wind had caused the wildfire to immediately spread to human settlements. The
fire gutted two buildings belonging to local Kalika Primary School while dozens
of cattle died in the incident.

Security personnel deployed at the incident site said they were yet to bring the
wildfire under control as of today evening. A joint team of Nepal Police, Armed
Police Force and Nepali Army, along with the locals, have been making efforts to
bring the wildfire under control since yesterday.

Inspector Sarbashree Bahadur Singh, of Area Police Office, Khurkot, said the
wildfire had gradually moved towards the community forest of Baseri, Bhadaure
and Okhle at ward number 6 and 8, respectively of the VDC. He said it would take
two days to assess the total damage caused by the fire.

Meanwhile, various political parties, Nepal Red Cross Society and the district
residents have been collecting relief for the fire victims at the initiative of
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Sindhuli.

Binesh Shrestha, chairman of Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Sindhuli, said
they had started collecting relief after the District Administration Office,
Sindhuli made them such a request.

"A team was deployed to the VDC with relief materials to offer to the victims,"
he informed. He said the relief collection would continue tomorrow as well.

Village reduced to ashes

SUNSARI: The fire that broke out at Bokraha VDC of Sunsari reduced an entire
village to ashes on Saturday noon. The blaze that started from the house of
local Fumulla Mansur engulfed 45 houses. SP Poshraj Pokhrel said strong winds
had caused the fire to spread. Security personnel from Nepali Army, APF and NP
along with fire fighters from Dharan, Itahari and Biratnagar had doused the
fire. "The fire might have damaged property worth millions, but the exact
details of the damage has yet to come," SP Pokhrel said. The fire victims have
been left to fend for themselves after the inferno gutted their houses. The
victims bemoaned that they had nothing left. The DAO, Sunsari informed that
efforts were under way to provide food to the victims as immediate relief.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2016 Himalayan Times, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              706 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            Quesnel Cariboo Observer

                          September 27, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

BC Wildfire Service rescinds all but one area restriction in Cariboo

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 179 words


The Ministry of Forests, Lands, Natural Resource Operations and Rural
Development and BC Wildfire Service have announced that area restrictions around
most Cariboo fires have now been rescinded, effective at noon on Sept. 27.

The Ministry cited a return to seasonal weather conditions and reduced fire
activity as the reasons for removing restrictions in the area.

The only restriction order now in place in the Cariboo Fire Centre is around the
Elephant Hill wildfire, although BC Wildfire Service has reported this fire is
now 100 per cent contained.

Regardless of the removal of area restrictions, BC Wildfire Service urged the
public to take care when entering areas affected by wildfire, as trees may be
unstable and ash pits may still remain hot after the flames have died down.

They also warned there will potentially still be smoke visible from the former
wildfire zones, and it may continue for some time. Smoke rising from green,
unburned fuel or from outside a fire's perimeter should be reported, but smoke
from within the former wildfire perimeter is not of concern.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              707 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 17, 2017 Wednesday

Idaho: 5th Annual Southwest Idaho Wildfire Mitigation Forum to be Hosted in
Boise

LENGTH: 411  words





Boise: The City of boise, Idaho has issued the following news release:
Wildfire Mitigation Coordinator Captain Jerry McAdams states that "the Southwest
Idaho Wildfire Mitigation Forum provides an opportunity for regional
stakeholders in wildfire mitigation to meet, network and to share their latest
efforts in wildfire mitigation. For homeowners, fire managers, non-profits,
funding agencies, utility companies and other stakeholders, the forum is
designed to encourage new cooperative partnerships and build efficiencies in
area wildfire mitigation efforts."
Attendees from past forums have included members and representatives from
multiple fire departments, the Bureau of Land Management, US Forest Service,
Idaho Department of Lands, Idaho Office of Emergency Management, Idaho Firewise,
Idaho State Fire Marshal's Office, County managers, local university professors,
city planners, open space managers, conservation organizations, non-profit
organizations, as well as residents and Firewise advocates that live in the
wildland urban interface. Captain McAdams stated that "with the increased
incidence and severity of wildfires that threaten lives and property in our
area, the need to address mitigation efforts in a cooperative fashion with
limited resources has become increasingly important."
The forum is being hosted by Ada County Parks & Waterways, whose mission is to
protect "...resources and natural habitats for the safe enjoyment of our
residents and visitors."  The forum is financially sponsored by the Fire Adapted
Communities Learning Network (FACLN), which "...encourages the development and
sharing of best practices and innovations in order to accelerate the adoption of
fire adapted community concepts nationwide." For more information on local fire
adaptation, see

www.adafireadapted.org
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Wildfire Field Representative, Gary
Marshall, will be in attendance to provide an update on national Firewise
efforts.  The Firewise Communities/USA program teaches people how to adapt to
living with wildfire and encourages neighbors to work together and take action
to annually reduce their risk from wildland fire.  Additionally, Kraig
Stevenson, Senior Regional Manager, International Code Council (ICC) Government
Relations, will be speaking on WUI code development and implementation.

 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              708 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                              The Herald (Glasgow)

                             March 6, 2014 Thursday
                                   1 Edition

Wildfire training provided for firefighters

BYLINE: NO BYLINE

SECTION: HS - NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 245 words


FIREFIGHTERS in areas of Scotland most likely to be affected by wildfires have
received special training in  a drive to combat the blazes.

More than 200 wildfires in one week stretched the fire service across part of
the West Highlands last year and a series of measures have been implemented to
ensure crews are prepared to deal with incidents this year.

Scottish Fire and Rescue Service assistant chief officer Robert Scott, chair of
the Scottish Wildfire Forum (SWFF), has appointed a full-time senior manager,
who will be responsible for looking into all aspects of wildfire management. A
working group made up of senior fire officers from various departments has also
been set up.

Mr Scott hopes this will raise awareness, encourage responsibility, improve
firefighter safety and reduce demand on SFRS resources during wildfire season.

Last year the SWFF launched the UK's only Wildfire Operational Guidance Manual,
commissioned by the Scottish Government.

Mr Scott said: "We have committed significant resources to training a number of
senior officers to an advanced level to ensure we have subject matter experts
available across the country to attend and control wildfire incidents."

Drew McFarlane-Slack, Highland regional manager for Scottish Land and Estates,
said: "We value the opportunity to work in partnership with the SFRS. We can
pool our resources and experience in a bid to reduce the number of wildfires,
which have a damaging effect on our environment."

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GH


                      Copyright 2014 Newsquest Media Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                              709 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                      IBNS

                       July 13, 2017 Thursday 6:30 AM EST

14,000 people evacuated in British Columbia Wildfire, Williams Lake under high
alert

BYLINE: India Blooms News Service

LENGTH: 384  words


Ottawa, July 13 (IBNS): Almost 14,000 people were evacuated from their home
following a wildfire in British Columbia's Interior which raged on last Friday.

Williams Lake is the largest city in the Central Interior of British Columbia
which is under a high alert, following the evacuation. On Friday, the disaster
occurred when lightening storm made the fire spread rapidly in the Interior of
B.C. An emergency was called immediately after the wildfire. Bob Turner from
Emergency Management B.C. told media that firefighters are working out with
fullest resources to control the situation. Minister of Public Safety and
Emergency Preparedness, Ralph Goodale, extended the support from the government
to tackle the ongoing situation of wildfire in B.C. In a statement issued on
July 9, the minister said: On behalf of the Federal Government, the Minister of
National Defence, the Honourable Harjit Sajjan, and I have accepted a request
for federal assistance in dealing with the wildfire situation from my provincial
counterpart, Todd Stone, Minister of Transportation and Infrastructure and
Minister responsible for Emergency Management BC. The Government Operations
Centre is working diligently to coordinate the federal response to ensure that
help is provided as soon as possible, and will continue to monitor and assess
the wildfire situation as it evolves, Goodale added. Our officials are working
closely with federal and provincial partners on planning the details of this
assistance, including support from Canadian Armed Forces he said. B.C. Wildfire
Service on Twitter confirmed the arrival of out of service personnel to join
them in tackling the situation of the wildfire, couple of days back.
Out-of-province firefighting personnel have started to arrive in #BC to assist
with our #BCwildfire situation B.C. Wildfire Service tweeted. Out-of-province
firefighting personnel have started to arrive in #BC to assist with our
#BCwildfire situation: https://t.co/VuD3pIAQp4 pic.twitter.com/MG3YotvnpJ BC
Wildfire Service (@BCGovFireInfo) July 11, 2017 Reports suggested that the
situation in the city is expected to get worsened with the deterioration of the
weather conditions and particularly winds. (Reporting by Souvik Ghosh) Image:
Official site of Public Safety Canada (Government of Canada).

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


            Copyright 2017 India Blooms., distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              710 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                 The Calhoun-Liberty Journal (Bristol, Florida)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                  May 11, 2011

WILDFIRE THREAT:Danger levels continue to rise in Northwest Florida

BYLINE: The Calhoun-Liberty Journal staff

LENGTH: 575  words


BAYCOUNTY -- The Florida Division of Forestry is reminding everyone that due to
continued dryness, gusty winds, and daily temperatures in the upper-eighties and
mid-nineties, we are seeing increased fire danger levels in all of northwest
Florida including Bay, Walton, Jackson, Holmes, Washington, Calhoun, and Gulf
counties. Everyone living in and visiting the Northwest Florida area is urged to
be extremely aware of the potential for wildfire due primarily to our current
weather patterns and conditions.

The month of May can traditionally be one of Florida's driest months when we see
our highest and often most destructive wildfire activity and since the northwest
Florida area has not seen much rain recently, that has compounded the problem.
Residents should pay close attention to weather forecasts and prepare their
homes and communities to be able to survive a wildfire disaster.

The Florida Division of Forestry urges Floridians to use the following safety
tips to protect their homes especially during these extremely dry conditions:

WHAT HOMEOWNERS CAN DO TO MINIMIZE THEIR RISK OF WILDFIRE

Take some time to clean up your yard and clean your roof and gutters of debris
that can serve as 'fuel' to airborne embers from a wildfire so that you don't
"invite" a wildfire to your home.

1) Remove leaves, pine needles, twigs and palm fronds, etc., from roofs and
gutters

2) Clear burnable materials like wood piles and dead plants from the sides of
the home

3) Clean, mow and water the area surrounding the home (up to 30 feet) to prevent
leading wildfires from the woods to your door

Never leave any fire unattended.

Be careful when using fire for anything - including campfires and barbecues.
Make sure someone watches the fire at all times until it is out.

Use caution when using anything that can cause a spark. Closely watch for any
sparks that might fly from equipment you may be using. This includes not only
grinding equipment and torches, but also any lawn care equipment and off road
vehicles. Be sure that spark arrestors are in place on all engines used near
wildland vegetation. Have these engines tuned so they don't back fire.

Supervise children and be sure they understand the dangers of fire and the
possible consequences of their actions.

If parking on dry grass or brush, remember that the heat of a vehicle can start
a fire.

Report all suspicious wildfire activity to the Department's Arson Alert Hotline:
(800) 342-5869.

Report any suspected 'wildfire' regardless of size immediately to 911.

For more information on how to protect your home and family, visit
www.fl-dof.com.

Also be advised that even if and when some areas receive 'afternoon
thunderstorms,' although the precipitation is much-needed, the temporary relief
is often minimal. Furthermore, the lighting associated with the thunderstorms
can spark wildfires that can smolder for several days until the vegetative
'fuel' that it's burning in dries out and can then spread rapidly.

Due to Florida's current dry conditions following winter freezes this year, the
Division of Forestry has responded to around 15 percent more wildfires than
during an average year, which are burning nearly 25 percent more acreage. As of
May 10, there are currently 106 'active' wildfires in the state of Florida that
either have burned or are burning a total of just more than 12,500 acres. In our
local seven-county Chipola Forestry Center, we have 7 'active fires' affecting
137 acres currently.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Disaster and Accident

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CHL

                      Copyright 2011 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                   Copyright 2011 The Calhoun-Liberty Journal


                              711 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Ocala Star-Banner (Florida)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           November 30, 2010 Tuesday

As hurricane season ends, severe drought brings wildfire threat

BYLINE: Joe Callahan, Ocala Star-Banner, Fla.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 865 words


Nov. 30--One of the most active -- yet least consequential -- hurricane seasons
in history came to end on Tuesday.

There were 19 named storms, 12 of which were hurricanes, during the season,
which lasted June 1 to Nov. 30. The 19 storms tied 1887 and 1995 for the third
most in a single season. But not one storm impacted Florida this year.

The record year was 2005, when 28 named storms streaked across the Atlantic. The
second most was 21 in 1933. In those years, many of those storms impacted
Florida.

But the same conditions that saved Florida from hurricanes also is partly to
blame for a different kind of threat: an above-normal wildfire threat that has
arrived on the scene much earlier than normal.

This part of Florida is in the midst of an severe drought, one that fire experts
say could lead all the way through spring, which is usually when the threat of
wildfires is the greatest.

Marion County has a drought index of 606 on the Keech-Byram scale, which
measures drought severity up to 800 points. Every 100 points on the scale equals
one inch a person must dig into the ground to find moisture.

The 606 score puts Marion County in the severe range, which is from 600 to 800
points and is the highest on the scale.

"It's looking extremely grim," said Ludie Bond, a wildfire mitigation specialist
for the Florida Division of Forestry.

Bond said wildfires are acting like they normally do in the spring when the
typical wildfire season begins. Her observation is based on reported flame
heights and other criteria.

It is shaping up to be one of the worst fire seasons on record, including the
1998 outbreak.

During that year, more than 500,000 acres burned throughout the state in a
six-week span, destroying hundreds of homes.

The outlook is so bad that Marion County is one of the Florida Division of
Forestry's biggest concerns when it comes to the threat of wildfires. Marion
County was ranked No. 10 out of Florida's 67 counties.

For that reason, the Florida Division of Forestry is developing a Community
Wildfire Protection Plan.

The committee should have its first meeting in a few weeks.

The reason for the extreme concerns is that Marion, which is larger than the
state of Rhode Island, has heavy vegetation in some areas and thousands of acres
of continuous forest land, to name just a few of the concerns.

Al Sandrik, the warning coordination meteorologist for the National Weather
Service in Jacksonville, said the East Coast of the U.S. was spared in 2010
because of a perfect weather setup this hurricane season.

The Bermuda-Azores High set up further east in the Atlantic this year, closer to
the Azores than to Bermuda.

The closer the high is to Bermuda ,the greater the risk that tropical systems
will be steered into Florida.

The high was far east of Bermuda this year, and an upper level trough hung over
the southeastern United States. Those combined to steer storms to the north and
away from the coast.

The storms that formed off Africa's west coast were steered by the high, which
rotates clockwise. As they approached the U.S., the high pulled them north
before hitting land.

"Those storms moved north between the two [weather patterns]" and missed the
eastern seaboard, Sandrik said.

The problem, Sandrik said, is that those weather systems also blocked
ever-important tropical waves from crossing Florida over the summer and fall.

Those tropical systems help produce much-needed rain. Coupled with the fact the
area is in the middle of La Nina -- which means a warm, dry fall and winter in
this part of the country -- Florida is becoming a tinderbox.

Weather experts and emergency management officials say the area is now in the
eye of another potential damaging storm: a wildfire outbreak.

Marion sheriff's Capt. Chip Wildy, who is the Marion County emergency management
director, said the lack of hurricanes has left the county with a much higher
wildfire threat.

Wildy said that was the tradeoff. He hopes this winter and spring 2011 does not
become the worst season for wildfires since 1998.

Sandrik said the area is already in a drought: less than an inch of rain has
fallen in Marion County in two months.

And La Nina promises less rain the normal over the winter, which is the driest
part of the year to begin with.

And with warmer than normal temperatures, vegetation -- fuel for wildfires --
will grow more than usual.

And after the first freeze kills a lot of vegetation, there could be the perfect
scenario for an active wildfire season.

Bond said the Florida Division of Forestry, along with the U.S, Forest Service
and area fire rescue agencies, will be keeping a close eye on the situation.

This time of year, Bond said, it is usually man who starts the fires. Lightning
fires usually do not start up until late May. Bond said community education will
be vital in the coming months in hopes of keeping the area's tinderbox from
exploding.

To see more of The Ocala Star-Banner or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.ocala.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Ocala Star-Banner, Fla. Distributed by
McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content
services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit
www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20101130-OA-As-hurricane-season-ends-severe-drought-brings-wildfire
-threat-20101130

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: OA


                        Copyright 2010 Ocala Star-Banner


                              712 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Springfield News-Sun, Ohio

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            December 5, 2016 Monday

Family who fled wildfires sends photos from Gatlinburg

BYLINE: Katherine Collins, Springfield News-Sun, Ohio

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 297 words


Dec. 05--UPDATE @ 2 p.m. Dec. 5

The Fox family, who relocated from Logan County to Gatlinburg where they fled
the deadly wildfire, has been allowed back into their neighborhood today to see
what's left of their property and belongings.

It's the first time Henry Fox, his wife, Casie, and their 5-year-old son are
seeing the devastation left by the wildfires. The trio fled their Gatlinburg
home just as the wildfires were nearing their neighborhood.

The family sent this newsroom photos of what they are seeing today. Some
buildings were reduced to piles of rubble that are still smoking. Other homes
and structures are gutted, with charred and blackened outer walls still
standing.

EARLIER

A former Logan County family has been displaced from their Gatlinburg home
because of wildfire.

Henry Fox, his wife and 5-year-old son moved to Tennessee from Bellefontaine
about two months ago. It was Monday evening when they realized they needed to
leave their Gatlinburg home, he said.

>>RELATED: Gatlinburg wildfires: 3 dead; over 14,000 evacuated

"It was like driving into hell," Fox said. "It was the scariest moment of my
life."

The family is now staying at a hotel in Pigeon Forge, he said, but isn't sure
how long it will be before they can return to Gatlinburg.

The fire has destroyed more than 150 homes and businesses and displaced more
than 14,000 people.

>>DETAILS: Wildfires in, near Gatlinburg leave Miami Valley residents devastated

It started Nov. 23 and is believed to have been the result of arson, according
to Great Smoky Mountain National Park officials.

Three deaths have been reported because of the fire, the Associated Press
reports.

___ (c)2016 Springfield News-Sun, Ohio Visit Springfield News-Sun, Ohio at
www.springfieldnewssun.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20161205-1SP-Family-who-fled-wildfires
-sends-photos-from-Gatlinburg-1205-20161205

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1SP


                   Copyright 2016 Springfield News-Sun, Ohio


                              713 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Clearwater Times (N. Thompson)

                             March 20, 2017 Monday
                                 Final Edition

B.C. streamlines online hunting forms, wildfire investigations

BYLINE: Contributed

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 425  words


Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations

Legislative amendments introduced recently will make it easier for hunters to
complete licensing, permitting and reporting activities online, and also will
give wildfire investigators more time to complete their work and streamline the
cost-recovery process associated with human-caused wildfires.

With the Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations Statutes
Amendment Act, 2017 (Bill 5), the B.C. government is acting on previous
commitments to streamline processes and move more services online.

Specifically, the proposed amendments to the Wildlife Act would:

Support the launch of a new online licensing system for hunters.

Allow for the submission of required reports electronically through a new online
system.

Reduce the number of authorizations hunters are required to carry while hunting.

Enhance compliance and enforcement by allowing conservation officers to request
photo ID from all hunters, anglers and trappers.

The new online licensing system for hunters would:

Give resident hunters the option of obtaining their hunting licences online at:
www.gov.bc.ca/hunting

Implement redesigned species licences that hunters would be required to carry at
all times while hunting, allowing for more accurate tracking and improved
overall management of wildlife.

Enable certain permits and licences to be issued on the same day that the
applications are submitted.

The B.C. government also intends to give the BC Wildfire Service and other
government agencies more time to investigate wildfires, since those sorts of
investigations can be both complex and time-consuming. The extra time will allow
them to better determine whether the government should pursue the recovery of
costs associated with fire suppression, fire damage, or contraventions of
wildfire-related legislation.

The proposed Wildfire Act amendments reinforce the government's commitment to
public safety and dealing appropriately with people or companies that violate
this legislation.

Specifically, the proposed amendments to the Wildfire Act would:

Implement a standardized limitation period of three years to give wildfire
investigators more time to complete their work and initiate any required
enforcement proceedings.

Give the government more time to recover costs associated with wildfire control,
to levy penalties or to require violators to undertake remediation activities.

Provide more time and flexibility for the government to consider charges related
to damage, reforestation and remediation related to wildfire activity.



LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              714 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                  Calgary Sun

                           August 16, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire season may be B.C.'s worst

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 281  words

DATELINE: KAMLOOPS, B.C.


B.C. is poised to face its worst wildfire season as flames scorch thousands of
hectares of land and costs rise to deal with the devastation.

BC Wildfire Service spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said an estimated 8,450 square
kilometres of forest, brush and grassland has been burned since the start of the
wildfire season April 1.

That compares with a record loss of 8,550 square kilometres in 1958.

"(It's) safe to say we are on track for this to be the worst season on record
for that area burned," Skrepnek said.

He said 154 wildfires are burning across the province and the firefighting price
tag has reached $309 million, though that figure does not include costs for the
loss for 71 homes and 118 outbuildings.

The largest wildfire, in Hanceville, southwest of Williams Lake, now covers
2,120 square kilometres, Skrepnek said.

"We're urging people to be extremely careful with any activity that could spark
a wildfire," he said. "We're continuing to see the increased likelihood of
lightning-caused fires, which makes it even more critical to avoid any
humancaused incidents."

Skrepnek also urged people to report fires.

Over 4,100 people, including about 760 people recruited from outside the
province, are working on firefighting efforts, Skrepnek said.

Chris Duffy, executive director of operations for Emergency Management BC, says
9,300 people remain out of their homes as 40 evacuation orders are in place.

"Our priority remains public safety, first responders'safety and support to
local authorities and First Nations," he said.

He said 31,000 people are on evacuation alert, meaning they must be ready to
leave on a moment's notice. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Sun Media Corporation. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Canadian Press File; (See hardcopy for photo);

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Calgary Sun
                              All Rights Reserved


                              715 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                  Edmonton Sun

                           August 16, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire season may be B.C.'s worst

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 281  words

DATELINE: KAMLOOPS, B.C.


B.C. is poised to face its worst wildfire season as flames scorch thousands of
hectares of land and costs rise to deal with the devastation.

BC Wildfire Service spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said an estimated 8,450 square
kilometres of forest, brush and grassland has been burned since the start of the
wildfire season April 1.

That compares with a record loss of 8,550 square kilometres in 1958.

"(It's) safe to say we are on track for this to be the worst season on record
for that area burned," Skrepnek said.

He said 154 wildfires are burning across the province and the firefighting price
tag has reached $309 million, though that figure does not include costs for the
loss for 71 homes and 118 outbuildings.

The largest wildfire, in Hanceville, southwest of Williams Lake, now covers
2,120 square kilometres, Skrepnek said.

"We're urging people to be extremely careful with any activity that could spark
a wildfire," he said. "We're continuing to see the increased likelihood of
lightning-caused fires, which makes it even more critical to avoid any
humancaused incidents."

Skrepnek also urged people to report fires.

Over 4,100 people, including about 760 people recruited from outside the
province, are working on firefighting efforts, Skrepnek said.

Chris Duffy, executive director of operations for Emergency Management BC, says
9,300 people remain out of their homes as 40 evacuation orders are in place.

"Our priority remains public safety, first responders'safety and support to
local authorities and First Nations," he said.

He said 31,000 people are on evacuation alert, meaning they must be ready to
leave on a moment's notice. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Sun Media Corporation. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Canadian Press File; (See hardcopy for photo);

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2017 Edmonton Sun
                              All Rights Reserved


                              716 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              North Island Gazette

                             August 14, 2017 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire southeast of Telegraph Cove now 50 per cent contained

BYLINE: Tyson Whitney

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 176 words


As of Monday, Aug. 14, The wildfire 25 kilometres southeast of Telegraph Cove is
81 hectares in size and is at 50 per cent containment since being discovered
last week.

"We have a 10 person crew assigned to the fire today, and one officer," said
Fire Information Officer Nicole Gagnon.

"There is no equipment and no helicopters currently assigned to the fire."

The wildfire, which is burning in a logging cut block in the Kaikash Creek area,
was 25 hectares in size when it was first discovered Tuesday, Aug. 9, and then
exploded to 80 hectares by the next morning, being classified as "not under
control."

Gagnon noted the terrain at the scene of the wildfire is rugged and steep,
making it difficult for BC Wildfire Service to access the area.

She said BC Wildfire Service "started burn off operations" last Thursday, which
means they used controlled burning to help bring the fire to a controlled
perimeter.

Gagnon said the cause of the wildfire is still unknown and under investigation.

Keep checking www.northislandgazette.com for more updates on the wildfire.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              717 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                               May 4, 2007 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

CRIST ISSUES EMERGENCY ORDER FOR STATE AS WILDFIRES ERUPT

BYLINE: By MICHAEL C. BENDER Palm Beach Post Capital Bureau

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 199 words

DATELINE: TALLAHASSEE


With more than 15 wildfires consuming 3,400 acres in Florida, Gov. Charlie Crist
declared a state of emergency on Thursday.

"The ongoing danger of wildfires and drought conditions continues to threaten
the state of Florida with a major disaster," Crist wrote in an executive order.

The order gives state agencies, such as the Division of Forestry and the Florida
National Guard, additional authority to respond to the wildfires.

More than 90 percent of Florida is experiencing drought conditions, according to
the National Drought Mitigation Center.

On Wednesday, more than 147 homes were evacuated in Flagler County because of a
wildfire that had consumed 2,000 acres. The fire also closed State Road 40.

By Thursday morning, 15 new wildfires were sparked, covering an additional 1,400
acres.

The Federal Emergency Management Agency approved Thursday the state's request
for assistance to fight wildfires in Flagler, Lake and Volusia counties.

Crist said dry weather conditions during the next 90 days would increase the
danger of additional wildfires.

With the executive order, Attorney General Bill McCollum activated the price
gouging hot line, (866) 9-NO-SCAM (866) 966-7226.

~ mike_bender@pbpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2007 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              718 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                  Stock Watch

                     October 7, 2015 Wednesday 6:30 AM EST

Slightest Change in regional warming can cause large wildfires

BYLINE: Gloria Bradley

LENGTH: 377  words


If history's indication is correct then more wildfires will happen. The research
paper published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences has
unveiled that the evidence of bigger fires is buried deep in the lake mud.

A research team led by John Calder from the University of Wyoming's Department
of Geology and Geophysics has studied charcoal deposits from 12 different lakes
in the state. The lakes surround northern Colorado's Mount Zirkel Wilderness.

Many parts of the area were destroyed by wildfires during the Medieval Warm
Period (MWP), dating back 1,000 years ago and lasted 300 years. The recent
temperature rise is akin to that of MWP when many notable wildfires had taken
place.

"Using Yellowstone fire history as a baseline for comparison, our minimum
estimate of 50 percent of (Mount Zirkel) sites burned within a century at the
beginning of the MWP exceeds any century-scale estimate of Yellowstone burning
for the past 750 years", said the research head.

The researchers have traced wildfire evidence in the last 2,000 years. It has
been found that large wildfires had happened only a few times and their
magnitude was infrequent.

Now, the research team has raised concern by unveiling that rise in area being
burnt by wildfires in latest years is directly proportional to the risk of
individual landscapes that have been falling prey to the rising temperature. It
has also been said that even the slightest change in regional warming could lead
to large wildfires.

"We will live in a different West. This is happening now, and it will continue
happening. It will be a new normal," said John Calder, a UW PhD student and
co-author of the paper, "Medieval warming initiated exceptionally large wildfire
outbreaks in the Rocky Mountains."

"This is real evidence things burned more. We're not speculating," said Bryan
Shuman, a co-author and geology and geophysics professor at UW. "We're showing
things really happened. It really was warmer here and when that happened, there
were more fire."

Topics: Science (http://nycity.today/section/science)Research
(http://nycity.today/section/research)Region: United States
(http://nycity.today/location/united-states)

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


          Copyright 2015 Manas Informatics, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              719 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                Hartlepool Mail

                              July 19, 2013 Friday

Wildfire warning as safety experts say hot conditions could spark blazes

LENGTH: 282  words


FIRE chiefs have warned people to be careful in the countryside over fears that
the dry and hot conditions could easily lead to wildfires.

The Durham Wildfire Fire Group and Durham and Darlington Fire and Rescue Service
say the recent spell of good weather has a downside.

William Salvin, chairman of the Durham Wildfire Fire Group, said: "After two dry
months and this period of hot sunshine with warm winds, our moor and heathland
vegetation is becoming tinder dry and we now have to worry about the risk of
wildfire occurring.

"With schools about to break up, we will soon have many more people out enjoying
themselves in our uplands and along our coast. I would urge everybody to really
consider the risk of wildfire when out and about. While devastating wildfires
are normally associated with moorlands, our coastal vegetation is also a high
risk area. Please do not light fires, including barbeques, unless in controlled
areas.

"Properly extinguish any cigarettes and do not discard items that may cause
fire, such as bottles.

"I must also strongly advise anyone against buying or using Chinese/sky
lanterns. If you do see fire in the countryside, do please report it by
telephoning 999."

A Durham and Darlington Fire and Rescue Service spokesman said: "Wildfires can
pose a huge drain on fire and rescue resources due to the large expanse they can
cover and therefore the time required to bring such fires under control.

"We have seen only recently in Arizona that these types of fires can have
devastatingly deadly outcomes.

"A very active wildfire season will stretch resources to the limit so we would
ask the public to be extra careful and vigilant when out in rural areas of the
county."

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NPHM


                       Copyright 2013 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              720 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                 Peterlee Mail

                              July 19, 2013 Friday

Wildfire warning as safety experts say hot conditions could spark blazes

LENGTH: 282  words


FIRE chiefs have warned people to be careful in the countryside over fears that
the dry and hot conditions could easily lead to wildfires.

The Durham Wildfire Fire Group and Durham and Darlington Fire and Rescue Service
say the recent spell of good weather has a downside.

William Salvin, chairman of the Durham Wildfire Fire Group, said: "After two dry
months and this period of hot sunshine with warm winds, our moor and heathland
vegetation is becoming tinder dry and we now have to worry about the risk of
wildfire occurring.

"With schools about to break up, we will soon have many more people out enjoying
themselves in our uplands and along our coast. I would urge everybody to really
consider the risk of wildfire when out and about. While devastating wildfires
are normally associated with moorlands, our coastal vegetation is also a high
risk area. Please do not light fires, including barbeques, unless in controlled
areas.

"Properly extinguish any cigarettes and do not discard items that may cause
fire, such as bottles.

"I must also strongly advise anyone against buying or using Chinese/sky
lanterns. If you do see fire in the countryside, do please report it by
telephoning 999."

A Durham and Darlington Fire and Rescue Service spokesman said: "Wildfires can
pose a huge drain on fire and rescue resources due to the large expanse they can
cover and therefore the time required to bring such fires under control.

"We have seen only recently in Arizona that these types of fires can have
devastatingly deadly outcomes.

"A very active wildfire season will stretch resources to the limit so we would
ask the public to be extra careful and vigilant when out in rural areas of the
county."

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NPWP


                       Copyright 2013 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              721 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            Quesnel Cariboo Observer

                           December 23, 2017 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

New help for business and non-profits starts in January

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 601  words


Businesses and non-profit organizations in wildfire-affected communities in the
Cariboo-Chilcotin/Lillooet area will soon have additional support thanks to a
partnership between Northern Development Initiative Trust (NDIT), Community
Futures Development Corporation (CFDC) - (CFDC Cariboo Chilcotin, CFDC North
Cariboo and CFDC Sun Country) and the Cariboo-Chilcotin Beetle Action Coalition
(CCBAC).

Thanks to this partnership, an emergency response co-ordinator and business
ambassadors will work from CFDC offices in Quesnel, Williams Lake and Ashcroft
until Oct. 3, 2018 to help businesses access resources to help with wildfire
recovery.

As a result of the worst wildfire season in provincial history, many businesses
in the Cariboo-Chilcotin and Thompson-Nicola regions are struggling to recover,
reopen and generate revenue.

While many programs and services already exist or have recently been established
to assist with wildfire recovery efforts, accessing these resources can be a
daunting and time-consuming task for business owners who are busy managing their
day-to-day operations.

The new positions will help businesses assess the impact of the wildfires on
their operations, match their needs to available programs and services, assist
with appropriate referrals and application processes and collect information
that can help communities better understand the wildfire impacts in order to
support new program development.

These positions will be working in collaboration with other wildfire response
programs to complement and promote resources available through organizations,
such as Emergency Management BC, the Red Cross and the Ministry of Forests,
Lands, Natural Resource Operations and Rural Development.

Community Futures welcomed the new staff members earlier this month:

· Emergency response co-ordinator Sue Lachance;

· Business ambassadors - Quesnel: Laurie Rice and Simon Turner; and

· Business ambassadors - Williams Lake: Deanne Hoversland and Alisha Piccolo

The Community Futures Wildfire Recovery Business Support program will begin
working with businesses in January 2018.

The positions are funded with $200,000 from NDIT, $140,000 from CCBAC and
$56,000 from CFDC.

NDIT's board allocated the funds for the program to support communities that
were not only hit by recent wildfires, but were also among some of the hardest
hit by pine beetle infestation in previous years.

Evan Saugstad, who is the NDIT chair, says Northern Development is pleased to be
able to provide assistance to the businesses and organizations in the
Cariboo-Chilcotin and Thomson-Nicola regions affected by the wildfires this past
year.

"The Trust's partnership with Community Futures and the CCBAC on this project,
in conjunction with the recovery efforts being made across central B.C., will
help ensure the organizations affected by the wildfires will receive sufficient
support in accessing the resources available to them.

"This program will play a key role in ensuring the success of the economic
recovery efforts being made across the region and will be essential in
facilitating important information to impacted businesses and organizations."

Karen Eden, CFDC - Cariboo-Chilcotin general manager, says Community Futures is
excited to be involved with this project.

The challenge for businesses and not-for-profit organizations is understanding
and accessing appropriate resources.

"The one-on-one assistance provided by the business ambassadors will help to
ensure businesses are able to effectively and efficiently access programs and
services that will assist with staying open and having ongoing sustainability."

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              722 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      Chico Enterprise-Record (California)

                          September 16, 2017 Saturday

wildfires cooling down;
Despite current trend, number of such blazes in state dipped in past 40 years

BYLINE: Daniel Tedford >> dtedford@scng.com >> @dgtedford on Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1012 words

ABSTRACT

mb OCR-L-WILDFIRE-TREND-0913: Despite 2017 being one of the worst fire seasons
in recent memory for California and one of the worst ever for the western US,
new research shows a surprising trend: Over the last 40 years, California has
seen a decline in wildfires. Why is that? Researchers don't know yet but they
intend to find out.Reporter: DTEDFORDLength: 1000 wordsArt: FILE + two line
charts showing recent trends

FULL TEXT

In a year that already is being called one of the worst for wildfires in the
Western United States, there is another fact that some might find remarkable:
For nearly 40 years, the number of wildfires in California has declined.

California wildfire data reviewed by a USGS research ecologist show a trend that
many could find hard to believe: Since a peak in 1980, there have been
fewerwildfires in California. This is true across thestate, according to
researcher Jon Keeley, who is also a professor at UCLA.

According to his paper, co-authored with Alexandra D. Syphard, we need to
rethink our ideas about the frequency of wildfires.

"The claim commonly made in research papers and the media that fire activity is
increasing throughout the western USA is certainly an over-statement," wrote the
authors.

The trend of fewer, but not smaller, fires is apparent in recent years. State
data regarding large wildfires (300 acres or more) from 2000 to 2015 show total
numbers - not fire size - have been in decline, despite a sharp spike in 2008.

So what's the reason for the decline? Well, they don't knowyet.

"Can't say at this point what has changed in the last 100 years that has caused
this decline ... but I am hoping we might find out," Keeley said.

Keeley has just begun to analyze the data and look for a reason, but he expects
to finish that analysis by the end of the month. He also will send his research
to Calfire for review.

Keeley is confident the culprits behind the decline can be narrowed down to two-
prevention or climate - but he is reserving his judgment for now.

"Maybe fire prevention strategies or could be related to climate," Keeley said.
"My guess is they would probably like to think it is increasing efficiency in
fire prevention but remains to be seen if that is the answer at this point."

Keeley is hoping Calfire might be able to point to some specific prevention
strategies and dates it implemented to help him determine if they had a major
impact in wildfire declines.

"We definitely have the education side," Calfire spokesman Scott McLean said.
"We spend a lot of money being proactive in trying to educate the public."

Though McLean said the organization has adopted social media and other modern
tactics in recent years to better reach the public about fire prevention,
Calfire's education efforts have been happening for decades.

"There are some embarrassing programs out there with blue leisure suits and
mullets," he said.

McLean said a decline in the numberof wildfires was a win for the agency's
outreach programs since the majority of wildfires are the result of human
causes.

"I love to see the trend of wildfires going down," McLean said. "That means we
are getting the message out."

Despite the decline in overall fires, the amount of acres burned by wildfiresis
doing just the opposite.

"For most ignition sources, we have found a decline in the numbers since the
1980s, but not a decline in the area burned," Keeley said.

Large wildfire numbers from 2000 to 2015 illustrate the growth in burned
acreage. Though the numbers are volatile year to year, the overall trend shows
growth in fire sizes.

McLean attributes the growth in acres burned to environmental factors that have
made fires burn hotter and faster than in the past. Despite that, he credited
Calfire for its work in keeping most fires from spreading.

According to Calfire data, 95 percent of fires are kept under 10 acres.

"We are constantly training. We always pay attention to what is going on, we
always investigate," he said. "We investigate what took place and we learn from
it, and we make sure our firefighters learn from it."

One reason acreage could be up is from the record winter rains that replenished
fuel for fires by spawning plant growth, including the return of grass that had
disappeared from wildland areas throughout Southern California during the
drought.

Grass fires tend to burn faster and increase the amount of acres burned,
according to a 2008 paper published by UC Merced Sierra Nevada Research
Institute's Anthony Westerling.

Other researchers point to climate change, but Keeley said there might be other
variables at play.

"People who have written on it tend to ascribe it to climate change, but I think
we are a long way from knowing if that is what is going on," he said.

During the past 40 years, there have been a number of years that have bucked the
trend of dwindling wildfire numbers and 2017 is already well on its way to being
one of those outliers.

As of Monday, Calfire has reported 5,102 wildland fires in its jurisdiction,
with nearly 230,000 acres burned.

During the same time period in 2016, there were 3,803 wildfires and 204,000
acres burned. The five-year average has been 3,872 wildland fires and 155,807
acres burned, according to Calfire.

This yearis also the most expensive year for wildfires as Montana, Washington
and Oregonall have been hit by devastating blazes. As a result, U.S. Secretary
of Agriculture Sonny Purdue announced Thursday the cost of fighting fires has
exceeded $2 billion. It  also has been a record-setting year for heat in
California and other western states, according to the National Climate Report
produced by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Though this year has been worse than predicted across Western states after there
were hopes a wet winter would diminish the fire season, McLean wasn't surprised
by the numbers considering the years of drought and the fuel created by the rain
that preceded fire season.

"As a firefighter, you wake up in the morning (thinking), 'What's the weather
doing?' because that tells you what your day is going to be like," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              723 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     Kamloops Daily News (British Columbia)

                             October 8, 2004 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire centre action urged

BYLINE: Cam Fortems, The Daily News

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 291  words


The regional district needs to put its own time and money behind a wildfire
interpretive centre in Barriere for senior governments to take the idea
seriously, Mayor Mel Rothenburger said Thursday.

The Thompson-Nicola Regional District's wildfire recovery committee will meet
with a group of Barriere residents interested in promoting the idea for a
wildfire centre.

"The concept of a wildfire interpretive centre was raised more than a year ago
as part of the route to recovery," said Rothenburger, a Kamloops director on the
TNRD board.

"There's been no activity whatsoever, other than asking government to look at
it. Government wants something firm from us."

The wildfire interpretive centre in Barriere was one of three major concepts in
the TNRD's wildfire recovery plan. The other two -- a second route to Sun Peaks
Resort from the Chase area, and a natural gas extension to the valley -- have
taken on a higher profile.

There is no preliminary costing for the project. Concepts include a building,
visitor centre for forestry and wildfire education and tours of the McLure burn.

Rothenburger said the vision is to create something in the mould of the Royal
Tyrrell Museum in Drumheller, home to the world's largest collection of dinosaur
artifacts.

Barriere-area director Bill Kershaw said a small group of residents in the
community is pushing the idea. However, he fears the regional district would
receive funding to build something that could become a long-term drain on
operating funds.

"I'd hate to build the thing and find out we don't have any way of keeping it
going."

Rothenburger said Liberal MP Hedy Fry has agreed to promote the idea among the
B.C. Liberal caucus, but the regional district needs a concrete plan for that
effort to succeed.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2004 Kamloops Daily News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              724 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Idaho Falls Post Register

                            October 5, 2017 Thursday

Guest column: Keeping our forests healthy

BYLINE: U.S. Sen. Jim Risch, Writer

LENGTH: 681 words

DATELINE: Idaho Falls, ID


The major difference between catastrophic hurricanes and wildfires is that
wildfires are at least partially preventable and almost fully manageable, writes
U.S. Senator Jim Risch.

Hurricanes Harvey, Irma and Maria have caused total and unprecedented
devastation in parts of Texas, Florida, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands and
the rest of the Caribbean. As Chairman of the Senate Committee on Small Business
and Entrepreneurship, I held a hearing last week to discuss the devastation this
region has experienced and to hear from the administration on how they are
helping small businesses and individuals recover. The Small Business
Administration, which serves as one of the federal government's premier disaster
agencies, told us many of these communities and businesses will face years of
rebuilding before their lives return to normal.

While we do not have hurricanes in the West, Idahoans can understand and
sympathize with the victims of these catastrophic events because we experience
similarly catastrophic wildfires.

Each year, wildfires tear through states like Idaho and burn through Western
forests, ecosystems, homes and businesses. The resulting disruption is untold.
Idahoans are forced to uproot from their homes and find temporary living
accommodations. Many with asthma and COPD must stay inside or leave the region
altogether as the smoke degrades air quality to hazardous levels, sometimes for
weeks. Small business owners-especially those who rely on the land like loggers,
outfitters and guides-have to abandon shop, which results in significant
economic losses. Major roadways are closed for weeks at a time causing
significantly decreased traffic into the state, and tourism dollars are lost.
Members of the small, rural communities across Idaho rely on the summer months
to earn enough income to sustain their families during the cold winters.
Wildfires completely interrupt our state's economy and our residents' daily
lives.

More than 8 million acres have burned across the country this year alone-a
47-percent increase from the 10-year average of 5.8 million acres. The emergency
preparedness levels for fire are at the highest point in five years.

Wildfires have increased not only in intensity, but in expense. Senator Crapo
and I attended a briefing at the Forest Service headquarters in D.C. last week,
and Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue shared with us that spending is at an
all-time record of more than $2 billion to pay to fight this year's wildfires.

The major difference between catastrophic hurricanes and wildfires is that
wildfires are at least partially preventable and almost fully manageable.
Western senators agree we must address the way we manage forests to prevent this
devastation in the first place.

I am a sponsor of Senators Mike Crapo's (R-ID) and Ron Wyden's (D-OR) bipartisan
bill, the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act, which would fund wildfires as natural
disasters - like a hurricane, tornado or earthquake. It would end "fire
borrowing"-which is spending money from other areas of the federal budget to pay
for firefighting. Ending fire borrowing would allow agencies to take steps ahead
of fire season to better prevent them from happening.

The basic method for funding wildfires must be corrected. In 1995, 16 percent of
the forest service budget was spent on fighting fires. So far this year, 56
percent of their budget has already been spent fighting fires. As a result of
that, the forest service is not able to do the kind of preventative work they
need to do. And spending will likely go up in future years if we don't act. When
we spend that much on firefighting, we are setting ourselves up for failure by
raiding budgets for fuels reduction and timber sales, habitat restoration, roads
and trails maintenance; all things that keep our forests usable, healthy and
less susceptible to catastrophic wildfires.

We need every resource available to prevent and combat the devastation caused by
wildfires. One way or another, I am committed to getting this done.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 The Post Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              725 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                            March 25, 2015 Wednesday

Piedmonter/Montclarion letters: Prevention key to firefighting

BYLINE: The Piedmonter and Montclarion

SECTION: MY TOWN; Alameda; Letters; Contra Costa; News; Local; Opinion

LENGTH: 1183 words


Prevention key to firefighting

We as the board for Friends of Montclair RR Trail park volunteers are concerned
about what the City will do to prevent wildfire and to protect the residents and
properties in the Oakland hills. High fire danger remains a persistent threat
and, with the end of the Wildfire Prevention Assessment District, it could
become an even greater danger.

Our city park trail, Montclair RR Trail, is used heavily by the public and
traverses through a densely populated residential area between Montclair Village
and Shepherd Canyon. Many people are drawn to live here due to the city's unique
and beautiful wildland-urban interface.

Residents will be vulnerable to wildfire if Oakland city leaders rely only on a
plan of fire suppression with more firefighters. The necessary strategy must
also include a plan of prevention, including an agency and personnel responsible
for it. The 1991 wildfire showed that an increased number of firefighters cannot
control that kind of firestorm. "Public safety" means more than police response
and fire suppression.

The expense for wildfire prevention now shifts to the city's general fund. We
are alarmed this could result in a vacuum of awareness and responsibility for
wildfire prevention in Oakland. Without adequate funding in the city budget,
wildfire risk will continue to build. Wildfire prevention must be a top public
safety priority for Oakland.

Our recent experience with WPAD has shown that wildfire prevention is not a
priority in our park. Most pointedly there has been little to no coordination or
collaboration between Oakland Public Works divisions and the Oakland Fire
Department. It is not clear which department is responsible for city park
(vegetation) maintenance. It seems that it has all been relegated to OFD to
contract out. Yet their vegetation management group is greatly understaffed to
administer the work and barred from contracting any tree work: only two OFD
officers, a supervisor and one fire-inspector and seasonal part-time help
(versus a staff of more than 500 full-time firefighters). Without better
staffing and interdepartmental collaboration, the risk of wildfire will persist.

As a result of this impasse, there has been no regular vegetation maintenance
along the Montclair RR Trail by Public Works employees or OFD contractors over
the last few years. Homes flanking the length of Montclair RR Trail are at risk
with many dead trees and woody canopies, downed limbs and debris and heavy bushy
overgrowth. By making wildfire prevention a citywide priority, all city
departments must adopt this as their top priority as well.

Our volunteers have attempted to take up the slack by contributing hundreds of
hours this past year alone to removing dead tree limbs, picking up debris,
weeding and other fire-mitigation tasks. Even then it has been difficult to get
major maintenance from Public Works divisions. We instead have gone to great
lengths to secure grant money for some park trail tree work. However, these
efforts are inadequate to meet the need for regular and effective maintenance by
the city. Vegetation and tree maintenance in the hills must be a city priority
with adequate funding, planning and staffing.

We strongly urge Councilmember Annie Campbell Washington to consider the
following:

The city budget must include funding for wildfire prevention in the Oakland
hills.

The City Council should adopt and reinforce the high priority for wildfire
prevention.

All city departments and staff should be made to understand that fire prevention
is a high priority.

City departments should come to view citizen volunteers as allies and
collaborators to create safe and enjoyable parks.

Barbara Brochard, Lin Barron, Henry Schott, Jeff Kahn, Valerie Peck

Causing division of Montclarions?

After reading The Town Crier column in the March 20 issue, it occurred to me
that Ginny Prior appears to hold a unique position with the paper. Apparently,
she is free to express her opinions while not being held accountable for how
those opinions may ultimately affect her readership or the community that the
paper serves.

In her recent column, Prior acknowledged that she's a "bus-basher." I wasn't
surprised to read this, as she has previously commented negatively on AC Transit
Line 18, which begins and ends in Montclair. But, like the reader she mentioned
in the column, I'm left to wonder what her point is.

If her concerns center on the bus line's schedule, route and/or driver
performance, then she should direct those concerns to AC Transit. After all,
given her more than 35 years in the journalism profession, she must know that
going to the source of a perceived problem is the first and most direct way to
address it.

But I sadly suspect that her bus-bashing comments may have more to do with
fomenting division within the Montclair Village community -- not unlike her
recent comments about the murals about town.

I certainly hope that I'm wrong and that Prior will soon propose some creative
solutions about the bus line that will more positively engage the Montclair
Village community and that the resulting dialogue will be transparent.

Dan Melvin

Oakland

It's another day, another death

The tragic murders of a mother in West Oakland protecting her children and a
14-year-old boy in East Oakland walking with his friends are the embodiment of
the senseless, barbaric carnage in Oakland.

In my travels throughout Oakland, I find that the constant threat of random,
gratuitous violence is on the minds of everybody and concomitant with that is
the belief that nobody cares. Mayor Libby Schaaf talks tough and does nothing
and will do nothing much. The campaign is over, so Schaaf can now let the
neighborhood folks fend for themselves. Politicians once ensconced in office
retreat into the mode of self-preservation choosing to travel the road less
perilous and let the folks deal with the carnage in their wake.

The mindless, senseless, barbaric savagery that pervades this town is of no
consequence to the befuddled ideologues downtown and the folks who complain
learn soon enough that their cries for help are in vain, and thus the beat goes
on. Oakland is so beyond scary, and people who ought to know better just can't
figure things out.

The constant refrain from the loudmouthed do-nothing crowd who seemingly reside
at City Hall promoting an entirely fictitious narrative at every City Council
meeting is given respect while the average working stiff in Oakland is under
constant assault by out-of-control criminals who operate much in the same mode
as terrorists savaging and assaulting neighborhoods with impunity while the
self-proclaimed civic leaders do nothing. The tragedy that is Oakland is
compounded by the fact that the people holding elective office in this town are
amoral, dishonest and obviously devoid of a conscience. A normal, well adjusted
person could not succeed in the sordid world of Oakland City Hall. The exercise
of governance hereabout is a descent into the netherworld of unscrupulous deceit
and cruel indifference to the victims of unchecked barbarism.

Jonathan C. Breault

Oakland

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 Contra Costa Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              726 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                            March 25, 2015 Wednesday

Piedmonter/Montclarion letters: Prevention key to firefighting

BYLINE: The Piedmonter and Montclarion

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1183 words


Prevention key to firefighting

We as the board for Friends of Montclair RR Trail park volunteers are concerned
about what the City will do to prevent wildfire and to protect the residents and
properties in the Oakland hills. High fire danger remains a persistent threat
and, with the end of the Wildfire Prevention Assessment District, it could
become an even greater danger.

Our city park trail, Montclair RR Trail, is used heavily by the public and
traverses through a densely populated residential area between Montclair Village
and Shepherd Canyon. Many people are drawn to live here due to the city's unique
and beautiful wildland-urban interface.

Residents will be vulnerable to wildfire if Oakland city leaders rely only on a
plan of fire suppression with more firefighters. The necessary strategy must
also include a plan of prevention, including an agency and personnel responsible
for it. The 1991 wildfire showed that an increased number of firefighters cannot
control that kind of firestorm. "Public safety" means more than police response
and fire suppression.

The expense for wildfire prevention now shifts to the city's general fund. We
are alarmed this could result in a vacuum of awareness and responsibility for
wildfire prevention in Oakland. Without adequate funding in the city budget,
wildfire risk will continue to build. Wildfire prevention must be a top public
safety priority for Oakland.

Our recent experience with WPAD has shown that wildfire prevention is not a
priority in our park. Most pointedly there has been little to no coordination or
collaboration between Oakland Public Works divisions and the Oakland Fire
Department. It is not clear which department is responsible for city park
(vegetation) maintenance. It seems that it has all been relegated to OFD to
contract out. Yet their vegetation management group is greatly understaffed to
administer the work and barred from contracting any tree work: only two OFD
officers, a supervisor and one fire-inspector and seasonal part-time help
(versus a staff of more than 500 full-time firefighters). Without better
staffing and interdepartmental collaboration, the risk of wildfire will persist.

As a result of this impasse, there has been no regular vegetation maintenance
along the Montclair RR Trail by Public Works employees or OFD contractors over
the last few years. Homes flanking the length of Montclair RR Trail are at risk
with many dead trees and woody canopies, downed limbs and debris and heavy bushy
overgrowth. By making wildfire prevention a citywide priority, all city
departments must adopt this as their top priority as well.

Our volunteers have attempted to take up the slack by contributing hundreds of
hours this past year alone to removing dead tree limbs, picking up debris,
weeding and other fire-mitigation tasks. Even then it has been difficult to get
major maintenance from Public Works divisions. We instead have gone to great
lengths to secure grant money for some park trail tree work. However, these
efforts are inadequate to meet the need for regular and effective maintenance by
the city. Vegetation and tree maintenance in the hills must be a city priority
with adequate funding, planning and staffing.

We strongly urge Councilmember Annie Campbell Washington to consider the
following:

The city budget must include funding for wildfire prevention in the Oakland
hills.

The City Council should adopt and reinforce the high priority for wildfire
prevention.

All city departments and staff should be made to understand that fire prevention
is a high priority.

City departments should come to view citizen volunteers as allies and
collaborators to create safe and enjoyable parks.

Barbara Brochard, Lin Barron, Henry Schott, Jeff Kahn, Valerie Peck

Causing division of Montclarions?

After reading The Town Crier column in the March 20 issue, it occurred to me
that Ginny Prior appears to hold a unique position with the paper. Apparently,
she is free to express her opinions while not being held accountable for how
those opinions may ultimately affect her readership or the community that the
paper serves.

In her recent column, Prior acknowledged that she's a "bus-basher." I wasn't
surprised to read this, as she has previously commented negatively on AC Transit
Line 18, which begins and ends in Montclair. But, like the reader she mentioned
in the column, I'm left to wonder what her point is.

If her concerns center on the bus line's schedule, route and/or driver
performance, then she should direct those concerns to AC Transit. After all,
given her more than 35 years in the journalism profession, she must know that
going to the source of a perceived problem is the first and most direct way to
address it.

But I sadly suspect that her bus-bashing comments may have more to do with
fomenting division within the Montclair Village community -- not unlike her
recent comments about the murals about town.

I certainly hope that I'm wrong and that Prior will soon propose some creative
solutions about the bus line that will more positively engage the Montclair
Village community and that the resulting dialogue will be transparent.

Dan Melvin

Oakland

It's another day, another death

The tragic murders of a mother in West Oakland protecting her children and a
14-year-old boy in East Oakland walking with his friends are the embodiment of
the senseless, barbaric carnage in Oakland.

In my travels throughout Oakland, I find that the constant threat of random,
gratuitous violence is on the minds of everybody and concomitant with that is
the belief that nobody cares. Mayor Libby Schaaf talks tough and does nothing
and will do nothing much. The campaign is over, so Schaaf can now let the
neighborhood folks fend for themselves. Politicians once ensconced in office
retreat into the mode of self-preservation choosing to travel the road less
perilous and let the folks deal with the carnage in their wake.

The mindless, senseless, barbaric savagery that pervades this town is of no
consequence to the befuddled ideologues downtown and the folks who complain
learn soon enough that their cries for help are in vain, and thus the beat goes
on. Oakland is so beyond scary, and people who ought to know better just can't
figure things out.

The constant refrain from the loudmouthed do-nothing crowd who seemingly reside
at City Hall promoting an entirely fictitious narrative at every City Council
meeting is given respect while the average working stiff in Oakland is under
constant assault by out-of-control criminals who operate much in the same mode
as terrorists savaging and assaulting neighborhoods with impunity while the
self-proclaimed civic leaders do nothing. The tragedy that is Oakland is
compounded by the fact that the people holding elective office in this town are
amoral, dishonest and obviously devoid of a conscience. A normal, well adjusted
person could not succeed in the sordid world of Oakland City Hall. The exercise
of governance hereabout is a descent into the netherworld of unscrupulous deceit
and cruel indifference to the victims of unchecked barbarism.

Jonathan C. Breault

Oakland

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              727 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                          September 20, 2014 Saturday

Burning money: Cost of fighting wildfires robs funds to prevent them;
The cost of fighting wildfires and protecting life and property from harm has
exceeded $1 billion every year since 2000, eating into agency resources for
forest management and fire preparedness - programs meant to prevent wildfires
before they start.

BYLINE: Brad Knickerbocker Staff writer

SECTION: USA

LENGTH: 772 words


News from California this week made it seem as if half the drought-stricken
state was ablaze with wind-whipped wildfires, forcing thousands of residents to
evacuate, wrecking some vacation plans for Yosemite National Park, and torching
hundreds of structures - including 143 homes in the small town of Weed.

All of that is happening and continues to happen as firefighters battle what
fire officials say are 23 active wildfires around the state - 17 of those
described as "uncontained large fires."

So far this year, there have been slightly more wildfires (39,927) than there
were in 2013 (38,208). But the total acreage burned so far in 2014 (3,002,842
acres) is significantly less than last year (4,006,080 acres).

The previous two years saw even higher numbers of fires and acreage burned.
(46,929 fires and 8,657,359 acres in 2012; 58,424 fires and 7,657,359 acres in
2011) The record year was 2006, when 96,385 wildfires burned 9,873,745 acres.

Also going up in smoke are federal firefighting budgets, which have eaten into
agency resources for forest management and fire preparedness - programs meant to
prevent wildfires before they start.

The expense of fighting wildfires and protecting life and property from harm is
nearly four times greater than it was 30 years ago, and it has exceeded $1
billion every year since 2000. The share of the US Forest Service budget devoted
to fire management rose from 13 percent in 1991 to more than 40 percent in 2012.
The total for all federal agencies last year - Forest Service, Bureau of Land
Management, Park Service, Bureau of Indian Affairs, and Fish and Wildlife
Service - topped $1.7 billion.

Earlier this year, President Obama asked for $615 million in supplemental
funding for firefighting in 2014.

"Two days ago the Forest Service said they have $179 million left for
suppression. Last week alone they spent $150-million on suppression efforts," US
Rep. Peter DeFazio (D) of Oregon told Northwest Public Radio this week. "That
means next week while we're out of session they'll run out of money and they'll
do what they always do, they'll start pulling back money from the fuel
reduction, forest health and other programs to fight the fires."

Rep. DeFazio is sponsoring the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act, which the Oregon
Democrat says "would end the cycle of fire-borrowing by treating catastrophic
wildfires like similar major disasters such as floods and hurricanes."

"Under the bill, routine wildland firefighting costs, which make up about 70
percent of the cost of wildfire suppression, would be funded through a normal
budgeting process," says DeFazio, senior Democrat on the House Natural Resources
Committee. "The true emergency fire events, which represent about 1 percent of
wildland fires but eat up 30 percent of the budgeted funds, would be treated
like similar major natural disasters."

The idea is to move fire suppression funding for catastrophic wildfires out of
the Forest Service and Interior budgets into an emergency disaster fund to
prevent the siphoning of cash from other programs.

The bill has 104 co-sponsors, including 52 Republicans, and there's a companion
bill in the Senate co-sponsored by Sen. Ron Wyden (D) of Oregon and Sen. Mike
Crapo (R) of Idaho. So far, however, the Republican-controlled natural resources
committee in the House has yet to schedule hearings.

Meanwhile, the King Fire northeast of Sacramento in heavy timber and steep
terrain has grown to 80,994 acres. Some structures have been destroyed, and
2,819 people have been evacuated. The fire, caused by a suspected arsonist, is
just 10 percent contained. Some 5,000 fire personnel are working to gain control
of the blaze.

Farther to the north, just south of the Oregon border, the Happy Camp Complex of
fires, sparked by a lightning strike five weeks ago, has grown to 130,139 acres.
The perimeter is 72 percent contained.

Officials Saturday declared the Boles Fire in Weed, Calif., fully contained. The
fire burned just 479 acres at the edge the small town near Mt. Shasta, but it
forced some 1,500 people to evacuate, destroying 143 homes, two churches, and
the town library. It also caused major damage to a forest products mill, the
main source of jobs in the town.

Weather.com meteorologist Chrissy Warrilow reports that weather conditions in
California will become unfavorable over the weekend, as warmer temperatures and
drier weather returns to the state through Sunday.

"Unfortunately, much of California is shunted from the Pacific Ocean's moisture,
and little to no chance of rain will be in the forecast for much of California
until the middle of next week," Ms. Warrilow said.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                              728 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                          September 6, 2017 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Ash covers Oregon cities, wildfire smoke chokes US West

BYLINE:  By GILLIAN FLACCUS and NICHOLAS K. GERANIOS Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 708 words


TROUTDALE, Ore. - A growing Oregon wildfire covered parts of Portland's
metropolitan area Tuesday with ash and forced the shutdown of a lengthy stretch
of highway through the state's scenic Columbia River Gorge.

It was one of dozens of wildfires burning in western U.S. states that sent smoke
into cities from Seattle to Denver - prompting health warnings and cancellations
of outdoor activities for children by many school districts.

The National Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho, a federal agency that
coordinates wildfire-fighting, said 80 large fires were burning on 2,200 square
miles in nine Western states.

The 16-square-mile fire east of Portland forced hundreds of home evacuations.
Embers from the fire drifted in the air across the Columbia River - sparking
blazes in neighboring Washington state.

The wildfire grew rapidly late Monday and overnight, giving authorities just
minutes to warn residents on the Oregon side of the river to leave their homes.

A closure of one section of Interstate 84 because of thick smoke and falling ash
was extended 50 miles east of Portland because flames reached the roadway, said
Dave Thompson, a spokesman for Oregon's Department of Transportation.

"If it jumps the road, you'd be driving through a wall of flame," he said. "It's
just not safe."

People in Oregon covered their faces to shield themselves from the smoke and the
ashes falling on them.

Elsewhere, a fast-moving wildfire in northern Utah swept down a canyon Tuesday
morning - destroying structures, forcing evacuations and closing highways.

A least one home burned and more than 1,000 people were evacuated as high winds
fed the flames in the canyon north of Salt Lake City. Thick black smoke closed
parts of two highways as firefighters struggled to fight the blaze fueled by
winds gust at up to 40 mph.

A fire in Montana's Glacier National Park emptied its busiest tourist spot as
wind gusts drove the flames toward the doorstep of an iconic lodge.

Lake McDonald Lodge, a 103-year-old Swiss chalet-style hotel, sits on a lake as
the famed Going-to-the-Sun-Road begins its vertigo-inducing climb up the
Continental Divide, making it an endearing park symbol for many visitors.

Outside California's Yosemite National Park, a wind-fueled fire made its way
deeper into a grove of 2,700-year-old giant sequoia trees on Labor Day.
Officials said the fire had gone through about half the grove but had not killed
any trees.

Giant sequoias are resilient and can withstand low-intensity fires. The blaze
burned brush and left scorch marks on some big trees that survived, said Cheryl
Chipman, a fire information officer.

Elsewhere in Northern California, a fire destroyed 72 homes and forced the
evacuation of about 2,000 people from their houses. The fire burned 14 square
miles in the community of Helena about 150 miles south of Oregon.

In Washington state the U.S. Department of Defense has agreed to assign 200
active-duty soldiers to help fight a wildfire.

Civilian firefighting commanders said Tuesday the soldiers from Joint Base Lewis
McChord, Wash., would undergo four days of training and then be sent to a
complex of 14 wildfires in the Umpqua National Forest that have burned 47 square
miles.

And a wildfire burning near Mount Rainier National Park in Washington state grew
to more than 29 square miles and heavy smoke blanketed many cities in Washington
state.

Mandatory evacuations were announced for the fire near Mount Rainier, including
the Crystal Mountain ski resort, which closed Monday because of smoke.

The air quality in Spokane, Wash., was rated as hazardous Tuesday morning. The
National Weather Service says it was likely to get worse as wind shifts bring in
smoke from fires in Canada, Montana, Oregon and Washington.

People in the Spokane region were advised to stay remain indoors.

Air quality alerts were issued for parts of Idaho as well.

In Oregon, people living in about 700 homes in and around the Columbia River
Gorge have been forced to evacuate the area. Others have been warned to get
ready as flames burn trees and brush in one of the state's biggest tourist
attractions.

"The Gorge is our crown jewel and it's our playground - and we're very, very
sad," said Multnomah County Board of Supervisors chairwoman Deborah Kafoury.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  A glowing, orange sun, muted by wildfire smoke, is visible behind the
spire of the Oregon Convention Center in Portland, Ore., Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017.
The dozens of fires burning across the Western United States and Canada have
blanketed the air with choking smoke from Oregon to Colorado, where health
officials issued an air quality advisory alert. (AP Photo/Don Ryan)  The
downtown skyline is visible through hazy smoke from wildfires in Portland, Ore.,
Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017. The dozens of fires burning across the Western United
States and Canada have blanketed the air with choking smoke from Oregon to
Colorado, where health officials issued an air quality advisory alert. (AP
Photo/Don Ryan)  Cars turn around on Interstate 84 as a wildfire fire burns
along the interstate near Weber Canyon, Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017, in Uintah
County, Utah. At least one home went up in smoke and more than 1,000 people were
evacuated as high winds fed the flames that started in a canyon north of Salt
Lake City. (Scott G Winterton/The Deseret News via AP)  A homeowner tries to
douse a wildfire near Weber Canyon, Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017, in Uintah County,
Utah. At least one home went up in smoke and more than 1,000 people were
evacuated as high winds fed the flames that started in a canyon north of Salt
Lake City. (Scott G Winterton/The Deseret News via AP)  Cars turn around on
Interstate 84 as a wildfire fire burns along the interstate near Weber Canyon,
Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017, in Uintah County, Utah. At least one home went up in
smoke and more than 1,000 people were evacuated as high winds fed the flames
that started in a canyon north of Salt Lake City. (Scott G Winterton/The Deseret
News via AP)  A pervasive blanket of smoke has descended on Boise, Idaho,
Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017, forcing air quality in the Treasure Valley to a red
warning. Wildfires burning in western U.S. states sent smoke into cities from
Seattle to Denver, prompting health warnings and cancellations of outdoor
activities for children by many school districts. (Darin Oswald/Idaho Statesman
via AP)  The smoke lies thick across City of Trees looking southeast from the
Boise, Idaho foothills Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017. Wildfires burning in western U.S.
states sent smoke into cities from Seattle to Denver, prompting health warnings
and cancellations of outdoor activities for children by many school districts.
(Darin Oswald/Idaho Statesman via AP)  Smoke from nearby wildfires clouds
Interstate 90 in North Bend, Wash., Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017. The Department of
Defense has agreed to assign 200 active-duty soldiers to help fight a wildfire
in Washington state. Civilian firefighting commanders said Tuesday the soldiers
from Joint Base Lewis McChord, Washington, will undergo four days of training
and then be sent to a complex of 14 wildfires in the Umpqua National Forest that
have burned 47 square miles. (Bettina Hansen/The Seattle Times via AP)  Smoke
invades Boise, Idaho, Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017, forcing air quality in the
Treasure Valley to a red warning. Wildfires burning in western U.S. states sent
smoke into cities from Seattle to Denver, prompting health warnings and
cancellations of outdoor activities for children by many school districts.
(Darin Oswald/Idaho Statesman via AP)  Ash and smoke from wildfires fires
obscure the sun early Tuesday morning, Sept. 5, 2017, in Seattle. The Department
of Defense has agreed to assign 200 active-duty soldiers to help fight a
wildfire in Washington state. Civilian firefighting commanders said Tuesday the
soldiers from Joint Base Lewis McChord, Washington, will undergo four days of
training and then be sent to a complex of 14 wildfires in the Umpqua National
Forest that have burned 47 square miles (Ellen M. BannerThe Seattle Times via
AP)/The Seattle Times via AP)  CORRECTS DATE TO SEPT. 1, 2017 - In an Sept. 1,
2017 photo, Cyd Kats covers her nose and mouth to protect herself from the smoke
as she runs errands in Seeley Lake, Mont., on Friday morning. The Rice Ridge
Fire continues to threaten the town of Seeley Lake as it burns in the Lolo
National Forest. The air quality in Seeley Lake had hourly pollution readings
classified as hazardous in 26 days in August. (Rion Sanders/The Great Falls
Tribune via AP)  CORRECTS DATE TO SEPT. 1, 2017 - In an Sept. 1, 2017 photo,
smoke from the Rice Ridge Fire blankets the town of Seeley Lake, Mont. The
lingering wildfire season and endless smoke has affected the Seeley Lake to such
a degree that Missoula County health officials urged people to leave to escape
the pollution weeks before Tuesday's order to evacuate part of the town due to
the encroaching fire. The air quality in Seeley Lake had hourly pollution
readings classified as hazardous in 26 days in August. (Rion Sanders/The Great
Falls Tribune via AP)  An American kestral takes in the setting sun, made red
from Northwest wildfire smoke, from a power line just outside Walla Walla,
Wash., Monday evening, Sept. 4, 2017. (Greg Lehman/Walla Walla Union-Bulletin
via AP)  Firefighters in Ottumwa had to respond Monday, Sept. 4, 2017, to a
brush fire on Camille Street, a reminder of just how quickly small fires can
become a problem. Wapello County is no longer under a ban on open burning, but
much of the county remains deep in drought. (Matt Milner/The Ottumwa Courier via
AP)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              729 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Abbotsford News

                              July 17, 2017 Monday
                                 Final Edition

$90M spent million fighting B.C. wildfires since April 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 658 words


The province has spent $90 million on fighting 188,928 hectares of wildfires
since April 1.

Chief fire information officer Kevin Skrepnek said 17 of those fires started on
Sunday for a total of 159 currently burning in B.C. Since April 1, there have
been 657 wildfires.

The total of hectares burned has already exceeded the 10-year provincial season
average of 154,000 hectares. With 100,000 hectares burned over the season, 2016
was a 'slow' fire season, Skrepnek said, but noted that 2017 has yet to come
close to the season highs reached over the past decade. In total, 2015 saw
280,000 hectares burned, 2016 saw 369,000 hectares, 2010 saw 337,000 and 2009
saw 247,000 hectares.

RELATED: Mount Polley ceases operations due to wildfires

There are 27 'fires of note' and 15 of the fires are threatening communities.
Almost 3,000 BC Wildfire Service staff are working to fight those fires,
including firefighters, support staff, over 450 out-of-province people, 1,000
forest service contractors."

"On July 19, we are also going to be welcoming 50 personnel from Australia."
said Skrepnek. "These are not frontline firefighting position but specialists
and support staff."

This isn't the first time Australia has helped out with B.C. wildfire fighting
efforts - they previously came up in 2009, 2014 and 2015.

RELATED: Ashcroft Reserve fire an "extremely high priority for the province"

More than 200 aircraft are currently operational in the wildfire, including both
helicopters and airtankers.

"We have made progress at putting some of the smaller fires out," said Skrepnek,
although noted that the number of current burning fires will fluctuate as the BC
Wildfire Service combines fires into complexes.

The fires around Williams Lake have slowed down, he said.

"Certainly the weather on Sunday was quite a bit more mild than what we had been
experiencing Saturday in terms of wind and temperatures," said Skrepnek. The
weather is expected to stay mild on Monday and Tuesday but the interior is
forecasted to see lighting on Wednesday and thundershowers Thursday. Lightning
can be a "double-edged sword," Skrepnek said because while the rain is always
welcome, lighting is a major cause of new wildfires.

twitter.com

Emergency Management BC deputy minister Robert Turner said that there was no
update on the number of evacuees at the moment.

"I can say there has been a huge upsurge in registration with the Canadian Red
Cross," said Turner.

On Sunday, there were approximately 37,000 evacuees across B.C. Evacuees have
begun to show up in the Lower Mainland; currently, there are 616 at the
Cloverdale Arena evacuation centre and 330 people at the Chilliwack Secondary
centre.

LIVE: Wildfire evacuees flow into Cloverdale evacuation centre

Turner confirmed that B.C. residents can refuse to evacuate as long as they are
'competent' adults, following multiple instances of people not leaving
evacuation areas.

"It's not illegal for them to stay," said Turner.

He noted that EMBC is gearing up for a "prolonged" wildfire season and 11
emergency reception centres have been opened to handle the flow of evacuees.

twitter.com

RCMP Sgt. Annie Linteau said that 5,000 officers are helping out with the
wildfire efforts and preparing for evacuation alerts to potentially turn in to
orders.

"In zones where evacuation orders are in effect, we continue to provide 24/7
coverage," said Linteau.

VIDEO: RCMP officers tackle looting in Cariboo wildfire zone

Major fires: Ashcroft Reserve - 52,600 ha. Growth mainly away from Cache Creek
towards Loon Lake Little Fort east - 3,000 ha with 30 per cent containment
Little Fort west - 565 ha with 50 per cent containment White Lake - 8,000 ha,
slight growth in direction of Williams Lake. City not threatened Wildwood
complex - 13,000 ha with 20 per cent containment Gustafsen - 5,700 ha with 25
per cent containment Lake Country - 50.3 hectares with 75 per cent containment

A map of all wildfires in B.C. can be found here.

www.twitter.com

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              730 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 26, 2016 Friday

Increasing size and complexity of wildfires straining Oregon Department of
Forestry

LENGTH: 795  words




 Cheyenne: Tennessee Secretary of State, The State of Wyoming has issued the
following news release:



 ODF fighting bigger fires with same number of staff as 20 years ago



 SALEM - With Oregon's wildfire season in effect across the state, the Secretary
of State's office released an audit today showing that the increasing number and
severity of wildfires in recent years is taxing the Department's other critical
missions and programs. The report details how the agency and legislative leaders
have not yet adjusted management systems and planning to adequately account for
the rapidly growing demand for fire response.  The Secretary of State recommends
improved data collection and personnel planning to help state leaders better
address the changing wildfire landscape.





 "Across western states right now, we see forest fires threatening homes and
destroying valuable timber and wildlife habitat in record numbers," Secretary of
State Jeanne P. Atkins said.  "In the last three years, the damage from
wildfires managed by the state forestry department has increased ten-fold. As
fire seasons lengthen and intensify, ODF needs long-term workforce planning to
address its firefighting and fire-prevention missions, while still maintaining
broader forest management responsibilities. According to our audit, the
Department is fighting more severe fires with about the same full-time
equivalent employees as it had 20 years ago."



 Like other wildfire organizations across the nation, ODF is facing difficult
challenges. Fires have grown in size, complexity, and cost, which demands more
staff resources. Prior to 2013, the seven-year average gross cost to ODF for
suppressing large fires was $9.7 million per year. Since 2013, the average gross
cost has climbed to $92.4 million per year. As of Aug. 22, 547 fires have burned
over 4,302 acres on ODF-protected lands so far this year. ODF's jurisdiction
only covers about half of the state's forest and grasslands, and the
comprehensive costs of wildfires across the state are not covered by this audit.




 "Many ODF employees work long hours away from home during fire season," said
Atkins. "Our audit shows that employees from across the agency move away from
their usual responsibilities and their families to help protect Oregonians
during fire season. It is understandable how other core missions of the agency
could suffer when the priority each summer shifts to fighting raging wildfires
and protecting Oregonians."



 ODF has three operating programs: Fire Protection, State Forests, and Private
Forests. Wildfire mitigation is an important proactive strategy the agency uses
to reduce risks to forests and communities and the audit recommends that it
increases its wildfire mitigation efforts on both public and private lands.
Despite efforts to reduce the risk of fires, Oregon has millions of acres of
land at high risk of wildfires and in need of restoration. Current resources are
unlikely to meet this challenge.



 This increased wildfire risk puts a burden on employees throughout the agency.
The audit released today reports that not only are more permanent employees
across programs participating in fire assignments, but these employees are
working much longer hours. Overtime hours spent on fire protection by permanent
employees has increased 197 percent in recent years.



 Among the steps the auditors recommended to ODF to reduce the impact of forest
fires on personnel and programs:



     Track costs, staffing, funding and workload impacts on programs unrelated
to firefighting to reach and communicate to state leaders a better understanding
of agency operations as a whole.

     Track data on strategies used to detect and prevent wildfires to guide
decision-making and allow prioritization of the most cost-effective and
successful methods.

     Develop a systematic workforce planning strategy to ensure the agency can
meet current and emerging needs.



 "Forests are an important part of our state's economy and cultural identity,"
Atkins said. "A healthy and sustainable forestry department will help ensure a
healthy and sustainable Oregon. More and more severe wildfires are a reality the
agency must take into account as it tries to meet its larger mission."



 Despite efforts to reduce the risk of large wildfires, there are millions of
acres in Oregon at high risk across all ownerships, including federal, state and
private lands. ODF and the Legislature have partnered with federal officials to
mitigate wildfire risk on federal forests, but there are also unmet needs on
state forest land. This could lead to loss in timber revenue, threatened
watersheds, and mounting environmental costs.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolution.com

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              731 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Property and Casualty 360

                               September 14, 2009

Collaboration Required In Battle Against Wildfires

BYLINE: SCOTT SPENCER

SECTION: ISSUES September-14-2009

LENGTH: 963  words


Recent wildfires clearly indicate the need for cooperation among public and
private firefighting services, along with property owners, to avoid and minimize
loss of life and damage to homes and businesses.

The most recent wildfire that began north of Los Angeles, Calif., destroyed over
75 homes and claimed the lives of two firefighters as it spread across more than
250 square miles.

Wildfires are unavoidable-especially in dry, wooded areas of the West-but there
are several steps homeowners can take to help protect their homes and families.
With the hot, dry Santa Ana winds scheduled to make their annual return to
Southern California, it's not too late to take action.

This year, public firefighters have not been working alone in their efforts to
protect homes in California. Several property and casualty insurers have begun
providing wildfire protection services to their customers, and some of these
services have been called into action as growing, fast-spreading flames strain
public resources.

But the burden doesn't, and shouldn't, rest with the firefighters alone.
Homeowners can take measures to prepare for wildfires and help firefighting
services do the best they can to save property.

For example, homeowners can eliminate fuel on their properties by removing brush
and cleaning out leaves from gutters or under the deck. This will decrease the
risk of embers igniting a new blaze.

Experts also recommend families create an evacuation plan that outlines where
they will go and how they will get there in the event a wildfire threatens their
home. They should try to make two escape routes out of the home and
neighborhood, and remember to plan for pets.

If there is an approaching wildfire, firefighting experts from CalFire-the state
firefighting agency-requests that homeowners turn on a light in each room to
increase the home's visibility through thick smoke. (For more information, go to

www.fire.ca.gov

.)

Homeowners should also remove any combustible curtains from the windows and
close all doors and windows-but be sure to leave them unlocked. Also, they
should put any combustible outdoor furniture in a garage or inside the home.

If homeowners do their part to mitigate wildfire damage by staying alert,
evacuating quickly, minimizing combustible fuel for the flames and flying
embers, and keeping their homes visible, public and private firefighters will
have a much easier job both putting out the fire and saving property in the
area.

Some in the public firefighting arena remain skeptical about working alongside
privately funded firefighters during an emergency, and would prefer that private
firefighters be banned from evacuation zones in the event of a fire.

But it's critical to note that private firefighting services, working in
conjunction with public resources, can play an important role in protecting
lives and property.

When fully integrated in the battle against wildfires, private firms can help
ensure the safety of firefighters and homeowners, as well as bring additional
credentialed resources to the response effort at no additional cost to the
public.

At a time when state budgets (particularly in California) are extremely
strained, cost is an important consideration. As of press time, the Los Angeles
County fire had cost the state as much as $45 million, excluding property damage
and the invaluable lives lost to the blaze.

As state and local communities struggle to balance their budgets, some may
consider reducing funds for firefighters. CalFire recently faced an $80 million
cutback that would have resulted in the layoffs of 600 full-time firefighters
and 1,100 seasonal firefighting positions.

While the federal government can offer some fiscal assistance via FEMA, local
publicly funded firefighting agencies are stretched thin by budget cuts, and
they soon may no longer have the manpower or the money to travel statewide to
help fellow departments in need. In the event that public fire departments are
depleted, private resources become even more valuable to homeowners.

An important role that private firefighters play is educating homeowners. When
these entities are not actively protecting homes from encroaching wildfires,
they are available to visit policyholders' homes and help educate them about how
to make their homes more resistant to wildfires.

Most firefighters would agree that homeowners should take more responsibility
for making their homes more fire-resistant, and privately funded firefighting
services can help make this happen.

Firefighting services funded by insurance carriers are not first responders and,
therefore, are not on the scene trying to contain or extinguish a spreading
wildfire. That job is left to the publicly funded firefighting crews.

The primary role of private firefighters is protecting the homes of
policyholders, which can include monitoring the approach of wildfires, creating
defensible space around homes or, as a last resort, spraying a home with
fire-resistant gel to prevent the home from igniting.

But the role they play is an important one, which is why private firefighting
services need to work closely with incident command and get permission to work
within the evacuation zones.

Regardless of how a wildfire was ignited-a lightning strike, a camp fire or
arson-there are important roles for everyone involved that can help mitigate the
loss of lives and property brought on by the raging flames. If homeowners,
public departments and private firefighting services can all work together,
wildfires will take less of a toll on affected residents as well as state and
local budgets.

Scott Spencer

is a senior vice president at Chubb & Son, as well as worldwide appraisal
manager at Chubb Personal Insurance in Whitehouse Station, N.J. He can be
reached at

srspencer@chubb.com

.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2009 The National Underwriter Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              732 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                Forfar Dispatch

                             March 30, 2015 Monday

Scottish fire service wildfire warning as peak risk period approaches

LENGTH: 331  words


The new chairman of the Scottish Wildfire Forum (SWF) is reminding everyone of
their responsibility to protect the countryside and environment from potentially
devastating wildfires. Deputy Assistant Chief Officer (DACO) Andy Coueslant
recently took over the chairmanship of the SWF from Assistant Chief Officer
Robert Scott and he is keen to build on previous work to ensure a continued
reduction in wildfire incidents.

The risk of wildfire is at its highest in the spring and Scottish Fire and
Rescue Service (SFRS) will continue to work with landowners, tourists and
communities to help reduce the number fires in a bid to protect the countryside
and its residents.

The demand on SFRS resources during wildfire season is significant and it is
hoped that raised awareness will help reduce that demand.

There are a number of proactive steps land managers can take to help prevent
wildfires, including strict adherence to the Muirburn Code, which applies to the
controlled burning of heather within the permitted season.

Many wild land fires are started deliberately or are due to careless, reckless
or irresponsible behaviour. Anyone who sees someone acting suspiciously,
recklessly or irresponsibly in the countryside should contact Police Scotland on
101 or pass information anonymously to Scotland Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111.

Mr Coueslant said: "We want people to Join Scotland's Fight Against Fire and we
are urging communities, tourists and visitors to be aware of the heightened risk
of wildfire at this time of year."

SFRS want people to act responsibly in a countryside environment, such as
properly disposing of smoking materials to prevent these fires happening in the
first place. Land managers are also asked not to burn outwith the permitted
season and ensure suitable fire plans are in place during land management
operations.

Further advice about wildfires and what can be done to prevent them is available
online at http://www.firescotland.gov.uk/your-safety/wildfires.aspx

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAFD


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              733 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                               Kirriemuir Herald

                             March 30, 2015 Monday

Scottish fire service wildfire warning as peak risk period approaches

LENGTH: 331  words


The new chairman of the Scottish Wildfire Forum (SWF) is reminding everyone of
their responsibility to protect the countryside and environment from potentially
devastating wildfires. Deputy Assistant Chief Officer (DACO) Andy Coueslant
recently took over the chairmanship of the SWF from Assistant Chief Officer
Robert Scott and he is keen to build on previous work to ensure a continued
reduction in wildfire incidents.

The risk of wildfire is at its highest in the spring and Scottish Fire and
Rescue Service (SFRS) will continue to work with landowners, tourists and
communities to help reduce the number fires in a bid to protect the countryside
and its residents.

The demand on SFRS resources during wildfire season is significant and it is
hoped that raised awareness will help reduce that demand.

There are a number of proactive steps land managers can take to help prevent
wildfires, including strict adherence to the Muirburn Code, which applies to the
controlled burning of heather within the permitted season.

Many wild land fires are started deliberately or are due to careless, reckless
or irresponsible behaviour. Anyone who sees someone acting suspiciously,
recklessly or irresponsibly in the countryside should contact Police Scotland on
101 or pass information anonymously to Scotland Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111.

Mr Coueslant said: "We want people to Join Scotland's Fight Against Fire and we
are urging communities, tourists and visitors to be aware of the heightened risk
of wildfire at this time of year."

SFRS want people to act responsibly in a countryside environment, such as
properly disposing of smoking materials to prevent these fires happening in the
first place. Land managers are also asked not to burn outwith the permitted
season and ensure suitable fire plans are in place during land management
operations.

Further advice about wildfires and what can be done to prevent them is available
online at http://www.firescotland.gov.uk/your-safety/wildfires.aspx

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAKH


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              734 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              India Insurance News

                       March 13, 2015 Friday 6:30 AM EST

Crestbrook Insurance Introduces Wildfire Solutions Program

LENGTH: 273  words


March 13 -- Crestbrook Insurance Company, an affluent market personal lines
carrier, announces the launch of the Crestbrook Wildfire Solution Program in
collaboration with Wildfire Defense Systems (WDS), a leader in insurance
wildfire loss prevention and response.

The Wildfire Solutions program offers Crestbrook's homeowners policyholders
access to a comprehensive risk mitigation and suppression at no additional cost.
Registered policyholders in the states of Arizona, California, Colorado, Texas,
Oregon and Washington are automatically covered in the 2015 program.

Wildfire Solutions program services include:

* On-site risk inspection

* Active fire monitoring

* Real-time policy-in-force reporting

* Agent and client demonstrations and fire education

* Fire patrols

* Pre-coordination with local fire authorities

During a wildfire incident, professional firefighters and dedicated fire engines
from WDS will respond to the policyholder residence on behalf of Crestbrook with
available resources and appropriate services in the area. Defense measures WDS
may provide include:

* Combustible removal

* Vegetative fuel mitigation and fire break construction

* Gel application and rehydrating

* Sprinkler deployment

* Post fire ember/spot fire suppression work

"Crestbrook developed this innovative program because we believe that mitigation
matters and taking action to prepare our clients' homes to withstand wildfires
is critical," says Dan Cuccia, risk solutions executive, Crestbrook Insurance.
"Reducing our clients' exposure to wildfires is one of the many ways we meet
their distinctive coverage and service needs."

Source: Crestbrook Insurance

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2015 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              735 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)

                              June 6, 2000 Tuesday
                                  City Edition

Spring weather puts fire officials on statewide alert

BYLINE: JESSICA FARGEN The Associated Press

SECTION: B; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 450 words


OMAHA -- A lack of snow and rain last fall and winter is responsible for
facilitating nearly 700 wildfires that have burned more than 100,000 acres
across Nebraska so far this year, state fire officials said.

Those fires have put the state on pace to surpass the unusually high number of
acres burned last year, according to the Nebraska Forest Service in Lincoln.

Last year, nearly 1,500 fires burned 186,044 acres in Nebraska. Through April 30
of this year, 697 wildfires had burned 113,803 acres.

With this summer predicted to bring a fire-friendly combination of high heat,
strong winds and sparse rain, fire officials already are looking ahead.

"We've been really worried about the weather conditions this year, so
everybody's got a heightened awareness of the conditions," said state Fire
Marshal Ken Winters.

Nebraska Forest Service fire program leader Don Westover said May and June --
normally laden with rain -- are the least likely months for wildfires, but he
said the potential existed all year long.

"Essentially, Nebraska can get clobbered at anytime of the year because there's
always grass, and as soon as it loses its green, it's ready to burn," Westover
said.

Some climate predictors have said Nebraska is experiencing one of its worst
droughts since such record-keeping began 105 years ago.

Rainfall in the state has totaled 40 percent to 60 percent of normal since
September in most areas. Soil in east-central and southeast Nebraska contains
only about 2 inches of moisture, compared to the normal for this time of year of
about 8 inches.

Westover said the most common wildfire starter is a controlled burn of trash or
fields that gets out of hand. Open burning is banned in Nebraska without a
permit from a local fire chief.

The second most common cause is fires started by equipment such as cars or farm
equipment, Westover said. Lightning and fires started by discarded cigarettes
also are often-cited causes.

Last March, a power surge at a Thedford farmhouse sparked dry grass that burned
about 75,000 acres -- the state's largest wildfire.

"Fire departments are very aware of what happened last year," Winters said.

FOR MORE INFO

On the Net: Nebraska Forest Service: http://www.ianr.unl.edu/nfs/

FIRE DAMAGE THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

The number of wildfires in each of the past 4 years in Nebraska and the amount
of acreage burned, provided by the Nebraska Forest Service. Wildfires are
classified as fires that burn natural land such as grasslands, forests, farm
fields and parks.

1996: 1,430 wildfires burned 60,623 acres

1997: 1,183 wildfires burned 22,557 acres

1998: 796 wildfires burned 34,362 acres

1999: 1,498 wildfires burned 186,044 acres

2000: 697 fires burned 113,803 acres (through April)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2000 Lincoln Journal Star,
                              All Rights Reserved


                              736 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        The East Bay Times (California)

                           September 5, 2017 Tuesday

Firefighters gain ground in Gilroy wildfire, 35 percent contained

BYLINE: Mark Gomez

LENGTH: 372 words



HIGHLIGHT: As of early Tuesday, containment of a vegetation fire burning in west
Gilroy increased from 10 to 35 percent, according to CAL Fire.


GILROY  Firefighters made significant progress overnight Monday containing a
100-acre wildfire that sparked in a gated golf club community.

As of early Tuesday, containment of the Ballybunion Fire jumped from 10 to 35
percent, according to CAL Fire spokeswoman Pam Temmermand.

Wildfires menace Yosemite, Glacier parks

La Tuna wildfire in L.A. County 30 percent contained

Gilroy fire: 10 percent containment on 100-acre wildfire near golf course

La Tuna wildfire  now more than 5,000 acres  largest fire in Los Angeles history

Berkeley, El Cerrito advise extreme caution to prevent fires during hot weekend
No homes or buildings have been threatened by the blaze.

They made good progress last night, Temmermand said Tuesday morning. The cooler
temperatures coming in from the coast helped them out a lot.

Go to our Facebook page for more conversation and news coverage from the Bay
Area and beyond.

The blaze at the Eagle Ridge housing development in west Gilroy was called in at

 7:10 p.m. Sunday and quickly spread, said Mary Gutierrez, a Gilroy Fire
Department division chief.

About 134 firefighters, three helicopters and 24 engines are being used to
battle the blaze, including resources from several other Bay Area fire
departments.

Santa Teresa Boulevard between Miller Avenue and south of Club Drive is open
Tuesday but remains subject to closure between 8:30 a.m.-2 p.m. and after 3:30
p.m. based on the needs of the emergency vehicles, according to Gilroy police.
Residents are discouraged from walking or biking down this stretch of road.

Monday, Gilroy police said: Due to the fire, air quality in Gilroy is very poor.
We recommend residents stay indoors with the doors and windows closed for
safety.

Fire officials do not yet know how the blaze started.

Temmermand said the fire has been difficult to fight because of its location in
extremely rugged, steep terrain of oak woodland and heavy underbrush.

Get top headlines in your inbox every afternoon.Sign up for the free PM Report
newsletter.

On Sunday night, one firefighter lost his footing and fell about 40 feet. He was
taken to St. Louise Regional Hospital for evaluation and was subsequently
released.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              737 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Vernon Morning Star

                            August 3, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Fire prevention urged over long weekend

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 502 words


With B.C. Day around the corner, the provincial government says everyone has a
role to play in helping prevent wildfires.

Given the number of fires currently burning in the province, along with elevated
fire danger ratings and extremely dry conditions in many parts of the province,
the B.C. Wildfire Service is urging residents and visitors to remain vigilant
regarding potential fire dangers.

From April 1 to Aug. 1, the B.C. Wildfire Service responded to 852 wildfires in
B.C., 341 of which were caused by people.

"Human-caused fires - e.g., from improperly extinguished campfires, discarded
cigarettes and sparking vehicles - are completely preventable and unnecessarily
tie up crucial firefighting resources that could be used to deal with naturally
occurring wildfires," states a release.

The B.C. Wildfire Service continues to receive reports of illegal campfires.
Campfires and open fires are banned throughout the province, with the exception
of Haida Gwaii and the west side of Vancouver Island.

"The current open-fire prohibitions do not apply to CSA-rated or ULC-rated
cooking stoves that use gas, propane or briquettes, or to a portable campfire
apparatus that uses briquettes, liquid or gaseous fuel, as long as the height of
the flame is less than 15 centimetres," states the provincial release.

"Local governments may have their own burning restrictions or bylaws in place,
so always check with local authorities before lighting any fire of any size."

The provincial government's natural resource officers and conservation officers
conduct regular patrols throughout B.C., monitoring high-risk activities and
looking out for potential damage. These officers also work closely with B.C.
Wildfire Service staff to investigate the cause of wildfires and any improper
use of fire when an open burning prohibition is in effect.

"Patrols will be stepped up this weekend to educate the public about fire
restrictions and issue violation tickets to people who are not complying with
open burning prohibitions," states the release.

To report a wildfire or open-burning violation, call 1 800 663-5555 toll-free or
*5555 on a cellphone. To report suspicious activities, environmental damage or a
natural-resource violation, call 1 877 952-RAPP (7277) or *7277 on a cellphone.

The B.C. Wildfire Service continues to receive reports of improperly discarded
cigarettes. Smokers must dispose of cigarette butts and other smoking material
responsibly, making sure that these materials are completely extinguished.
Smokers who drop lit or smouldering cigarettes or other items could face a $575
fine under the Wildfire Act.

Anyone found in contravention of an open-burning prohibition may be issued a
violation ticket for $1,150, may be required to pay an administrative penalty of
$10,000 or, if convicted in court, may be fined up to $100,000 and/or sentenced
to one year in jail. If the contravention causes or contributes to a wildfire,
the person responsible may be ordered to pay all firefighting and associated
costs.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              738 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             March 8, 2016 Tuesday

Wildfires big problem this time of year

BYLINE: Eppie Pallangyo, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 385 words


March 08--The St. Joseph Fire Department has responded to several grass and
brush fires in recent weeks.

According to the Missouri Department of Conversation a combination of strong
winds, low humidity, dry conditions and warming temperatures during this time of
year has the potential to cause wildfires.

"Fires peak before spring rains and after crops die out and it starts getting
dry again before winter," said Mike Neylon, chief training officer with the St.
Joseph Fire Department.

This year, the department has responded to nearly 20 wildfires, according to
Neylon.

"About 90 percent or more wildfires are started by careless smoking or by people
burning when they shouldn't be or barbecue grills left unattended," Neylon said.

The Missouri Department of Conversation cites the main cause of wildfires as
improper burning of debris such as trash and brush piles. Neylon said the proper
way to burn outdoors is in a contained environment.

"Have it in a can or some structure similar to a can and be there the whole time
it's burning," Neylon said. "You have to have water, a rag and be able to
extinguish the fire if you need to."

Each year, the Missouri Department of Conservation works with fire departments
throughout the state to extinguish wildfires that can consume thousands of
acres.

"Don't throw out cigarettes when it's this dry and don't throw it out anytime
especially if it's this dry," Neylon said. "It's littering and it can cause a
great deal of damage."

To prevent wildfires The Missouri Department of Conservation recommends avoiding
outdoor burning during times when grasses, brush and other fire fuel are very
dry, humidity is low and the weather is windy. Dry fuel combined with high
temperatures, low humidity and high winds can cause fires to be uncontrollable.

"You can be held liable for any property that you damage if you start a wildfire
, so if it burns down someone's house you would be in fault for some or all of
that," Neylon said.

Parking a car over high grass or tall weeds can cause the catalytic converter to
start a fire, according to Neylon.

For more information visit stjoemo.info or www.mdc.mo.gov

___ (c)2016 the St. Joseph News-Press (St. Joseph, Mo.) Visit the St. Joseph
News-Press (St. Joseph, Mo.) at www.newspressnow.com/index.html Distributed by
Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160308-JM-Wildfires-big-problem-this-time-of-year-0308-20160308

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JM


                      Copyright 2016 St. Joseph News-Press


                              739 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                              July 30, 2017 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Vandals, thieves, ATVers, boaters disrupting efforts to fight wildfires

BYLINE: Nick Eagland, The Province

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 336 words


Frontline workers risking their lives battling wildfires across B.C. are now
adding thieves, vandals and careless outdoor enthusiasts to their list of
problems.

On Saturday, 148 wildfires burned across B.C., while 4,700 people worked with
the B.C. Wildfire Service to control them.

But public interference with these operations has become an increasing concern,
particularly in areas where there have been evacuation alerts, said Kevin
Skrepnek, B.C. Wildfire Service's chief fire information officer.

Skrepnek said there have been multiple incidents in the Cariboo Region of people
accessing areas where crews are fighting fires, including people driving through
these areas on off-road vehicles.

As well, people are accessing areas where there are helicopters operating and
they're using boats in bodies of water and hampering water-skimming aircraft
operations.

Water hoses, pumps and other firefighting equipment have been vandalized or
stolen, Skrepnek added.

"This is not only posing a risk to the members of the public who are doing this,
but also it's potentially impacting our operations and affecting the safety of
our crews as well," he said.

The B.C. Wildfire Service is working closely with the RCMP to combat the
problem, which has been particularly bad in Williams Lake, the Chilcotin Region
and along the Highway 97 corridor.

Skrepnek said RCMP and conservation officers have stepped up patrols in areas
where interference is an issue.

The B.C. Wildfire Act and Wildfire Regulation allows authorities to order people
to leave an affected area. Those caught interfering with firefighting operations
or burning a campfire during a prohibition face fines of $1,150.

"I don't think they're intentionally trying to impede operations," Skrepnek
said. "I think what it could be in many situations is just ignorance of how
large these fires are and how expansive our operations have become in terms of
responding to them."

- With files from The Canadian Press !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network Inc.
All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 The Vancouver Province
                              All Rights Reserved


                              740 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                  MetroNews.ca

                          February 15, 2017 Wednesday

Alberta braces for another wildfire season, a year after Fort McMurray

BYLINE: Matt Kieltyka - Metro

SECTION: METRO NEWS | NEWS | EDMONTON; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 165  words


Less than a year removed from Fort McMurray's "beast", Alberta is bracing itself
for another wildfire season.

The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry released a statement Wednesday
reminding residents that March 1 marks the beginning of this year's wildfire
season.

New penalties are in place this year under changes to the Forest and Prairie
Protection Act but Minister Oneil Carlier still warns people to be vigilant.

"The wildfire that burned into Fort McMurray last year serves as a reminder of
how important it is for us to be ready to respond to wildfires at a moment's
notice," Carlier said in a statement.

Last year, 1,338 wildfires burned more than 611,000 hectares throughout the
province.

That includes the Horse River wildfire (dubbed "The Beast"), which swept into
Fort McMurray last May, destroyed thousands of homes and forced the evacuation
of nearly 90,000 people.

It is believed that fire - like 60 per cent of all wildfires - was human-caused.

-with files from The Canadian Press

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Free Daily News Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              741 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        The Observer (La Grande Oregon)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            August 18, 2016 Thursday

BRIEF: State fire marshal urges vigilance and extreme care against wildfires

BYLINE: The Observer, La Grande, Ore.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 191 words


Aug. 18--With Oregon's hottest temperatures and driest conditions occurring
throughout the next few days, Oregon State Fire Marshal Jim Walker is urging all
residents to take the utmost care and thorough caution to prevent wildfires.

"A majority of this year's wildfires have been human caused," Walker said in a
press release. "This demonstrates that all of us need to take responsibility for
protecting ourselves and our neighbors by preventing wildfires in these extreme
conditions."

The Oregon Department of Forestry has reported that since Jan. 1 , there have
been 466 wildfires caused by humans. And due to the extreme temperatures, much
of Oregon is under a burn ban.

Currently, Oregon has several active wildfires that have put people and homes at
risk, and a number of families have received evacuation warnings.

"Our office is in constant communication with the Oregon Department of Forestry
and our other wildland partners to assist with firefighting efforts if called
upon," Walker said.

___ (c)2016 The Observer (La Grande, Ore.) Visit The Observer (La Grande, Ore.)
at www.lagrandeobserver.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20160818-YL-BRF-State-fire-marshal-urges-vigilance-and-extreme-care-against-
wildfires-0818-20160818

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: YL


                          Copyright 2016 The Observer


                              742 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 8, 2015 Wednesday

NEBRASKA:Community wildfire protection update is complete

LENGTH: 344  words

DATELINE: Lincoln


Office of Forest Service, The state of Nebraska has issued the following news
release:


The new North Central Nebraska Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP) is hot
off the press and will be distributed this month to fire departments, emergency
managers, local, state, and federal government entities, natural resources
agencies and organizations, and others who manage fire and hazardous fuels in
Boyd, Brown, Cherry, Holt, Keya Paha, and Rock Counties. The CWPP updates the
2009 Central Niobrara Watershed Fire Management Plan and adjusts the plan
boundary to coincide with the Region 24 and Holt County Emergency Management
Area boundaries.


The CWPP identifies factors associated with wildfire risk and areas particularly
susceptible to wildfire. It summarizes current protection capabilities, wildfire
response capacity, and infrastructure. An action plan establishes a risk
assessment procedure; summarizes risk reduction practices; makes recommendations
for improving emergency preparedness, education, and training; and outlines
strategies for reducing wildfire hazard through fuels management.
Other information in the CWPP includes fire district maps, historic fire maps,
the most current contact information and equipment lists for fire departments
and the 2015 Emergency Assistance for Wildfire Control quick reference handbook.
The CWPP is intended to be a working document - a handy tool for fire
departments, agencies, emergency managers, public officials, and land managers
to use when addressing wildfire concerns in the six counties.
This has been a team effort. Local emergency planners, fire district personnel,
elected officials, natural resources professionals, and landowners provided
information and planning assistance to guide the preparation of this document.
Having a current CWPP in place allows the Nebraska Forest Service to apply for
funds to cost-share forest fuels reduction treatments in at-risk areas within
the plan boundaries.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:
editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              743 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                The Denver Post

                            June 10, 2015 Wednesday
                              WED REGIONAL Edition

Feds prep for wildfires

BYLINE: Bruce Finley

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 500 words


The Obama administration's top public lands officials Tuesday warned of a
worsening risk of catastrophic wildfires this summer around the West.

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack and Interior Secretary Sally Jewell during a
news conference Tuesday at a wildlife refuge north of Denver urged an overhaul
of how the government pays for firefighting. The costs rise yearly, and the
budget now exceeds $1.5 billion.

For Colorado, an exceptionally rainy May has kept the potential for severe
wildfires below average this month, federal forecasters said. But rapid growth
of grasses and shrubs because of moisture primes forests with fuel for bigger,
fast moving fires starting in July.

The challenge is to get ahead of an escalating long term problem of out of
balance forests and a growing population on land naturally prone to wildfires.
Vilsack, Jewell and Forest Service Chief Tom Tidwell gathered with firefighters
at the Rocky Mountain Arsenal National Wildlife Refuge and focused on a growing
need for forest health work to boost the resilience.

Such forest health work is considered essential because healthy forests burn
less severely and watersheds are at stake. Yet the Forest Service regularly
drains forest health funds to cover the rising costs of firefighting.

The feds are pushing an overhaul that would use a separate disaster fund to
cover costs of the most catastrophic Western wildfires. One percent of the most
severe fires typically eat up 30 percent of the nation's $1.5 billion budget for
suppressing wildfires.

"It is just imperative that Congress fix this problem," Vilsack said. "It has
been frustrating."

Given the trends, if forest health funds continue to be raided, the fires "are
going to get more catastrophic and more expensive," Vilsack said.

Jewell added: "You may end up with soils that turn to glass and nothing will
grow there. ... You will not have sagebrush landscapes. ... We will end up with
unhealthy water supplies. We will end up with erosion. The future of what we
know as the American West is at stake if we don't deal with this."

While the wet spring reduces immediate risks of wildfire around the nation and
all but the western edges of Colorado, federal wildfire outlook specialists say
dangers will rise during peak lightning periods.

"Colorado is really in the bull's eye the latter part of June and July," said
Dick Bahr, deputy director of the Office of Wildland Fire for the U.S.
Department of the Interior. "Colorado is trending toward a normal season, but
you will have more fuel than you normally have.

"With wind and dryness, you could have a fire that advances quicker and may get
larger than what you normally see."

Over the past three decades, wildfire seasons have grown longer by 60 to 80 days
and the frequency of huge catastrophic wildfires has increased.

This year, federal officials said, the Forest Service expects to spend $810
million to $1.62 billion putting out fires.

Bruce Finley: 303 954 1700, bfinley@denverpost.com or twitter.com/finleybruce

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DENVER, CO - JUNE 09: Fire crews from various agencies gathered to
stand behind officials as they spoke during a press conference on wildfires. Top
federal and state officials gathered at Rocky Mountain Arsenal National Wildlife
Refuge north of Denver to prepare for wildfires this summer around the West on
Tuesday, June 9, 2015. (Photo by AAron Ontiveroz/The Denver Post) AAron
Ontiveroz, THE DENVER POST

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2015 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              744 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        The East Bay Times (California)

                            December 5, 2017 Tuesday

Southern California fire forces evacuation of over 400 homes

BYLINE: The Associated Press

LENGTH: 189 words



HIGHLIGHT: Ferocious winds in Southern California made a wildfire explode to
nearly 4 square miles just hours after it broke out and forced the evacuation of
more than 400 homes.


SANTA PAULA  Ferocious winds in Southern California made a wildfire explode to
nearly 4 square miles just hours after it broke out and forced the evacuation of
more than 400 homes.

California congressional delegation requests $4.4 billion in fire relief

After Octobers wildfires, the Wine Country looks ahead

Last of Sonoma County fire victims named by sheriffs office

Wildfires: Utility blocked from charging customers for wildfire costs

Wine Country fire relief: ICC, Patland Vineyards host Campbell event

Ventura County fire officials say the blaze broke out Monday east of Santa
Paula, a city of 30,000 people about 60 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles.

Powerful winds are pushing the blaze west toward the city along Highway 150,
which is shut down.

Thomas Aquinas College, a school with about 350 students, has also been
evacuated.

The National Weather Service says winds of 43 mph with gusts over 60 mph have
been reported in the area and are expected to continue into the night.

There are not yet any reports of structures burning or people injured.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              745 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         The Mercury News (California)

                            December 5, 2017 Tuesday

Southern California fire forces evacuation of over 400 homes

BYLINE: The Associated Press

LENGTH: 189 words



HIGHLIGHT: Ferocious winds in Southern California made a wildfire explode to
nearly 4 square miles just hours after it broke out and forced the evacuation of
more than 400 homes.


SANTA PAULA  Ferocious winds in Southern California made a wildfire explode to
nearly 4 square miles just hours after it broke out and forced the evacuation of
more than 400 homes.

California congressional delegation requests $4.4 billion in fire relief

After Octobers wildfires, the Wine Country looks ahead

Last of Sonoma County fire victims named by sheriffs office

Wildfires: Utility blocked from charging customers for wildfire costs

Wine Country fire relief: ICC, Patland Vineyards host Campbell event

Ventura County fire officials say the blaze broke out Monday east of Santa
Paula, a city of 30,000 people about 60 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles.

Powerful winds are pushing the blaze west toward the city along Highway 150,
which is shut down.

Thomas Aquinas College, a school with about 350 students, has also been
evacuated.

The National Weather Service says winds of 43 mph with gusts over 60 mph have
been reported in the area and are expected to continue into the night.

There are not yet any reports of structures burning or people injured.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              746 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     Marin Independent Journal (California)

                            October 20, 2017 Friday

Bipartisan Senate bill aims to prevent wildfires

BYLINE: Matthew Daly; The Associated Press

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 520 words

ABSTRACT

As wildfires rage across California and the West, a bipartisan group of senators
is seeking to help rural communities better prepare for and prevent catastrophic
wildfires

FULL TEXT

WASHINGTON >> As wildfires rage across California and the West, Democratic and
Republican senators have joined forces to help rural communities better prepare
for and prevent catastrophic wildfires.

A bill introduced Thursday by senators from three Northwestern states would
authorize more than $100 million to help at-risk communities prevent wildfires
and create a pilot program to cut down trees in the most fire-prone areas.

Under a streamlined approval process, forest managers would "thin" pine forests
near populated areas and do controlled burns in remote regions. The bill also
calls for detailed reviews of any wildfire that burns over 100,000 acres.

Sen. Maria Cantwell of Washington state said the bill would "create new tools to
reduce fire risk and help better protect our communities," especially those in
the Northwest near fire-prone pine forests.

Cantwell, top Democrat on the Energy and Natural Resources Committee,
co-sponsored the bill with Democrats Patty Murray of Washington state, Ron Wyden
of Oregon and Republicans Jim Risch and Mike Crapo of Idaho.

Risch, who also serves on the natural resources panel, said the nation needs to
"actively manage our forests to reduce the fuel available for fires to burn."

The bipartisan bill is a compromise between Republicans eager to make it easier
for federal land managers to thin overgrown woodlands and Democrats dubious of
allowing timber companies greater access to harvest federally owned forests.

The bill comes as lawmakers from both parties push to rework a federal funding
formula that makes it hard for officials to budget for extreme wildfire seasons
such as the one ravaging the West this year. The formula ties spending to a
10-year average for wildfires even as fires burn longer and hotter each year and
forces officials to tap money meant for prevention programs to fight wildfires.

Western lawmakers are seeking to ensure that Congress includes a fix to the
"fire borrowing" problem in disaster-aid legislation being considered in the
wake of Hurricanes Harvey, Irma and Maria.

"Congress must continue to pursue efforts aimed at reducing the risk and
severity of wildfires and end the 'fire borrowing' that takes funds from other
Forest Service maintenance priorities," Crapo said.

The bipartisan forest-management bill won praise from a range of timber
industry, firefighting and conservation groups.

Collin O'Mara, president and CEO of the National Wildlife Federation, said the
bill "will improve forest health and mitigate fire risks."

Travis Joseph, president of the American Forest Resource Council, a timber
industry group, called the bill "a thoughtful response to our nation's public
forest health crisis."

Thomas Jenkins, fire chief in Rogers, Arkansas, and chairman of the
International Association of Fire Chiefs, said the bill would provide needed
resources to protect at-risk communities and assist federal agencies develop
preparedness programs.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


    Copyright 2017 Marin Independent Journal, a MediaNews Group publication
                              All Rights Reserved


                              747 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Idaho Falls Post Register

                             July 25, 2017 Tuesday

Learning to live with wildfires: how communities can become 'fire-adapted'

BYLINE: SUSAN J. PRICHARD, Writer

LENGTH: 1622 words

DATELINE: Idaho Falls, ID



EDITOR'S NOTE: This article was originally published on The Conversation, an
independent and nonprofit source of news, analysis and commentary from academic
experts. Read the original article at http://bit.ly/2tnqdjA.

In recent years wildfire seasons in the western United States have become so
intense that many of us who make our home in dry, fire-prone areas are grappling
with how to live with fire.

When I moved to a small town in eastern Washington in 2004, I thought I was
prepared for the reality of wildfires. As a fire ecologist, I had studied
climate change and knew the predictions of hotter, drier and longer fire
seasons.

But the severity and massive size of recent wildfires in our area have
highlighted the importance of making our communities more resilient to fire.

In addition to better preparing for the inevitability of fire, my research and
related studies have shown that prescribed burns and proactive thinning can make
our neighboring forests less susceptible to large fire events.

A history of frequent fire

The valley where I live in eastern Washington is so special that I hesitate to
share its name. In spite of record-breaking wildfire seasons in recent years,
many people are still moving here to build cabins in the woods.

The Methow Valley is stunningly beautiful, with shrub steppe and ponderosa pine
lowlands grading into mixed conifer forests at higher elevations, topped by high
mountain peaks. Our valley was named by Native Americans for the balsamroot
sunflower blossoms that wash the springtime hillsides in brilliant gold.

The native plants here depend on fire for growing space and regeneration. The
arrowleaf balsamroot, for example, is deeply rooted and easily resprouts
following fire. Ponderosa pine trees have thick, deeply grooved bark, and can
shed their lower branches. If surface fires burn them, thick bark insulates
their living tissue, and the lack of lower branches can prevent fires from
spreading to crowns.

Historically, most semi-arid landscapes of western North America evolved with
frequent fire. Ever-changing patterns of forest and rangeland vegetation were
created by past burns. Grasslands, shrublands, open-grown and closed-canopy
forests were all part of the patchwork.

Prior wildfire patterns constrained future fire spread through a mosaic of
forest and nonforest vegetation that, in general, did not let fire burn
contagiously across vast areas. While fires burned frequently, they were small
to medium in size. Large fires, those of more than 10,000 acres, were infrequent
by comparison and occurred during prolonged droughts, often under hot and windy
conditions.

Today, in the absence of frequent fire, the same semi-arid landscapes have much
more continuous forest cover. And fires, when they do burn, tend to be larger
and more severe. My community lived through two such fire events in the past two
summers.

How the forests has changed

Despite recent wildfires, semi-arid forests in my valley and across the inland
West are still under a chronic fire deficit, resulting from a variety of
historical factors. Fire suppression, displacement of native people, railroad
and road building, and livestock grazing all contributed to the lack of fire.

It is difficult to convey how excluding fires from forests can so radically
change them. Imagine if we replaced days of rain and snow with sunshine: the
absence of precipitation would quickly shift all existing vegetation to sparse
desert. Similarly, the near absence of fire over the past century has
dramatically altered semi-arid landscapes, gradually replacing varied burn
mosaics, characterized by forests of varying ages, shrublands and grasslands,
with dense, multi-layered forests.

Markedly different wildfire behavior accompanies these changes. Wildfires are
now able to contagiously burn vast areas of flammable vegetation, and severe
fires, including crown fires that consume forest canopies, are increasingly
common.

A rapidly warming climate is also contributing to large and severe wildfires.

It was after an early and dry spring in 2006 that the largest wildfire in 50
years, the Tripod Complex fire, raged north of our small town of Winthrop,
Washington.

I remember watching it start - awestruck by the smoke plume, which resembled the
aftermath of a bomb explosion. As the plume collapsed and smoke settled into our
valley, the reality of living through a major wildfire sunk in. I wasn't
prepared for this kind of fire. None of us was.

Eight years later, the 2014 Carlton Complex fire burned down our valley, and in
two days became the largest wildfire in state history. Lightning strikes had
started many small fires, and when high winds arrived on July 17, fire starts
exploded into fire storms, coalescing to burn over 160,000 acres and traveling
nearly 40 miles in just nine hours.

If you asked anyone in our valley who lived through the Carlton Complex fires,
you would need to prepare for a long story. Evacuations of everyone downwind of
the fires. Night skies filled with ember showers. A total of 310 homes
destroyed. Loss of pets and livestock. Properties so blackened and charred that
owners chose to move. Wide-ranging opinions about firefighter responses, from
profound gratitude to what might have been done. Massive flood and mudslide
events that followed. Heroic acts of tight-knit neighborhoods and communities as
we pulled together and helped each other recover and rebuild.

Recovery had just begun when the 2015 wildfire season struck. Drought continued
across the region and set the stage for a second, fire-filled summer. In
mid-July, lightning storms ignited the Okanogan Complex, the latest
record-holding wildfire in state history. One hundred and twenty homes were
destroyed, many in neighboring communities to the north and south. In our
valley, three firefighters lost their lives, and a fourth was badly burned.
After all that we have been through, the loss and injury of these young people
is the most devastating.

Evidence for thinning and prescribed burns

As we face another dry summer, our community is coming to terms with the
continuing reality of wildfires. By my estimate, since 1990 over one-third of
our watershed has burned. We are beginning to discuss what it means to be
fire-adapted: making our homes less penetrable to burning embers, reducing fuels
and thinning vegetation around our properties, and choosing better places to
live and build. We can also create safe access for firefighters, plan emergency
evacuation routes, and manage dry forests to be more resilient.

After decades of fire exclusion, dense and dry forests with heavy accumulations
of fuel and understory vegetation often need to be treated with a combination of
thinning and prescribed burning. Restoring landscape patterns will take time and
careful management to mitigate how future wildfires burn across landscapes.

From our research, we know that fuel reduction in dry forests can mitigate the
effects of wildfires. After the 2006 Tripod fires, we studied how past forest
thinning and prescribed burning treatments influenced subsequent wildfire
severity. We found that tree mortality was high in untreated or recently thinned
forests, but lower in forests that had been recently thinned and prescribed
burned. Our results, along with other studies in the western United States,
provide compelling evidence that thinning, in combination with prescribed
burning, can make forests more resilient.

On average, one-quarter of mature trees died in thinned and prescribed burned
forests compared to 60-65 percent of trees in untreated or thinned forests. In a
driving tour of the Tripod burn post-wildfire, areas that were prescribed burned
are generally green islands amidst a gray sea of standing dead trees.

In ongoing research, we hope to learn how restoration treatments can be
strategically placed to create more fire-resistant landscapes.

Self-regulating?

Wildfires also have a critical role in restoration. The 2014 Carlton and 2015
Okanogan Complex fires burned the borders of the Tripod fire and of other recent
wildfires, but sparse fuels on the margins of these prior burned areas did not
support fire spread.

As more fires burn across dry forests, they are creating vast puzzle-piece
mosaics, and in time may become more self-regulating - limiting the size and
spread of subsequent fires.

However, the imprints of recent fires are large, and it will take many small to
medium wildfires to restore the diverse mosaic these landscapes need and once
supported. Managing naturally ignited wildfires that burn in the late season or
under favorable weather conditions, in combination with prescribed burning, will
be essential to restore self-regulating landscapes.

Recent summers have taught us that we can't permanently exclude fire from our
valley or other fire-prone areas. This is difficult to accept for a community so
recently devastated by fire and sick of the smoke that comes with it. However,
summers are getting hotter and drier, and more wildfires are on the way. We have
to adapt the way we live with fire and learn ways to promote resilience - within
our homes, communities and neighboring forests.

Native peoples, less than 150 years ago, proactively burned the landscapes we
currently inhabit - for personal safety, food production and enhanced forage for
deer and elk. In some places, people still maintain and use traditional fire
knowledge. As we too learn to be more fire-adapted, we need to embrace fire not
only as an ongoing problem but an essential part of the solution.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 The Post Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              748 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Idaho Falls Post Register

                             July 25, 2017 Tuesday

Learning to live with wildfires: how communities can become 'fire-adapted'

BYLINE: SUSAN J. PRICHARD, Writer

LENGTH: 1622 words

DATELINE: Idaho Falls, ID



EDITOR'S NOTE: This article was originally published on The Conversation, an
independent and nonprofit source of news, analysis and commentary from academic
experts. Read the original article at http://bit.ly/2tnqdjA.

In recent years wildfire seasons in the western United States have become so
intense that many of us who make our home in dry, fire-prone areas are grappling
with how to live with fire.

When I moved to a small town in eastern Washington in 2004, I thought I was
prepared for the reality of wildfires. As a fire ecologist, I had studied
climate change and knew the predictions of hotter, drier and longer fire
seasons.

But the severity and massive size of recent wildfires in our area have
highlighted the importance of making our communities more resilient to fire.

In addition to better preparing for the inevitability of fire, my research and
related studies have shown that prescribed burns and proactive thinning can make
our neighboring forests less susceptible to large fire events.

A history of frequent fire

The valley where I live in eastern Washington is so special that I hesitate to
share its name. In spite of record-breaking wildfire seasons in recent years,
many people are still moving here to build cabins in the woods.

The Methow Valley is stunningly beautiful, with shrub steppe and ponderosa pine
lowlands grading into mixed conifer forests at higher elevations, topped by high
mountain peaks. Our valley was named by Native Americans for the balsamroot
sunflower blossoms that wash the springtime hillsides in brilliant gold.

The native plants here depend on fire for growing space and regeneration. The
arrowleaf balsamroot, for example, is deeply rooted and easily resprouts
following fire. Ponderosa pine trees have thick, deeply grooved bark, and can
shed their lower branches. If surface fires burn them, thick bark insulates
their living tissue, and the lack of lower branches can prevent fires from
spreading to crowns.

Historically, most semi-arid landscapes of western North America evolved with
frequent fire. Ever-changing patterns of forest and rangeland vegetation were
created by past burns. Grasslands, shrublands, open-grown and closed-canopy
forests were all part of the patchwork.

Prior wildfire patterns constrained future fire spread through a mosaic of
forest and nonforest vegetation that, in general, did not let fire burn
contagiously across vast areas. While fires burned frequently, they were small
to medium in size. Large fires, those of more than 10,000 acres, were infrequent
by comparison and occurred during prolonged droughts, often under hot and windy
conditions.

Today, in the absence of frequent fire, the same semi-arid landscapes have much
more continuous forest cover. And fires, when they do burn, tend to be larger
and more severe. My community lived through two such fire events in the past two
summers.

How the forests has changed

Despite recent wildfires, semi-arid forests in my valley and across the inland
West are still under a chronic fire deficit, resulting from a variety of
historical factors. Fire suppression, displacement of native people, railroad
and road building, and livestock grazing all contributed to the lack of fire.

It is difficult to convey how excluding fires from forests can so radically
change them. Imagine if we replaced days of rain and snow with sunshine: the
absence of precipitation would quickly shift all existing vegetation to sparse
desert. Similarly, the near absence of fire over the past century has
dramatically altered semi-arid landscapes, gradually replacing varied burn
mosaics, characterized by forests of varying ages, shrublands and grasslands,
with dense, multi-layered forests.

Markedly different wildfire behavior accompanies these changes. Wildfires are
now able to contagiously burn vast areas of flammable vegetation, and severe
fires, including crown fires that consume forest canopies, are increasingly
common.

A rapidly warming climate is also contributing to large and severe wildfires.

It was after an early and dry spring in 2006 that the largest wildfire in 50
years, the Tripod Complex fire, raged north of our small town of Winthrop,
Washington.

I remember watching it start - awestruck by the smoke plume, which resembled the
aftermath of a bomb explosion. As the plume collapsed and smoke settled into our
valley, the reality of living through a major wildfire sunk in. I wasn't
prepared for this kind of fire. None of us was.

Eight years later, the 2014 Carlton Complex fire burned down our valley, and in
two days became the largest wildfire in state history. Lightning strikes had
started many small fires, and when high winds arrived on July 17, fire starts
exploded into fire storms, coalescing to burn over 160,000 acres and traveling
nearly 40 miles in just nine hours.

If you asked anyone in our valley who lived through the Carlton Complex fires,
you would need to prepare for a long story. Evacuations of everyone downwind of
the fires. Night skies filled with ember showers. A total of 310 homes
destroyed. Loss of pets and livestock. Properties so blackened and charred that
owners chose to move. Wide-ranging opinions about firefighter responses, from
profound gratitude to what might have been done. Massive flood and mudslide
events that followed. Heroic acts of tight-knit neighborhoods and communities as
we pulled together and helped each other recover and rebuild.

Recovery had just begun when the 2015 wildfire season struck. Drought continued
across the region and set the stage for a second, fire-filled summer. In
mid-July, lightning storms ignited the Okanogan Complex, the latest
record-holding wildfire in state history. One hundred and twenty homes were
destroyed, many in neighboring communities to the north and south. In our
valley, three firefighters lost their lives, and a fourth was badly burned.
After all that we have been through, the loss and injury of these young people
is the most devastating.

Evidence for thinning and prescribed burns

As we face another dry summer, our community is coming to terms with the
continuing reality of wildfires. By my estimate, since 1990 over one-third of
our watershed has burned. We are beginning to discuss what it means to be
fire-adapted: making our homes less penetrable to burning embers, reducing fuels
and thinning vegetation around our properties, and choosing better places to
live and build. We can also create safe access for firefighters, plan emergency
evacuation routes, and manage dry forests to be more resilient.

After decades of fire exclusion, dense and dry forests with heavy accumulations
of fuel and understory vegetation often need to be treated with a combination of
thinning and prescribed burning. Restoring landscape patterns will take time and
careful management to mitigate how future wildfires burn across landscapes.

From our research, we know that fuel reduction in dry forests can mitigate the
effects of wildfires. After the 2006 Tripod fires, we studied how past forest
thinning and prescribed burning treatments influenced subsequent wildfire
severity. We found that tree mortality was high in untreated or recently thinned
forests, but lower in forests that had been recently thinned and prescribed
burned. Our results, along with other studies in the western United States,
provide compelling evidence that thinning, in combination with prescribed
burning, can make forests more resilient.

On average, one-quarter of mature trees died in thinned and prescribed burned
forests compared to 60-65 percent of trees in untreated or thinned forests. In a
driving tour of the Tripod burn post-wildfire, areas that were prescribed burned
are generally green islands amidst a gray sea of standing dead trees.

In ongoing research, we hope to learn how restoration treatments can be
strategically placed to create more fire-resistant landscapes.

Self-regulating?

Wildfires also have a critical role in restoration. The 2014 Carlton and 2015
Okanogan Complex fires burned the borders of the Tripod fire and of other recent
wildfires, but sparse fuels on the margins of these prior burned areas did not
support fire spread.

As more fires burn across dry forests, they are creating vast puzzle-piece
mosaics, and in time may become more self-regulating - limiting the size and
spread of subsequent fires.

However, the imprints of recent fires are large, and it will take many small to
medium wildfires to restore the diverse mosaic these landscapes need and once
supported. Managing naturally ignited wildfires that burn in the late season or
under favorable weather conditions, in combination with prescribed burning, will
be essential to restore self-regulating landscapes.

Recent summers have taught us that we can't permanently exclude fire from our
valley or other fire-prone areas. This is difficult to accept for a community so
recently devastated by fire and sick of the smoke that comes with it. However,
summers are getting hotter and drier, and more wildfires are on the way. We have
to adapt the way we live with fire and learn ways to promote resilience - within
our homes, communities and neighboring forests.

Native peoples, less than 150 years ago, proactively burned the landscapes we
currently inhabit - for personal safety, food production and enhanced forage for
deer and elk. In some places, people still maintain and use traditional fire
knowledge. As we too learn to be more fire-adapted, we need to embrace fire not
only as an ongoing problem but an essential part of the solution.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 The Post Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              749 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Idaho Falls Post Register

                             July 25, 2017 Tuesday

Learning to live with wildfires: how communities can become 'fire-adapted'

BYLINE: SUSAN J. PRICHARD, Writer

LENGTH: 1622 words

DATELINE: Idaho Falls, ID



EDITOR'S NOTE: This article was originally published on The Conversation, an
independent and nonprofit source of news, analysis and commentary from academic
experts. Read the original article at http://bit.ly/2tnqdjA.

In recent years wildfire seasons in the western United States have become so
intense that many of us who make our home in dry, fire-prone areas are grappling
with how to live with fire.

When I moved to a small town in eastern Washington in 2004, I thought I was
prepared for the reality of wildfires. As a fire ecologist, I had studied
climate change and knew the predictions of hotter, drier and longer fire
seasons.

But the severity and massive size of recent wildfires in our area have
highlighted the importance of making our communities more resilient to fire.

In addition to better preparing for the inevitability of fire, my research and
related studies have shown that prescribed burns and proactive thinning can make
our neighboring forests less susceptible to large fire events.

A history of frequent fire

The valley where I live in eastern Washington is so special that I hesitate to
share its name. In spite of record-breaking wildfire seasons in recent years,
many people are still moving here to build cabins in the woods.

The Methow Valley is stunningly beautiful, with shrub steppe and ponderosa pine
lowlands grading into mixed conifer forests at higher elevations, topped by high
mountain peaks. Our valley was named by Native Americans for the balsamroot
sunflower blossoms that wash the springtime hillsides in brilliant gold.

The native plants here depend on fire for growing space and regeneration. The
arrowleaf balsamroot, for example, is deeply rooted and easily resprouts
following fire. Ponderosa pine trees have thick, deeply grooved bark, and can
shed their lower branches. If surface fires burn them, thick bark insulates
their living tissue, and the lack of lower branches can prevent fires from
spreading to crowns.

Historically, most semi-arid landscapes of western North America evolved with
frequent fire. Ever-changing patterns of forest and rangeland vegetation were
created by past burns. Grasslands, shrublands, open-grown and closed-canopy
forests were all part of the patchwork.

Prior wildfire patterns constrained future fire spread through a mosaic of
forest and nonforest vegetation that, in general, did not let fire burn
contagiously across vast areas. While fires burned frequently, they were small
to medium in size. Large fires, those of more than 10,000 acres, were infrequent
by comparison and occurred during prolonged droughts, often under hot and windy
conditions.

Today, in the absence of frequent fire, the same semi-arid landscapes have much
more continuous forest cover. And fires, when they do burn, tend to be larger
and more severe. My community lived through two such fire events in the past two
summers.

How the forests has changed

Despite recent wildfires, semi-arid forests in my valley and across the inland
West are still under a chronic fire deficit, resulting from a variety of
historical factors. Fire suppression, displacement of native people, railroad
and road building, and livestock grazing all contributed to the lack of fire.

It is difficult to convey how excluding fires from forests can so radically
change them. Imagine if we replaced days of rain and snow with sunshine: the
absence of precipitation would quickly shift all existing vegetation to sparse
desert. Similarly, the near absence of fire over the past century has
dramatically altered semi-arid landscapes, gradually replacing varied burn
mosaics, characterized by forests of varying ages, shrublands and grasslands,
with dense, multi-layered forests.

Markedly different wildfire behavior accompanies these changes. Wildfires are
now able to contagiously burn vast areas of flammable vegetation, and severe
fires, including crown fires that consume forest canopies, are increasingly
common.

A rapidly warming climate is also contributing to large and severe wildfires.

It was after an early and dry spring in 2006 that the largest wildfire in 50
years, the Tripod Complex fire, raged north of our small town of Winthrop,
Washington.

I remember watching it start - awestruck by the smoke plume, which resembled the
aftermath of a bomb explosion. As the plume collapsed and smoke settled into our
valley, the reality of living through a major wildfire sunk in. I wasn't
prepared for this kind of fire. None of us was.

Eight years later, the 2014 Carlton Complex fire burned down our valley, and in
two days became the largest wildfire in state history. Lightning strikes had
started many small fires, and when high winds arrived on July 17, fire starts
exploded into fire storms, coalescing to burn over 160,000 acres and traveling
nearly 40 miles in just nine hours.

If you asked anyone in our valley who lived through the Carlton Complex fires,
you would need to prepare for a long story. Evacuations of everyone downwind of
the fires. Night skies filled with ember showers. A total of 310 homes
destroyed. Loss of pets and livestock. Properties so blackened and charred that
owners chose to move. Wide-ranging opinions about firefighter responses, from
profound gratitude to what might have been done. Massive flood and mudslide
events that followed. Heroic acts of tight-knit neighborhoods and communities as
we pulled together and helped each other recover and rebuild.

Recovery had just begun when the 2015 wildfire season struck. Drought continued
across the region and set the stage for a second, fire-filled summer. In
mid-July, lightning storms ignited the Okanogan Complex, the latest
record-holding wildfire in state history. One hundred and twenty homes were
destroyed, many in neighboring communities to the north and south. In our
valley, three firefighters lost their lives, and a fourth was badly burned.
After all that we have been through, the loss and injury of these young people
is the most devastating.

Evidence for thinning and prescribed burns

As we face another dry summer, our community is coming to terms with the
continuing reality of wildfires. By my estimate, since 1990 over one-third of
our watershed has burned. We are beginning to discuss what it means to be
fire-adapted: making our homes less penetrable to burning embers, reducing fuels
and thinning vegetation around our properties, and choosing better places to
live and build. We can also create safe access for firefighters, plan emergency
evacuation routes, and manage dry forests to be more resilient.

After decades of fire exclusion, dense and dry forests with heavy accumulations
of fuel and understory vegetation often need to be treated with a combination of
thinning and prescribed burning. Restoring landscape patterns will take time and
careful management to mitigate how future wildfires burn across landscapes.

From our research, we know that fuel reduction in dry forests can mitigate the
effects of wildfires. After the 2006 Tripod fires, we studied how past forest
thinning and prescribed burning treatments influenced subsequent wildfire
severity. We found that tree mortality was high in untreated or recently thinned
forests, but lower in forests that had been recently thinned and prescribed
burned. Our results, along with other studies in the western United States,
provide compelling evidence that thinning, in combination with prescribed
burning, can make forests more resilient.

On average, one-quarter of mature trees died in thinned and prescribed burned
forests compared to 60-65 percent of trees in untreated or thinned forests. In a
driving tour of the Tripod burn post-wildfire, areas that were prescribed burned
are generally green islands amidst a gray sea of standing dead trees.

In ongoing research, we hope to learn how restoration treatments can be
strategically placed to create more fire-resistant landscapes.

Self-regulating?

Wildfires also have a critical role in restoration. The 2014 Carlton and 2015
Okanogan Complex fires burned the borders of the Tripod fire and of other recent
wildfires, but sparse fuels on the margins of these prior burned areas did not
support fire spread.

As more fires burn across dry forests, they are creating vast puzzle-piece
mosaics, and in time may become more self-regulating - limiting the size and
spread of subsequent fires.

However, the imprints of recent fires are large, and it will take many small to
medium wildfires to restore the diverse mosaic these landscapes need and once
supported. Managing naturally ignited wildfires that burn in the late season or
under favorable weather conditions, in combination with prescribed burning, will
be essential to restore self-regulating landscapes.

Recent summers have taught us that we can't permanently exclude fire from our
valley or other fire-prone areas. This is difficult to accept for a community so
recently devastated by fire and sick of the smoke that comes with it. However,
summers are getting hotter and drier, and more wildfires are on the way. We have
to adapt the way we live with fire and learn ways to promote resilience - within
our homes, communities and neighboring forests.

Native peoples, less than 150 years ago, proactively burned the landscapes we
currently inhabit - for personal safety, food production and enhanced forage for
deer and elk. In some places, people still maintain and use traditional fire
knowledge. As we too learn to be more fire-adapted, we need to embrace fire not
only as an ongoing problem but an essential part of the solution.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 The Post Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              750 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Idaho Falls Post Register

                             July 25, 2017 Tuesday

Learning to live with wildfires: how communities can become 'fire-adapted'

BYLINE: SUSAN J. PRICHARD, Writer

LENGTH: 1622 words

DATELINE: Idaho Falls, ID



EDITOR'S NOTE: This article was originally published on The Conversation, an
independent and nonprofit source of news, analysis and commentary from academic
experts. Read the original article at http://bit.ly/2tnqdjA.

In recent years wildfire seasons in the western United States have become so
intense that many of us who make our home in dry, fire-prone areas are grappling
with how to live with fire.

When I moved to a small town in eastern Washington in 2004, I thought I was
prepared for the reality of wildfires. As a fire ecologist, I had studied
climate change and knew the predictions of hotter, drier and longer fire
seasons.

But the severity and massive size of recent wildfires in our area have
highlighted the importance of making our communities more resilient to fire.

In addition to better preparing for the inevitability of fire, my research and
related studies have shown that prescribed burns and proactive thinning can make
our neighboring forests less susceptible to large fire events.

A history of frequent fire

The valley where I live in eastern Washington is so special that I hesitate to
share its name. In spite of record-breaking wildfire seasons in recent years,
many people are still moving here to build cabins in the woods.

The Methow Valley is stunningly beautiful, with shrub steppe and ponderosa pine
lowlands grading into mixed conifer forests at higher elevations, topped by high
mountain peaks. Our valley was named by Native Americans for the balsamroot
sunflower blossoms that wash the springtime hillsides in brilliant gold.

The native plants here depend on fire for growing space and regeneration. The
arrowleaf balsamroot, for example, is deeply rooted and easily resprouts
following fire. Ponderosa pine trees have thick, deeply grooved bark, and can
shed their lower branches. If surface fires burn them, thick bark insulates
their living tissue, and the lack of lower branches can prevent fires from
spreading to crowns.

Historically, most semi-arid landscapes of western North America evolved with
frequent fire. Ever-changing patterns of forest and rangeland vegetation were
created by past burns. Grasslands, shrublands, open-grown and closed-canopy
forests were all part of the patchwork.

Prior wildfire patterns constrained future fire spread through a mosaic of
forest and nonforest vegetation that, in general, did not let fire burn
contagiously across vast areas. While fires burned frequently, they were small
to medium in size. Large fires, those of more than 10,000 acres, were infrequent
by comparison and occurred during prolonged droughts, often under hot and windy
conditions.

Today, in the absence of frequent fire, the same semi-arid landscapes have much
more continuous forest cover. And fires, when they do burn, tend to be larger
and more severe. My community lived through two such fire events in the past two
summers.

How the forests has changed

Despite recent wildfires, semi-arid forests in my valley and across the inland
West are still under a chronic fire deficit, resulting from a variety of
historical factors. Fire suppression, displacement of native people, railroad
and road building, and livestock grazing all contributed to the lack of fire.

It is difficult to convey how excluding fires from forests can so radically
change them. Imagine if we replaced days of rain and snow with sunshine: the
absence of precipitation would quickly shift all existing vegetation to sparse
desert. Similarly, the near absence of fire over the past century has
dramatically altered semi-arid landscapes, gradually replacing varied burn
mosaics, characterized by forests of varying ages, shrublands and grasslands,
with dense, multi-layered forests.

Markedly different wildfire behavior accompanies these changes. Wildfires are
now able to contagiously burn vast areas of flammable vegetation, and severe
fires, including crown fires that consume forest canopies, are increasingly
common.

A rapidly warming climate is also contributing to large and severe wildfires.

It was after an early and dry spring in 2006 that the largest wildfire in 50
years, the Tripod Complex fire, raged north of our small town of Winthrop,
Washington.

I remember watching it start - awestruck by the smoke plume, which resembled the
aftermath of a bomb explosion. As the plume collapsed and smoke settled into our
valley, the reality of living through a major wildfire sunk in. I wasn't
prepared for this kind of fire. None of us was.

Eight years later, the 2014 Carlton Complex fire burned down our valley, and in
two days became the largest wildfire in state history. Lightning strikes had
started many small fires, and when high winds arrived on July 17, fire starts
exploded into fire storms, coalescing to burn over 160,000 acres and traveling
nearly 40 miles in just nine hours.

If you asked anyone in our valley who lived through the Carlton Complex fires,
you would need to prepare for a long story. Evacuations of everyone downwind of
the fires. Night skies filled with ember showers. A total of 310 homes
destroyed. Loss of pets and livestock. Properties so blackened and charred that
owners chose to move. Wide-ranging opinions about firefighter responses, from
profound gratitude to what might have been done. Massive flood and mudslide
events that followed. Heroic acts of tight-knit neighborhoods and communities as
we pulled together and helped each other recover and rebuild.

Recovery had just begun when the 2015 wildfire season struck. Drought continued
across the region and set the stage for a second, fire-filled summer. In
mid-July, lightning storms ignited the Okanogan Complex, the latest
record-holding wildfire in state history. One hundred and twenty homes were
destroyed, many in neighboring communities to the north and south. In our
valley, three firefighters lost their lives, and a fourth was badly burned.
After all that we have been through, the loss and injury of these young people
is the most devastating.

Evidence for thinning and prescribed burns

As we face another dry summer, our community is coming to terms with the
continuing reality of wildfires. By my estimate, since 1990 over one-third of
our watershed has burned. We are beginning to discuss what it means to be
fire-adapted: making our homes less penetrable to burning embers, reducing fuels
and thinning vegetation around our properties, and choosing better places to
live and build. We can also create safe access for firefighters, plan emergency
evacuation routes, and manage dry forests to be more resilient.

After decades of fire exclusion, dense and dry forests with heavy accumulations
of fuel and understory vegetation often need to be treated with a combination of
thinning and prescribed burning. Restoring landscape patterns will take time and
careful management to mitigate how future wildfires burn across landscapes.

From our research, we know that fuel reduction in dry forests can mitigate the
effects of wildfires. After the 2006 Tripod fires, we studied how past forest
thinning and prescribed burning treatments influenced subsequent wildfire
severity. We found that tree mortality was high in untreated or recently thinned
forests, but lower in forests that had been recently thinned and prescribed
burned. Our results, along with other studies in the western United States,
provide compelling evidence that thinning, in combination with prescribed
burning, can make forests more resilient.

On average, one-quarter of mature trees died in thinned and prescribed burned
forests compared to 60-65 percent of trees in untreated or thinned forests. In a
driving tour of the Tripod burn post-wildfire, areas that were prescribed burned
are generally green islands amidst a gray sea of standing dead trees.

In ongoing research, we hope to learn how restoration treatments can be
strategically placed to create more fire-resistant landscapes.

Self-regulating?

Wildfires also have a critical role in restoration. The 2014 Carlton and 2015
Okanogan Complex fires burned the borders of the Tripod fire and of other recent
wildfires, but sparse fuels on the margins of these prior burned areas did not
support fire spread.

As more fires burn across dry forests, they are creating vast puzzle-piece
mosaics, and in time may become more self-regulating - limiting the size and
spread of subsequent fires.

However, the imprints of recent fires are large, and it will take many small to
medium wildfires to restore the diverse mosaic these landscapes need and once
supported. Managing naturally ignited wildfires that burn in the late season or
under favorable weather conditions, in combination with prescribed burning, will
be essential to restore self-regulating landscapes.

Recent summers have taught us that we can't permanently exclude fire from our
valley or other fire-prone areas. This is difficult to accept for a community so
recently devastated by fire and sick of the smoke that comes with it. However,
summers are getting hotter and drier, and more wildfires are on the way. We have
to adapt the way we live with fire and learn ways to promote resilience - within
our homes, communities and neighboring forests.

Native peoples, less than 150 years ago, proactively burned the landscapes we
currently inhabit - for personal safety, food production and enhanced forage for
deer and elk. In some places, people still maintain and use traditional fire
knowledge. As we too learn to be more fire-adapted, we need to embrace fire not
only as an ongoing problem but an essential part of the solution.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 The Post Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              751 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The Columbian (Vancouver, Washington)

                              June 19, 2017 Monday

In Our View Put Out 'Fire Borrowing'

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 579 words



HIGHLIGHT: redicting the severity of wildfire season in the Northwest is a lot
like predicting the weather in March - you can make an educated guess using the
best possible science, but you might be wrong.So, while experts cross their
fingers and forecast a relatively mild wildfire season for the upcoming summer,
it is time to again examine the failure of the federal government to effectively
approach the prevention and suppression of blazes that are ecologically and
economically damaging. A bill recently re-introduced in Congress does exactly
that.Introduced by Rep. Mike Simpson, R-Idaho, and Kurt Schrader, D-Ore., the
Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would put an end to federal policy that amounts to
throwing good money after bad. The bill, which is co-sponsored by a bipartisan
group of 16 representatives, targets the practice of "fire borrowing" in the
suppression of wildfires.In short, the approach forces federal agencies to
redirect money from other areas - namely, forest management and fire prevention
- when the cost of fighting fires exceeds expectations. This leaves less money
for prevention, which exacerbates the fires in future years.It is a foolish
cycle. Failing to properly manage forests and reduce the fuel for fires leads to
more intense fires and increased costs down the road. "It is time to acknowledge
that catastrophic wildfires should be funded like natural disasters so we can
ensure that land managers have the resources they need to properly manage our
forests," Simpson said.In 1995, wildfire costs accounted for 16 percent of the
U.S. Forest Service budget; by 2016, those costs burned up 56 percent of the
Forest Service budget. Part of the reason for that is the increased size and
intensity of fires because of climate change and tinder-dry forests; but part of
it is a lack of preventative measures because money to manage forests has been
spent on fire suppression.This problem is not a new one. The Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act was introduced in the House of Representatives in 2015, where it
attracted more than 150 co-sponsors but failed to make it out of committee. As
The Columbian wrote editorially at the time: "The use of stop-gap, backfill
measures to pay for wildfires after the fact is not sustainable - at either the
state or the federal level. It is time for officials to embrace the reality of a
changing climate and choose one of two courses of action: Stop fighting fires in
wilderness areas, or provide permanent funding for fighting them."There is a
school of thought that says the government should avoid suppressing fires until
those fires endanger lives or buildings, that fires are part of nature. Many
experts agree with these assertions, while others emphasize that allowing fires
to burn would lead to costly destruction of ecosystems and habitat.Either way,
the costs are rising. In 2014, Washington experienced the most devastating
wildfire season in its history - a record that lasted exactly one year. In 2015,
more than 1 million acres in the state burned, more than 300 homes were
destroyed, and three firefighters were killed. A total of $347 million in
federal, state, and local money was spent fighting those blazes.Such expenses
call for dedicated funding rather than a system that moves money around and
leads to greater costs down the road. The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would be
a wise step toward acknowledging an immutable fact of governance: We can pay for
it now, or pay more for it later.


Predicting the severity of wildfire season in the Northwest is a lot like
predicting the weather in March - you can make an educated guess using the best
possible science, but you might be wrong.So, while experts cross their fingers
and forecast a relatively mild wildfire season for the upcoming summer, it is
time to again examine the failure of the federal government to effectively
approach the prevention and suppression of blazes that are ecologically and
economically damaging. A bill recently re-introduced in Congress does exactly
that.Introduced by
Rep. Mike Simpson,
R-Idaho, and
Kurt Schrader,
D-Ore., the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would put an end to federal policy
that amounts to throwing good money after bad. The bill, which is co-sponsored
by a bipartisan group of 16 representatives, targets the practice of "fire
borrowing" in the suppression of wildfires.In short, the approach forces
federal agencies to redirect money from other areas - namely, forest management
and fire prevention - when the cost of fighting fires exceeds expectations.


This leaves less money for prevention, which exacerbates the fires in future
years.It is a foolish cycle. Failing to properly manage forests and reduce the
fuel for fires leads to more intense fires and increased costs down the road.
"It is time to acknowledge that catastrophic wildfires should be funded like
natural disasters so we can ensure that land managers have the resources they
need to properly manage our forests," Simpson said.In 1995, wildfire costs
accounted for 16 percent of the U.S. Forest Service budget; by 2016, those
costs burned up 56 percent of the Forest Service budget. Part of the reason for
that is the increased size and intensity of fires because of climate change and
tinder-dry forests; but part of it is a lack of preventative measures because
money to manage forests has been spent on fire suppression.This problem is not
a new one. The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act was introduced in the House of
Representatives in 2015, where it attracted more than 150 co-sponsors but
failed to make it out of committee. As The Columbian wrote editorially at the
time: "The use of stop-gap, backfill measures to pay for wildfires after the
fact is not sustainable - at either the state or the federal level. It is time
for officials to embrace the reality of a changing climate and choose one of
two courses of action: Stop fighting fires in wilderness areas, or provide
permanent funding for fighting them."There is a school of thought that says the
government should avoid suppressing fires until those fires endanger lives or
buildings, that fires are part of nature. Many experts agree with these
assertions, while others emphasize that allowing fires to burn would lead to
costly destruction of ecosystems and habitat.Either way, the costs are rising.
In 2014, Washington experienced the most devastating wildfire season in its
history - a record that lasted exactly one year. In 2015, more than 1 million
acres in the state burned, more than 300 homes were destroyed, and three
firefighters were killed. A total of $347 million in federal, state, and local
money was spent fighting those blazes.Such expenses call for dedicated funding
rather than a system that moves money around and leads to greater costs down
the road. The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would be a wise step toward
acknowledging an immutable fact of governance: We can pay for it now, or pay
more for it later.


LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 The Columbian Publishing Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              752 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                The Denver Post

                          September 5, 2012 Wednesday
                              WED REGIONAL Edition

Things looking up

BYLINE: Bruce Finley

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 795 words


From Colorado's scorched forest floors, aspen trees sprout, replacing blackened
firs.

As state Forest Service ranger Boyd Lebeda crunches across charred branches and
duff west of Fort Collins, he sees hundreds of the green shoots. Some reach as
high as 2 feet, springing from root networks like ropes underlying roughly 5
percent of the High Park fire's 87,284-acre burn zone.

Lebeda also sees mountain mahogany, chokecherries, currant, sumac, bitter brush
and purple lupine.

This rapid emergence of new life -- less than two months after the flames --
hints at the potential for future aspen forests that state and federal experts
say could be more diverse, healthy and resilient.

"That sprouting would not be happening without the fire," Lebeda said.

The ecological benefits of wildfires are a bright side of the burning that
ravaged more than 116,000 acres of forest this year and destroyed more than 600
homes along Colorado's Front Range. Six people died in this year's wildfires.

It's largely a matter of letting in light where forests previously were
unnaturally dense. Wildfires also release nutrients to the soil.

While U.S. Forest Service and state rangers regularly point out that wildfire
plays a critical role in forest health, they increasingly must balance ecosystem
needs with needs of people who have built homes in forests and with maintenance
of powerlines and roads.

The urbanization forces aggressive suppression of wildfires, which then leads to
the overly dense forests that, if they do burn, produce superfires worse than
natural wildfires.

"You have to take the long view sometimes with these fires. The restoration and
ensuring the health of the ecological environment, cannot be separated from the
fire management practices," said Bob Baird, deputy director of Fire and Aviation
Management at Forest Service headquarters in Washington D.C.

"We want a diverse forest," Baird said in an interview. "We want to minimize the
damaging wildfire and allow healthy fire on the landscape -- healthy prescribed
fire and mechanical clearing -- not unhealthy wildfire at the wrong time and
place."

There's no current policy mandating suppression of all wildfires, he said.
Federal supervisors weigh many factors to decide whether a wildfire can burn.

Meanwhile, as aspen and shrubbery begin to sprout again, forest workers and
volunteers -- with government support -- are working to encourage the
regeneration.

Hundreds of bales of straw mulch, for example, are being dropped from
helicopters on areas where burned soil is barren and prone to erosion. Slopes
are being stabilized with burned pine trunks laid perpendicular to fall lines to
slow water flow.

A federal contract is expected to be awarded this week for more straw drops west
of Fort Collins. Even more straw must be dropped and spread in the Waldo fire
area in Colorado Springs, U.S. Forest Service officials said, because soils
there are weaker and prone to erosion and aspen root systems may not exist.

Work to maximize the ecological benefits of wildfire increasingly begins while
forests are still burning. Federal teams inspected both the High Park and Waldo
fires, evaluating where flames were needed to thin out overly thick trees. Some
of the superfires burn so hot that soils become "hydroponic," preventing
regeneration -- as seen in the 2002 Hayman fire zone, where crews are manually
replanting ponderosas.

The beauty of aspen is that, where their roots exist, no special attention is
needed, said U.S. Forest Service scientist Tommy John, regional Burn Area
Emergency Response coordinator. "Those areas are fine. We just let them go,
recover naturally."

Aspen trees "will come up within days of the wildfire," said Wayne Shepperd, a
retired U.S. Forest Service research scientist who studied 140 aspen stands
around Colorado.

Five years ago, aspens around the region were in trouble. The Sudden Aspen
Decline die-off, linked to the drought of 2002, had reduced aspen in Colorado by
about 800,000 acres, or 30 percent. Studies were launched. Scientists replanted
aspen where no roots exist, which requires careful drip irrigation that is too
expensive for large-scale regeneration.

Shepperd said SAD seems to be declining, with 2 million to 4 million acres of
aspen trees surviving.

The burn area west of Fort Collins, where roots still exist, gives an
opportunity for regeneration. Soils are sufficiently rich. The moisture was
there. But aspen need sunlight, and dense pines and firs created deep shade.

The wildfire has brought light by opening up gaps between trees, a
characteristic of healthy forests, Shepperd said.

"What we're going to have more of, in the next 50 years," he said, "is a lot
more openings in the forests."

Bruce Finley: 303-954-1700 twitter.com/finleybruce or bfinley@denverpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 08, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Alastair Young of Western States Reclamation watches Tuesday as nearly
a ton of straw is transported during straw-mulch mitigation for the High Park
fire burn area. At left, nature has begun the slow process of regenerating the
forest that was scorched by the wildfire. AAron Ontiveroz, The Denver Post
(above); Karl Gehring, The Denver Post
Far left: Plants rise through the ashes of Rist Canyon, ravaged this summer by
the High Park fire west of Fort Collins. The ecological benefits of wildfires
are a bright side of the burning that ravaged forest land this year along the
Front Range. It's largely a matter of letting in light where forests previously
were unnaturally dense. Wildfires also release nutrients to the soil. Left: The
scorched-black trunk of a pine stands in stark contrast against the sky in Rist
Canyon last week. Photos by Karl Gehring, The Denver Post

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2012 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              753 of 987 DOCUMENTS


              Lake County News-Chronicle (Two Harbors, Minnesota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 13, 2013 Thursday

Lake County prepares for wildfires

BYLINE: LaReesa Sandretsky, Lake County News-Chronicle, Two Harbors, Minn.

SECTION: LIFESTYLE

LENGTH: 660 words


June 13--Mary Kingston remembers the Pagami Wildfire like it was yesterday,
though it occurred almost two years ago. The 92,000-acre wildfire came within
two miles of her home on Wilson Lake, which is about 30 miles northeast of
Finland. She and her neighbors were evacuated.

The fire, which affected mostly the Superior National Forest and Boundary
Waters, was one of the worst in recent memory. The wilderness areas are still
recovering but no homes or businesses were damaged. Still, Kingston said Pagami
made her and her neighbors think seriously about wildfire control.

"Pagami kind of changed my life...we realized we'd better do everything we can
do to be defensible," she said.

Enter Firewise, a program of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. It's
an initiative that aims to make homes more resistant to wildfires. Homeowners
can request a Firewise inspection from an emergency management official, who
will advise them as to how to reduce the risk of a fire affecting their
property.

These tips could include storing firewood as far as possible from any structures
or enclosing the bottom of a deck to keep dry leaves and brush from piling up
underneath it.

"Protecting structures from wildfire is more effective than fighting wildfires,"
said BJ Kohlstedt, director of emergency management for Lake County.

Kingston and her neighbors did one better than individual Firewise assessments.
They decided to make a Firewise plan for their entire community, including
Crooked Lake and Nine Mile Lake, just southeast of Wilson Lake.

"They worked really hard to work together and communicate with each other,"
Kohlstedt said.

They designated a communication center and a phone tree. They also fortified
their homes individually, set annual goals and held a Firewise day.
Additionally, each member volunteered his or her time to mitigation projects.
The result: last fall, they applied for and received national recognition as a
Firewise community.

"We were really excited. Everybody was involved in helping gather this
information. We all kind of worked together," Kingston said.

The Wilson/Crooked Lakes community is the first in the area, but Kingston said
she would encourage any community to go through the process to protect
themselves from wildfires. With the help of Kohlstedt, Lake County Firewise
Coordinator Michael Dyste and U.S. Forest Service Officer Bree Schueller,
Kingston said it was a straightforward process.

"I'd do it again in a minute," she said. "(There are) easy things we can do to
keep our houses safe from wildfires. We can give ourselves the best chance."

Firewise isn't the only program Kohlstedt has pursued to mitigate wildfires. The
county has applied for and received many grants to help protect homeowners.

The county recently put out bids to use a grant to pay for brush removal around
high-risk homes. Another grant was recently awarded by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that will pay 70 percent of the cost for homeowners in the
northern parts of the county to install metal roofs. Earlier grant programs paid
for sprinkler installations and dry hydrants -- pipes placed in a body of water
that can be hooked up to a fire truck.

"Because wildfires are a great risk for our county, we tend to put a lot of time
and money into it," Kohlstedt said.

While the risk of fires will always be present in a heavily wooded area like
Lake County, Kohlstedt said she and other county officials are working hard to
keep residents safe.

Kingston, for one, said she's thankful for the knowledgeable officials and
available help.

"I'm just really happy it's out there. (They all are) very good resources are
very easy to work with," Kingston said.

Learn more about the Firewise program at http://www.dnr.state.mn.us/firewise/.

More from around the web

___ (c)2013 the Lake County News-Chronicle (Two Harbors, Minn.) Visit the Lake
County News-Chronicle (Two Harbors, Minn.) at www.twoharborsmn.com Distributed
by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130613-TQ-Lake-County-prepares-for-wildfires-0613-20130613

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TQ


                   Copyright 2013 Lake County News-Chronicle


                              754 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                           August 16, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Early Edition

B.C. nears worst wildfire season ever recorded; Roughly 8,450 square kilometres
have burned since April 1, spokesman says

BYLINE: Camille Bains, The Canadian Press

SECTION: CITY; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 450 words

DATELINE: KAMLOOPS, B.C.


British Columbia is facing its worst wildfire season on record, as flames scorch
thousands of hectares of land and costs rise to deal with the devastation. B.C.
Wildfire Service spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said an estimated 8,450 square
kilometres of forest, brush and grassland has been burned since the start of the
wildfire season April 1.

That compares with a record loss of 8,550 square kilometres in 1958.

"(It's) safe to say we are on track for this to be the worst season on record
for that area burned," Skrepnek said.

He said 154 wildfires are burning across the province and the firefighting price
tag has reached $309 million, though that figure does not include costs for the
loss for 71 homes and 118 outbuildings.

The largest wildfire, in Hanceville, southwest of Williams Lake, now covers
2,120 square kilometres, Skrepnek said.

"We're urging people to be extremely careful with any activity that could spark
a wildfire," he said. "We're continuing to see the increased likelihood of
lightningcaused fires, which makes it even more critical to avoid any
humancaused incidents."

Skrepnek also urged people to report fires.

More than 4,100 people, including about 760 people recruited from outside the
province, are working on firefighting efforts, Skrepnek said.

Chris Duffy, executive director of operations for Emergency Management B.C.,
says nearly 9,300 people remain out of their homes as 40 evacuation orders are
still in place.

"Our priority remains public safety, first responders'safety and support to
local authorities and First Nations," he said.

He said 31,000 people are on evacuation alert, meaning they must be ready to
leave at a moment's notice.

Evacuation orders in parts of the Cariboo have been downgraded to alerts in some
areas, including Alexis Creek to Riske Creek after residents were forced to
leave Sunday.

However, officials with the Cariboo Regional District said ongoing fire control
activities mean access to some areas may be limited and is at the discretion of
checkpoint personnel.

"We would still urge the public to remain vigilant," Duffy said, adding the fire
risk remains high. "Have an emergency plan, an emergency kit, report fires and,
in particular, respect orders and alerts and instructions from first responders,
fire crews, highways (officials) and RCMP who are working around these fire
sites."

Many returning residents have had to power wash off the red fire retardant that
covered their property in efforts to protect structures.

The B.C. Centre for Disease Control says anyone removing coloured fire retardant
should avoid eye contact and wash hands when removing the substance from
structures. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Calgary Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              755 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      Coast Mountain News (Williams Lake)

                            January 19, 2018 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Red Cross Workers to visit Bella Coola January 23 - 25

BYLINE: Caitlin Thompson

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 502  words


The 2017 summer BC wildfire season was unprecedented and the impacts were felt
across the Province, including the Central Coast Regional District (CCRD). The
CCRD has received funding support, through Emergency Management BC, for a
Wildfire Recovery Manager.

The Wildfire Recovery Manager will work to capture the impacts of the wildfires
and begin necessary actions of assessing resources and addressing gaps and
challenges for recovery. They will be reaching out to residents, non-profits,
and businesses, as well as those who derive livelihoods from the resource base
and subsistence economy to determine the social and economic impacts and inform
development of a Wildfire Recovery Plan.

"As a small remote community and as part of a much larger area suffering from
the effects of the worst wildfire season in BC's history, we need a better
understanding of the direct and indirect impacts of the wildfires on our
constituents," said CCRD Board Chair Alison Sayers. "The aim is to identify
short-term and long-term activities that will work towards helping community
members, entrepreneurs, and businesses recover from impacts and to help identify
the types of work that can help us along with other communities to build back
stronger."

The CCRD has retained Wildfire Recovery Manager, Jessie MacDonald, on contract
until the end of March 2018, to spearhead the Region's planning toward recovery.
Jessie's role is to pull together and lead a small team that will gather
information about impacts communities in the Central Coast have weathered as a
result of the 2017 wildfires.

Caitlin Thompson has been enlisted to support the wildfire recovery work and
recruitment of expertise toward assessing impacts specific to Nuxalk Nation
interests is underway. The hope is to achieve a cross-cultural survey and data
collection approach that will serve in building a sound recovery approach that
is both relevant and culturally appropriate to all the impacted sub regional
communities within the regional district.

"This work has already resulted in the Red Cross coming to the Bella Coola
Valley in-person to support those looking for help to access their program
supports" explains CCRD Board Chair Alison Sayers.

Red Cross workers will be at the Moose Hall Jan 23-25 to meet one-on-one with
individuals and households that need recovery assistance from the impacts of the
2017 BC wildfires. For any questions and to pre-register call 1-800-863-6582.
Dates and times are as follows: Jan 23 - 9:30am - 3:30pm , Jan 24 - 1:30pm -
6:30pm, and Jan 25 - 9:30am - 3:30pm

Recovery information is posted on the CCRD's website at www.ccrd-bc.ca. A
current list of supports for individuals and families, small businesses,
not-for-profit organizations, and First Nations cultural livelihoods are posted
on the website and more information will be added as it becomes available.

Those needing assistance related to impacts from the wildfires can reach out to
Jessie MacDonald by calling 250.267.8621 or by email at recovery@ccrd-bc.ca

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2018 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              756 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                The Taber Times

                             May 17, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire protection strengthened with new rules in province

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 330  words


Albertans are reminded to take precautions to prevent forest fires as new
wildfire protection regulations have taken place.

"Last fall, we passed important legislation to help deter unsafe behaviour and
give our wildland firefighters more tools to keep Albertans and their
communities safe. These strengthened regulations send a clear message that we
all share a responsibility to help prevent wildfires," said Oneil Carlier,
Minister of Agriculture and Forestry.

Enhancements to the Forest and Prairie Protection Act regulations include: New
penalties for infractions such as leaving a campfire unattended or burning
without a permit Restrictions on the use of fireworks or exploding targets in
the Forest Protection Area of Alberta without written permission from a forest
officer Improvements to flammable debris disposal and other industrybased
requirements Individuals who knowingly contravene the Forest and Prairie
Protection Act by starting a wildfire can be fined up to $100,000 or face
imprisonment for up to two years.

Industrial users who knowingly contravene the Act and start a wildfire can be
fined up to $1 million.

Corporations may also face penalties of up to $10,000 per offence per day for
less severe industrial-based violations of the Act and regulations.

Effective May 1, officers will be authorized to issue tickets for
contraventions, like leaving a campfire unattended. Depending on the infraction,
individual fines for specific violations could result in tickets ranging from
between $172 and $575.

Activities that interfere with the fighting of a wildfire, such as the
unauthorized use of drones near a wildfire, are considered more severe offences
and will result in an automatic court appearance.

In 2016, Alberta wildfire crews fought more than 1,300 fires that consumed more
than 600,000 hectares. About 70 per cent of wildfires over the last five years
have been linked to human activity.

If you see a wildfire, please report it toll-free at 310-FIRE (3473).

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 The Taber Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              757 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 16, 2017 Saturday

Who is starting all those wildfires? We are

LENGTH: 1205  words



Washington: American Association for the Advancement of Science has issued the
following news release:
As parts of the western United States choke on smoke from wildfires scorching
more than 660,000 hectares, renewed attention is falling on the role that people
have played in starting some of these blazes. An Oregon fire that has consumed
13,000 hectares, for instance, is thought to have been started by teens tossing
firecrackers.


Jennifer Balch, a wildfire ecologist at the University of Colorado in Boulder,
has examined just how big a role people are playing in starting wildfires in the
United States. Nationwide, humans are responsible for starting 84% of wildfires,
according to a paper co-authored by Balch, published this past March in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. In California, the eastern
United States, and the coastal Northwest, people are behind more than 90% of
wildfires. And, by starting so many fires, humans are essentially lengthening
the fire season, into times of the year when natural causes--such as
lightning--don't play a major role.
ScienceInsider spoke with Balch about those numbers, and their implications.
This interview has been edited for brevity and clarity.
Q: How did you get interested in how people start wildfires in the United
States?
A: We recently stumbled across a stash of government records that contained
information about the cause [of a wildfire]. Exploring that database--over a
million and a half records of government-recorded fire events [between 1992 and
2012]--we realized what a substantial role today people are playing in starting
wildfires. We found that 84% of all wildfires were started by people over the
last couple of decades in the U.S.
I was shocked. We've used fire as a tool for a long time. But the fact that
people have such a large print on our wildfires was surprising.
Q: Where are most wildfires started by people?
A: If you look at a map, you see a majority of human-started fires happening in
the Southeast, in the eastern U.S., and on the western coastal
areas--California, Oregon, Washington. It's only in the Intermountain West,
where it is fairly devoid of people, where you see a strong signal of
lightning-started fires.
[In some mountain areas, such as Colorado,] we see predominantly human-started
fires along road networks and smack against the major metropolitan
areas--Boulder and Fort Collins, Denver and Colorado Springs. So we see a really
strong signal of humans essentially swamping out natural, lightning-started
fires.
Lightning storms [are] mainly concentrated during summer months. With people,
what we're doing is effectively tripling the length of the natural fire season
because we're distributing ignitions throughout the year.
Q: Were you able to track the ways people start fires?
A: So the breakdown: Of the approximately 1.5 million wildfires in the
government record, 25% were burning of trash and debris; about a quarter (22%)
were unknown human causes. The next biggest category is arson, [then] heavy
equipment, campfires, children, and smokers. Those are the seven biggest
categories.
Fireworks didn't rank in the very top for the whole year, but it does pop on
July 4th. It's the day with the most fires. Over 7000 events started on July 4th
alone. They were predominantly started by fireworks. It's unfortunate that our
Independence Day didn't fall in January or December when it's cooler and wetter.

Q: It looks like the biggest increase in human-caused wildfires is in the Great
Plains. Why?
A: There's a lot of agricultural industry and there's a lot of cattle ranching
going on in the Great Plains. So it's important to recognize that there are a
lot of intentionally set fires to manage landscapes. Fire can get rid of stubble
and old crop residues. Fire is also used in cattle ranching to rejuvenate
pasture grasses. The data we're looking at is fires that needed some sort of
suppression response. Se we are not capturing the intentionally set fires. But
we are capturing the ones that escaped.
Q: There's a lot of talk about the problem of people building houses at the edge
of fire-prone forests. Have you looked at how that connects to people starting
wildfires, and whether it might change in the future?
A: That's actually work that we're doing right now. I can tell you that 9% of
the total land area of the U.S. has this intermix between houses and natural
areas. That's projected to double by 2030. So we don't expect this problem to go
away. In fact, we expect that--because people are living in these landscapes and
carrying ignitions to wherever they go--we're actually going to see more
wildfire started by people in the future.
Q: Are there parts of the United States at particular risk?
A: Yeah, it's projected to starkly go up in the Intermountain West.
Q: It appears that the number of ignitions is going up in every part of the
country except California. Why is it that?
A: It's something that has been noted not only by our research but by some other
really prominent papers that have come out recently. [They show] in the western
U.S. an overall increase in the number of fires and burned area, except for [the
part of California with a Mediterranean-type ecosystem]. I've been asking a lot
of questions about what's going on there, and I haven't been able to get a clear
answer. Here are some hypotheses or guesses: increased public recognition of the
danger of wildfires, increased suppression, or another possibility is that as
more people are fragmenting the landscape, you have a decrease in the overall
size of fire events. I think there's an important story, because there might be
a lesson there in terms of how we're dealing with fires in the West as a whole.

Q: Any insights into measures that could reduce the number of fires being
started by people?
A: Part of the take-home is that, given we do play such a substantial role in
starting our own wildfires, we need to accept living in flammable places.
There's good fire, there's bad fire, and we need more of the right kind of fire.
What I mean by that is we need more prescribed burning and we need more cultural
acceptance around prescribed burning, because we cannot remove fire from the
landscape. We've already tried that experiment for 100 years and it didn't work.
What our results provide justification for is shifting people's contribution to
something where we're setting more prescribed fires, rather than setting
wildfires and then suffering the consequences. We need to start the right kinds
of fires.
It's hard to swallow that, especially right now when a lot of the western U.S.
is choking on smoke. But ultimately the question is: "How do we want our smoke?
Do we want our smoke in large concentrated pulses like this, or do we want it
more dispersed?"
Postscript:
In a follow-up email, Balch provided a scorecard for the 2017 fire season. "This
year so far (1 January 1 - September 11), there have been 41,775 wildfires
started by people vs. 6,354 wildfires started by lightning across the U.S.," she
wrote. The total area burned by human-started fires, she added, was about 1.459
million hectares, compared with 1.843 million hectares burned by
lightning-started fires.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              758 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 30, 2016 Tuesday

Oregon: Increasing size and complexity of wildfires straining Oregon Department
of Forestry

LENGTH: 785  words




 Salem: The State of Secretary, Oregon has issued the following news release:



  http://oregonsosblog.us





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com
 With Oregon 's wildfire season in effect across the state, the Secretary of
State's office released an audit today showing that the increasing number and
severity of wildfires in recent years is taxing the Department's other critical
missions and programs. The report details how the agency and legislative leaders
have not yet adjusted management systems and planning to adequately account for
the rapidly growing demand for fire response.  The Secretary of State recommends
improved data collection and personnel planning to help state leaders better
address the changing wildfire landscape.





 "Across western states right now, we see forest fires threatening homes and
destroying valuable timber and wildlife habitat in record numbers," Secretary of
State Jeanne P. Atkins said.  "In the last three years, the damage from
wildfires managed by the state forestry department has increased ten-fold. As
fire seasons lengthen and intensify, ODF needs long-term workforce planning to
address its firefighting and fire-prevention missions, while still maintaining
broader forest management responsibilities. According to our audit, the
Department is fighting more severe fires with about the same full-time
equivalent employees as it had 20 years ago."



 Like other wildfire organizations across the nation, ODF is facing difficult
challenges. Fires have grown in size, complexity, and cost, which demands more
staff resources. Prior to 2013, the seven-year average gross cost to ODF for
suppressing large fires was $9.7 million per year. Since 2013, the average gross
cost has climbed to $92.4 million per year. As of Aug. 22, 547 fires have burned
over 4,302 acres on ODF-protected lands so far this year. ODF's jurisdiction
only covers about half of the state's forest and grasslands, and the
comprehensive costs of wildfires across the state are not covered by this audit.




 "Many ODF employees work long hours away from home during fire season," said
Atkins. "Our audit shows that employees from across the agency move away from
their usual responsibilities and their families to help protect Oregonians
during fire season. It is understandable how other core missions of the agency
could suffer when the priority each summer shifts to fighting raging wildfires
and protecting Oregonians."



 ODF has three operating programs: Fire Protection, State Forests, and Private
Forests. Wildfire mitigation is an important proactive strategy the agency uses
to reduce risks to forests and communities and the audit recommends that it
increases its wildfire mitigation efforts on both public and private lands.
Despite efforts to reduce the risk of fires, Oregon has millions of acres of
land at high risk of wildfires and in need of restoration. Current resources are
unlikely to meet this challenge.



 This increased wildfire risk puts a burden on employees throughout the agency.
The audit released today reports that not only are more permanent employees
across programs participating in fire assignments, but these employees are
working much longer hours. Overtime hours spent on fire protection by permanent
employees has increased 197 percent in recent years.



 Among the steps the auditors recommended to ODF to reduce the impact of forest
fires on personnel and programs:



     Track costs, staffing, funding and workload impacts on programs unrelated
to firefighting to reach and communicate to state leaders a better understanding
of agency operations as a whole.

     Track data on strategies used to detect and prevent wildfires to guide
decision-making and allow prioritization of the most cost-effective and
successful methods.

     Develop a systematic workforce planning strategy to ensure the agency can
meet current and emerging needs.



 "Forests are an important part of our state's economy and cultural identity,"
Atkins said. "A healthy and sustainable forestry department will help ensure a
healthy and sustainable Oregon. More and more severe wildfires are a reality the
agency must take into account as it tries to meet its larger mission."



 Despite efforts to reduce the risk of large wildfires, there are millions of
acres in Oregon at high risk across all ownerships, including federal, state and
private lands. ODF and the Legislature have partnered with federal officials to
mitigate wildfire risk on federal forests, but there are also unmet needs on
state forest land. This could lead to loss in timber revenue, threatened
watersheds, and mounting environmental costs.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              759 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         The Daily News of Los Angeles

                          September 16, 2017 Saturday

california seeing Fewer wildfires;
This year bucks the trend, but blazes have declined over 40 years

BYLINE: Daniel Tedford; dtedford@scng.com @dgtedford on Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1017 words

ABSTRACT

OCR-L-WILDFIRE-TREND-0913: Despite 2017 being one of the worst fire seasons in
recent memory for California and one of the worst ever for the western US, new
research shows a surprising trend: Over the last 40 years, California has seen a
decline in wildfires. Why is that? Researchers don't know yet but they intend to
find out.Reporter: DTEDFORDLength: 1000 wordsArt: FILE + two line charts showing
recent trends

FULL TEXT

In a year that is already being called one of the worst ever for wildfires in
the western United States, there is another fact that some might find
remarkable: For nearly 40 years, the number of wildfires in California has
declined.

California wildfire data reviewed by a U.S. Geological Survey research ecologist
shows a trend that many could find hard to believe: Since a peak in 1980, there
have been fewerwildfires in California. This is true across thestate, according
to researcher Jon Keeley, who is also a professor at UCLA.

According to his paper, co-authored with Alexandra D. Syphard, we need to
rethink our ideas about the frequency of wildfires.

"The claim commonly made in research papers and the media that fire activity is
increasing throughout the western USA is certainly an overstatement," wrote the
authors.

The trend of fewer, but not smaller, fires is apparent in recent years. State
data regarding large wildfires (300 acres or more) from 2000 to 2015 show total
numbers - not fire size - has been in decline, despite a sharp spike in 2008.

So, what's the reason for this decline? Well, they don't knowyet.

"Can't say at this point what has changed in the last 100 years that has caused
this decline ... but I am hoping we might

find out," Keeley said.

Keeley has just begun to analyze the data and look for a reason, but he expects
to finish that analysis this month. He also will send his research to Cal Fire
for review.

Keeley is confident the culprits behind the decline can be narrowed down to two-
prevention or climate - but he is reserving his judgment for now.

"Maybe fire prevention strategies or could be related to climate," Keeley said.
"My guess is they would probably like to think it is increasing efficiency in
fire prevention, but (it) remains to be seen if that is the answer at this
point."

Keeley is hoping Cal Fire might be able to point to some specific prevention
strategies and dates they were implemented to help him suss out if they had a
major impact in wildfire declines.

"We definitely have the education side," Cal Fire spokesman Scott McLean said.
"We spend a lot of money being proactive in trying to educate the public."

While McLean said the organization has adopted social media and other modern
tactics in recent years to better reach the public about fire prevention, Cal
Fire's education efforts have been happening for decades.

"There are some embarrassing programs out there with blue leisure suits and
mullets," he said.

McLean said a decline in the numberof wildfires was a win for the agency's
outreach programs since the majority of wildfires are the result of human
causes.

"I love to see the trend of wildfires going down," McLean said. "That means we
are getting the message out."

Despite the decline in overall fires, the amount of acres burned by wildfiresis
doing just the opposite.

"For most ignition sources, we have found a decline in the numbers since the
1980s, but not a decline in the area burned," Keeley said.

Large wildfire numbers from 2000 to 2015 illustrate the growth in burned
acreage. While the numbers are volatile from year to year, the overall trend
shows growth in fire sizes.

McLean attributes the growth in acres burned to environmental factors that have
made fires burn hotter and faster than in the past. Despite that, he credited
Cal Fire for its work in keeping the majority of fires from spreading. According
to Cal Fire data, 95 percent of fires are kept under 10 acres.

"We are constantly training. We always pay attention to what is going on, we
always investigate," he said. "We investigate what took place, and we learn from
it, and we make sure our firefighters learn from it."

One reason acreage could be up is from the record winter rains that replenished
fuel for fires by spawning plant growth, including the return of grass that had
disappeared from wildland areas throughout Southern California during the
drought.

Grass fires tend to burn faster and increase the amount of acres burned,
according to a 2008 paper published by UC Merced Sierra Nevada Research
Institute's Anthony Westerling.

Other researchers point to climate change, but Keeley says he thinks there might
be other variables at play.

"People who have written on it tend to ascribe it to climate change, but I think
we are a long way from knowing if that is what is going on," he said.

During the past 40 years, there have been a number of years that have bucked the
trend of dwindling wildfire numbers, and 2017 is already well on its way to
being one of those outliers.

As of Monday,Cal Fire has reported 5,102 wildland fires in its jurisdiction,
with nearly 230,000 acres burned. During the same time period in 2016, there
were 3,803 wildfires and 204,000 acres burned. The five-year average has been
3,872 wildland fires and 155,807 acres burned, according to Calfire.

This yearis also the most expensive year for wildfires as Montana, Washington
and Oregonall have been hit by devastating blazes. As a result, U.S. Secretary
of Agriculture Sonny Purdue announced Thursday the cost of fighting fires has
exceeded $2 billion. It has also been a record-setting year for heat in
California and other western states, according to the National Climate Report
produced by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

While 2017 has been worse than predicted across western states after there were
hopes a wet winter would diminish the fire season, McLean wasn't surprised by
the numbers considering the years of drought and the fuel created by the rain
that preceded fire season.

"As a firefighter, you wake up in the morning (asking) 'What's the weather
doing' because that tells you what your day is going to be like."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2017 Digital First Media
                              All Rights Reserved


                              760 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                               Waterloo Chronicle

                           December 18, 2012 Tuesday
                                  ONT Edition

Lightning strike back for win over Wildfire

SECTION: Pg. 0

LENGTH: 252  words


By Chronicle Staff

The National Ringette League's Waterloo Wildfire were neck-and-neck with the
Richmond Hill Lightning for two periods last Saturday at RIM Park in Waterloo
before the visitors erupted in the final half of an 11-5 victory on Boston Pizza
Night.

It was the first game in three weeks for the Wildfire (4-9-0, 10th in the
Eastern Conference) after a road trip to Atlantic Canada in November. Meanwhile,
Richmond Hill played two tough games with the Cambridge Turbos each of the past
two weekends and appeared stronger, especially in the second half.

Bryanna Kelly led the Wildfire with two goals and two assists and was named the
Wildfire's Boston Pizza MVP of the game. Lindsey Vivian (also with an assist),
Chelsea Moore and Brooke Reid scored the other Waterloo goals.

The Lightning outshot the Wildfire 45-16 on the night. Amanda Voisin (until a
third period injury) and Chelsea Moore shared goaltending duties.

Following a pre-game moment of silence for victims of the Newtown, Conn.,
shooting, five members of the Wildfire were recognized after being named to the
Eastern Canadian, French and Russian teams for the under-19 world ringette
championships next week in London.

They include Waterloo native Danielle Duncan, Karly McMullen, forward Kayla
Kowalsky, goalie Hailey Moore and forward Chelsea Moore.

The Wildfire are idle until Jan. 5 when they will take on last season's NRL
champion, the BC Thunder, at RIM Park at 7 p.m. on Wildfire Family Night. The
team is still looking for a local sponsor.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              761 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                           August 16, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

B.C. on track for worst wildfire season on record

BYLINE: Camille Bains, The Canadian Press

SECTION: CAPITAL REGION; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 203 words


British Columbia is poised to face its worst wildfire season as flames scorch
thousands of hectares of land and costs rise to deal with the devastation. B.C.
Wildfire Service spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said an estimated 8,450 square
kilometres of forest, brush and grassland has been burned since the start of the
wildfire season on April 1.

That compares with a record loss of 8,550 square kilometres in 1958.

"[It's] safe to say we are on track for this to be the worst season on record
for that area burned," Skrepnek said.

He said 154 wildfires are burning across the province and the firefighting price
tag has reached $309 million, but that figure does not include costs for the
loss for 71 homes and 118 outbuildings.

The largest wildfire, in Hanceville, southwest of Williams Lake, now covers
2,120 square kilometres, Skrepnek said.

"We're urging people to be extremely careful with any activity that could spark
a wildfire," he said. "We're continuing to see the increased likelihood of
lightningcaused fires, which makes it even more critical to avoid any
human-caused incidents."

More than 4,100 people, including about 760 people recruited from outside the
province, are working on firefighting efforts, Skrepnek said.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Times Colonist
                              All Rights Reserved


                              762 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            Aberdeen Evening Express

                             March 27, 2017 Monday

TEMPERATURES SOAR IN N-EAST

BYLINE: Chris Oreilly

SECTION: SPORT; GOLF; Majors; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 436 words


THIS weekend brought the warmest weather of the year so far, but forecasters
warn the sunshine won't last.

Temperatures in Aboyne reached 19.1C (66F), making the North-east town the
hottest spot in Scotland on Saturday.

Fyvie Castle followed closely behind, recording 18.8C (65F).

But the climbing mercury resulted in a busy weekend for the Scottish Fire and
Rescue Service (SFRS).

Two crews were called to tackle a wildfire near the Deeside Gliding Club near
Aboyne at around 1pm on Saturday.

Four pumps were used to put out the blaze, which broke out in an area of gorse
and shrub-land near the airfield.

Officers from Police Scotland were on hand to manage traffic, with the call to
stop given shortly before 2pm.

A spokeswoman for the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service said: "Crews were called
to a wildfire on a 400 metre by 400 metre area of shrub and gorse near the
Deeside Gliding Club.

"Police were also on the scene.

"Our crews have extinguished the blaze and the call to stop came at 1.51pm."

The Deeside blaze broke out a day after fire crews tackled another wildfire,
this time at Aberdeen beach.

The incident happened just before 7.45pm on Friday night in the Donmouth area
near the nature reserve.

One Scottish Fire and Rescue Service appliance from Central attended, as well as
a wildfire unit.

The Scottish Wildfire Forum (SWF) warned there was an increased risk of wildfire
over the weekend due to the dry conditions.

Vice chairman of the Scottish Wildfire Forum Michael Bruce said the public need
to be aware of the risk wildfire presents.

He said: "At the start of spring there is often a lot of dead vegetation
leftover from last year.

"This fuel can dry out quickly when there is overnight frost, followed by sunny
days with higher temperatures and lower humidity levels."

SFRS deputy assistant chief officer Andy Coueslant is chairman of the Scottish
Wildfire Forum.

He said: "Raising awareness is key to reducing the risk. Human behaviour can
significantly lower the chance of a wildfire starting so it's crucial people act
safely and responsibly in rural environments and follow the countryside code."

By yesterday temperatures across the North-east dropped a few degrees, down to
13C (55F) in Aberdeen - a light breeze bringing temperatures at the coast down
to 11C (51F)

But people still flocked to the beach with one group taking the opportunity to
brush up on their volleyball.

A spokesman for the Met Office said: "The temperatures we experienced this
weekend are high for the end of March.

"The warmer weather will continue into today and most of tomorrow, but we expect
some rain by Wednesday and Thursday."

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: fun: Keeva Sutherland, three, played at the beach.
family: Cousins Kerry, left, and Meganne Shearer. enjoy ice-cream.
sunshine: Biba Shaw, left, Anna Hill and Mairi Lowe took advantage of the good
weather.
outdoors: People could be seen flying their kites and playing volleyball at
Aberdeen Beach as they made the most of the warm weather, which saw the mercury
hit 19C.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EE


                      Copyright 2017 Aberdeen Journals Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              763 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            Aberdeen Evening Express

                             March 27, 2017 Monday

TEMPERATURES SOAR IN N-EAST

BYLINE: Chris Oreilly

SECTION: SPORT; GOLF; Majors; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 435 words


THIS weekend brought the warmest weather of the year so far, but forecasters
warn the sunshine won't last.

Temperatures in Aboyne reached 19.1C (66F), making the North-east town the
hottest spot in Scotland on Saturday.

Fyvie Castle followed closely behind, recording 18.8C (65F).

But the climbing mercury resulted in a busy weekend for the Scottish Fire and
Rescue Service (SFRS).

Two crews were called to tackle a wildfire near the Deeside Gliding Club near
Aboyne at around 1pm on Saturday.

Four pumps were used to put out the blaze, which broke out in an area of gorse
and shrub-land near the airfield.

Officers from Police Scotland were on hand to manage traffic, with the call to
stop given shortly before 2pm.

A spokeswoman for the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service said: "Crews were called
to a wildfire on a 400 metre by 400 metre area of shrub and gorse near the
Deeside Gliding Club.

"Police were also on the scene.

"Our crews have extinguished the blaze and the call to stop came at 1.51pm."

The Deeside blaze broke out a day after fire crews tackled another wildfire,
this time at Aberdeen beach.

The incident happened just before 7.45pm on Friday night in the Donmouth area
near the nature reserve.

One Scottish Fire and Rescue Service appliance from Central attended, as well as
a wildfire unit.

The Scottish Wildfire Forum (SWF) warned there was an increased risk of wildfire
over the weekend due to the dry conditions.

Vice chair of the Scottish Wildfire Forum Michael Bruce said the public need to
be aware of the risk wildfire presents.

He said: "At the start of spring there is often a lot of dead vegetation
leftover from last year.

"This fuel can dry out quickly when there is overnight frost, followed by sunny
days with higher temperatures and lower humidity levels."

SFRS deputy assistant chief officer Andy Coueslant is chairman of the Scottish
Wildfire Forum.

He said: "Raising awareness is key to reducing the risk. Human behaviour can
significantly lower the chance of a wildfire starting so it's crucial people act
safely and responsibly in rural environments and follow the countryside code."

By yesterday temperatures across the North-east dropped a few degrees, down to
13C (55F) in Aberdeen - a light breeze bringing temperatures at the coast down
to 11C (51F)

But people still flocked to the beach with one group taking the opportunity to
brush up on their volleyball.

A spokesman for the Met Office said: "The temperatures we experienced this
weekend are high for the end of March.

"The warmer weather will continue into today and most of tomorrow, but we expect
some rain by Wednesday and Thursday."

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: fun: Keeva Sutherland, three, played at the beach.
family: Cousins Kerry, left, and Meganne Shearer. enjoy ice-cream.
sunshine: Biba Shaw, left, Anna Hill and Mairi Lowe took advantage of the good
weather.
outdoors: People could be seen flying their kites and playing volleyball at
Aberdeen Beach as they made the most of the warm weather, which saw the mercury
hit 19C.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EE


                      Copyright 2017 Aberdeen Journals Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              764 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                              May 28, 2006 Sunday

The south is set to burn

BYLINE: By Nate Carlisle The Salt Lake Tribune

SECTION: LOCAL; Top Stories

LENGTH: 651 words


In Washington County, no fires are allowed except campfires in pits in improved
campgrounds. No smoking in fields with vegetation. Discharging fireworks, tracer
ammunition or other incendiary devices on federal, state and unincorporated
private lands is prohibited.

Similar restrictions are also in effect for the Arizona Strip in northwestern
Arizona.

Where wildfires are a concern, above-normal precipitation can be a bittersweet
drink.

Winter snows and spring rains keep vegetation green and resistant to fire, but
the moisture grows those grasses and brush too. When they dry out, the
vegetation becomes fuel.

The formula has already played out in southeastern and southwestern Utah, where
small wildfires already have broken out this month. A wet year in 2005 helped
grow fuel in those areas, and a dry 2006 - especially in southern Utah - has
made those spots ripe for fire.

In southern Utah, heavy fuels, such as logs and tree branches, are in summer
conditions, "and it shouldn't be that way this early in the season," said
Sheldon Wimmer, fire manager for the U.S. Bureau of Land Management.

On the whole, Utah has a higher than normal threat of wildfires this summer,
said Alex Tardy, meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Salt Lake
City. In addition to low precipitation levels in southern Utah, Tardy said, the
entire state can expect higher than normal temperatures this summer - perhaps
not enough to be noticed by the average Utahn, but enough to influence a
wildfire.

"That doesn't mean we're going to have big fires or anything," Tardy said. "It
just means the threat is there."

The outlook is better in northern Utah and the state's higher elevations, both
of which have had more typical precipitation totals. Tardy said he expects snow
to remain in the high elevation into July.

In 2005, Utah set a five-year high for acres lost to wildfires. More than
318,000 acres burned. About 200,000 acres were lost in Washington County. Still,
wildfire officials felt Utah was fortunate last year because of a relatively low
number of fires and because few structures were lost and only a handful of towns
were evacuated.

Washington County has already had some wildfires this year. Two around Hurricane
earlier this month burnt more than 5,000 acres. A wildfire that began Thursday
near the rocket-testing range east of LaVerkin has burned about 650 acres but
was largely contained Saturday.

Utah's reserve of Black Hawk helicopters, used for dropping water and
transporting personnel during wildfires, is currently with an Army National
Guard unit training in Texas. The unit and its helicopters are scheduled to be
shipped to Iraq by the end of the summer.

National Guard officials said the state has two Black Hawks on loan, one from
South Dakota and another from Wyoming, to use in the interim. The aircraft
should suffice in a wildfire season similar to the past few, Guard officers
said. Meeting needs in any greater catastrophe, officers said, would require
Utah to turn to its neighbors for help.

Though about 1,000 of Utah's citizen soldiers are deployed overseas or in
training elsewhere in the United States, National Guard officials have
maintained they will have enough soldiers to help, if called.

A busy fire season can place a strain on city fire departments and county fire
districts because they're often the first responders to wildfires.

Corky Brewer, chief of Moab Valley Fire District, is expecting more wildfire
activity in southeastern Utah than in recent years. So far this year, Moab
Valley has seen its normal share of wildfires - a handful of grass and brush
blazes, Brewer said. Those fires, Brewer said, moved faster than a typical May
wildfire and more like a summertime fire fueled by dry plants.

"We haven't had anything real big," Brewer said. "We're definitely lucky because
we're real dry."

ncarlisle@sltrib.com

---

Reporter Matthew LaPlante contributed to this story.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: In June, Matt Ginder of Idaho cuts through smoldering tree limbs to try
to douse the Blue Ridge fire, which was burning west of Interstate 15 and south
of New Harmony, northeast of St. George.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              765 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 29, 2017 Friday

Washington: Feinstein, Harris to Trump: Declare Southern California Wildfires a
Major Disaster

LENGTH: 447  words



Washington: Office of the Senator Dianne Feinstein has issued the following news
release:
Senators Dianne Feinstein and Kamala D. Harris (both D-Calif.) today called on
President Trump to declare the Southern California wildfires a major disaster
and make federal assistance available to wildfire victims.


"We strongly support Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s request for a Major Disaster
declaration for the State of California in response to the severe wildfires that
have swept through Southern California this month," the senators wrote. "We urge
you to approve the Governor's request to make federal assistance available under
Section 401 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance
Act and other programs."
The Honorable Donald J. Trump
 The White House
 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue
 Washington, D.C. 20500
Dear Mr. President:
We strongly support Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s request for a Major Disaster
declaration for the State of California in response to the severe wildfires that
have swept through Southern California this month. We urge you to approve the
Governor's request to make federal assistance available under Section 401 of the
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act and other
programs.
This year's wildfire season in California has been nothing short of
catastrophic. Over 1.2 million acres have burned in the state this year. In
October, wildfires destroyed thousands of homes and killed 44 people in Northern
California. Since the beginning of December, six large wildfires have burned
nearly 300,000 acres in Southern California. Driven by high temperatures, strong
and unpredictable winds, low humidity, and dry brush, the wildfires have forced
more than 200,000 residents to evacuate their homes, burned over 1,000
structures, and have tragically claimed the lives of one civilian and one
firefighter. One of these fires, the Thomas Fire, is now the second largest
wildfire in state history and continues to threaten communities in Southern
California.
Additionally, five other large fires have burned across Los Angeles, Ventura,
Santa Barbara, and San Diego counties. These fires led to evacuations, road
closures, destruction of residences, and terrible air quality hazards. Put
simply, this has been the worst wildfire season in recent memory and one of the
worst in California history.
We appreciate your approval of earlier requests to provide federal assistance,
and we ask that you again approve this request for disaster aid. We support
Governor Brown's request and strongly urge you to declare a major disaster.
Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely,
Dianne Feinstein
 United States Senator

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              766 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 11, 2015 Monday

Idaho: Crapo-Wyden Wildfire Disaster Funding Act Gains Support of More Than 250
Organizations

LENGTH: 437  words

DATELINE: Boise


Mike Crapo of Idaho has issued the following news release:

More than 250 groups from across the country joined Sens. Mike Crapo (R-Idaho),
and Ron Wyden (D-Oregon), to express support for passing the Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act to ensure vital resources in the fight against catastrophic
wildfires in the West ahead of this year's fire season.

The 261 organizations, including the Nature Conservancy and the National Rifle
Association, wrote to all 535 members of the U.S. Senate and the House of
Representatives to show the importance of passing the bill.

"These groups are helping sound our call to action, which became even more
urgent today with news that the fire outlook is worsening," said Crapo.
"According to Chief Tom Tidwell, there is a 90-percent chance the Forest Service
will run out of money to fight fires at a time when 58-millon acres of national
forests face a high or very high risk of severe wildfire.  We have got to
perform the management that will reduce catastrophic fires and make sure
resources for that management, and to fight fires, are available."

"Fire season is almost here, and for Oregonians and others in the West, who know
that wildfires are no less destructive than other natural disasters, it's past
time to end the destructive cycle of playing catch-up on wildfire funding,"Wyden
said. "I'm glad to have these groups standing with Sen. Crapo and me as we
continue to push for our fix to address these wildfires before they start."

Wyden and Crapo reintroduced the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act on Jan. 22. The
bill ends the cycle of underfunding fire suppression, which currently forces
federal agencies to steal from fire prevention just to put out fires. Instead,
Wyden and Crapo's bill will end this so-called "fire borrowing" by funding the
largest wildfires from a similar disaster account used to fund other natural
disasters. The Interior Department and the Forest Service estimate these fires -
about 1 percent - consume 30 percent of firefighting budgets.

In March, Crapo and Wyden secured language in the Senate budget to allow a
funding cap adjustment that has prevented agencies from treating wildfires as
natural disasters under the federal budget.

The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would move any fire suppression spending above
70% of the 10-year average to a disaster funding account that is separate from
Forest Service and Interior budgets. The bill now has 14 bipartisan cosponsors
in the Senate and 79 representatives have signed on to the House version.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              767 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 9, 2015 Saturday

Idaho: Crapo-Wyden Wildfire Disaster Funding Act Gains Support of More Than 250
Organizations

LENGTH: 437  words

DATELINE: Boise


Mike Crapo of Idaho has issued the following news release:

More than 250 groups from across the country joined Sens. Mike Crapo (R-Idaho),
and Ron Wyden (D-Oregon), to express support for passing the Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act to ensure vital resources in the fight against catastrophic
wildfires in the West ahead of this year's fire season.

The 261 organizations, including the Nature Conservancy and the National Rifle
Association, wrote to all 535 members of the U.S. Senate and the House of
Representatives to show the importance of passing the bill.

"These groups are helping sound our call to action, which became even more
urgent today with news that the fire outlook is worsening," said Crapo.
"According to Chief Tom Tidwell, there is a 90-percent chance the Forest Service
will run out of money to fight fires at a time when 58-millon acres of national
forests face a high or very high risk of severe wildfire.  We have got to
perform the management that will reduce catastrophic fires and make sure
resources for that management, and to fight fires, are available."

"Fire season is almost here, and for Oregonians and others in the West, who know
that wildfires are no less destructive than other natural disasters, it's past
time to end the destructive cycle of playing catch-up on wildfire funding,"Wyden
said. "I'm glad to have these groups standing with Sen. Crapo and me as we
continue to push for our fix to address these wildfires before they start."

Wyden and Crapo reintroduced the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act on Jan. 22. The
bill ends the cycle of underfunding fire suppression, which currently forces
federal agencies to steal from fire prevention just to put out fires. Instead,
Wyden and Crapo's bill will end this so-called "fire borrowing" by funding the
largest wildfires from a similar disaster account used to fund other natural
disasters. The Interior Department and the Forest Service estimate these fires -
about 1 percent - consume 30 percent of firefighting budgets.

In March, Crapo and Wyden secured language in the Senate budget to allow a
funding cap adjustment that has prevented agencies from treating wildfires as
natural disasters under the federal budget.

The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would move any fire suppression spending above
70% of the 10-year average to a disaster funding account that is separate from
Forest Service and Interior budgets. The bill now has 14 bipartisan cosponsors
in the Senate and 79 representatives have signed on to the House version.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              768 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 9, 2015 Saturday

Idaho: Crapo-Wyden Wildfire Disaster Funding Act Gains Support of More Than 250
Organizations

LENGTH: 437  words

DATELINE: Boise


Mike Crapo of Idaho has issued the following news release:

More than 250 groups from across the country joined Sens. Mike Crapo (R-Idaho),
and Ron Wyden (D-Oregon), to express support for passing the Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act to ensure vital resources in the fight against catastrophic
wildfires in the West ahead of this year's fire season.

The 261 organizations, including the Nature Conservancy and the National Rifle
Association, wrote to all 535 members of the U.S. Senate and the House of
Representatives to show the importance of passing the bill.

"These groups are helping sound our call to action, which became even more
urgent today with news that the fire outlook is worsening," said Crapo.
"According to Chief Tom Tidwell, there is a 90-percent chance the Forest Service
will run out of money to fight fires at a time when 58-millon acres of national
forests face a high or very high risk of severe wildfire.  We have got to
perform the management that will reduce catastrophic fires and make sure
resources for that management, and to fight fires, are available."

"Fire season is almost here, and for Oregonians and others in the West, who know
that wildfires are no less destructive than other natural disasters, it's past
time to end the destructive cycle of playing catch-up on wildfire funding,"Wyden
said. "I'm glad to have these groups standing with Sen. Crapo and me as we
continue to push for our fix to address these wildfires before they start."

Wyden and Crapo reintroduced the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act on Jan. 22. The
bill ends the cycle of underfunding fire suppression, which currently forces
federal agencies to steal from fire prevention just to put out fires. Instead,
Wyden and Crapo's bill will end this so-called "fire borrowing" by funding the
largest wildfires from a similar disaster account used to fund other natural
disasters. The Interior Department and the Forest Service estimate these fires -
about 1 percent - consume 30 percent of firefighting budgets.

In March, Crapo and Wyden secured language in the Senate budget to allow a
funding cap adjustment that has prevented agencies from treating wildfires as
natural disasters under the federal budget.

The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would move any fire suppression spending above
70% of the 10-year average to a disaster funding account that is separate from
Forest Service and Interior budgets. The bill now has 14 bipartisan cosponsors
in the Senate and 79 representatives have signed on to the House version.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              769 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                             May 23, 2015 Saturday
                                 Early Edition

Red Earth Creek wildfire contained

SECTION: CITY &; REGION; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 284 words


A large wildfire near Red Earth Creek in northern Alberta has been contained
after spreading across 256 hectares.

The fire began after a man allegedly lit his truck on fire in a ditch on Highway
88, about 44 kilometres south of Red Earth Creek on Tuesday. It then spread to
the bush and was considered out-ofcontrol.

Kenneth Joseph Auger, 35, has since been charged with arson.

There are currently 1,000 firefighters deployed throughout the province to deal
with wildfires and help with fire prevention.

Another 126 firefighters were scheduled to arrive from Ontario Friday afternoon.

Last year, 117 firefighters from Ontario were brought to help fight more than
1,400 wildfires.

There are now 25 wildfires burning in Alberta, all currently classified as under
control. Since April 1, there have been 588 wildfires recorded in Alberta.

A full fire ban has been declared for all of Strathcona County, including rural
areas, hamlets and Sherwood Park.

The county says it called the ban in response to extremely dry and windy
conditions.

No outdoor fires are permitted until further notice, nor are recreational
firepits or charcoal barbecues. The use of propane appliances and barbecues is
permitted. Fire permits have been suspended until the ban is lifted.

Failure to comply with the fire bans may result in a $1,000 fine.

There is also a fire ban in place in Edmonton, the first in several years, after
the fire danger rating in the city was listed as extreme on Wednesday.

The Edmonton ban prohibits burning activities, including open burning, backyard
fire pits, solid fuel cook stoves in parks and fireworks. Propane or gas
barbecues are still permitted. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2015 Postmedia Network Inc. All
rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 Edmonton Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              770 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        The Jamestown Sun (North Dakota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 2, 2012 Tuesday

Wildfires cause mandatory evacuation in Minnesota city

BYLINE: Forum Communications, The Jamestown Sun, N.D.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 477 words


Oct. 02--Wildfires have forced the mandatory evacuation of the south side of
Karlstad, Minn., this afternoon.

Some buildings, which were believed to be unoccupied, were on fire at about 3:30
p.m., according to the Kittson County Sheriff's Department.

The wildfires in the region have been fueled by strong southerly winds that have
topped 40 mph this afternoon.

A large wildfire has been burning southwest of Karlstad since Sunday. It was
reported to cover about 500 acres earlier today.

Local volunteer fire departments from Karlstad and all of Kittson County have
been dispatched to the Karlstad scene.

Meanwhile, he Minnesota National Guard joined the battle today to control the
series of wildfires that have been burning since the weekend in the region.

Two Blackhawk helicopters and at least a dozen Guardsmen were dispatched to
Thief River Falls, upon the directive issued by Gov. Mark Dayton.

The main target was a 700-acre fire, known as the Minnie Fire near Fourtown,
Minn. The fire was about two miles long and about one-half-mile wide Tuesday
morning and access had been difficult, according to the Minnesota Interagency
Fire Center.

It's one of several weekend fires that still were burning Tuesday in what is
considered the Wannaska Complex of northwest Minnesota.

Meanwhile, the National Weather Service extended its red flag fire warning to
cover both western Minnesota and eastern North Dakota through Tuesday, as winds
that topped 40-mph and relative humidity levels of 20 percent or lower turned
the region into a tinderbox.

In addition, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources continued mop-up
operations on two of four fires that were still burning this morning west of
Middle River, Minn.

--East Park, a 150-acre fire in which firefighting efforts have been hampered by
burning peat pockets, according to Jean Bergerson, a Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources public information officer who is part of the incident command
system. Firefighters have been able to extinguish only about five acres per day,
using heavy equipment to dig out and turn the peat.

--West Lincoln, a 15-acre fire in which mop-up work was underway Tuesday in a
hardwood forest area.

--Richardville, a 980-acre fire north of Lancaster, Minn. While most of the fire
was located in Manitoba, one residence and four outbuildings were destroyed
Monday.

--Juneberry, a small area of peat, the site of a fire that initially was
reported in August.

Besides the National Guard, the state has been aided by the use of aerial water
scoopers to drop water and other fire suppressants from the air from Manitoba
and Ontario, according to a report Tuesday.

Local volunteer fire departments also have been assisting.

More from around the web

___ (c)2012 The Jamestown Sun (Jamestown, N.D.) Visit The Jamestown Sun
(Jamestown, N.D.) at www.jamestownsun.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121002-QJ-Wildfires
-cause-mandatory-evacuation-in-Minnesota-city-1002-20121002

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QJ


                        Copyright 2012 The Jamestown Sun


                              771 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              India Insurance News

                      January 24, 2017 Tuesday 6:30 AM EST

SpatialKey, RedZone Partner to Offer Leading Wildfire Underwriting Solution

LENGTH: 374  words


Jan. 24 -- SpatialKey Inc. (SpatialKey) is pleased to offer its insurance
clients access to wildfire risk data from RedZone. RedZone provides the most
accurate, up-to-date wildfire intelligence for underwriters, now immediately
available in SpatialKey's geospatial insurance analytics platform.

According to the Insurance Information Institute, 2016 saw 61,920 wildfires
compared to the reported 58,225 in 2015 in the U.S. Historically, there haven't
been great tools for underwriters to understand the risk of wildfire, which is
why SpatialKey and RedZone decided to collaborate. Combining SpatialKey's
powerful analytics and visualizations with RedZone's wildfire risk data,
insurers gain a competitive advantage in the marketplace by making more informed
risk decisions.

SpatialKey's Underwriting app, designed by insurance experts, gives underwriters
the ability to exploit faster, better intelligence to price and select risk
better, driving improved underwriting profit with reduced downstream costs
associated with reinsurance and claims. Today's newly announced partnership puts
RedZone's wildfire risk data directly into the hands of underwriters, empowering
them to analyze and visualize live ember risk, fire severity, fire frequency,
and more.

Clark Woodward, founder and CEO of RedZone explains: "We've devoted our business
entirely to giving underwriters access to the most accurate, reliable,
up-to-date wildfire intelligence available. Now, underwriters can access this
data through the SpatialKey platform and quickly visualize and analyze
information to make prudent risk and pricing decisions. This partnership puts
data into the hands of the underwriter, and we're thrilled to be a part of that
innovation."

Bret Stone, President of SpatialKey comments: "We believe rapid innovation is
best achieved through collaboration among commercial providers. This
collaboration enables insurers to put advancements in InsurTech into action. Our
partnership with RedZone brings together the best data and technology to deliver
value to insurers. We're excited that RedZone shares our vision and has enabled
us to deliver an unmatched wildfire solution to help insurers better understand,
select, and manage wildfire risk."

Source: SpatialKey

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2017 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              772 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                             June 15, 2013 Saturday

Colorado fire: Is global warming one of the culprits?;
Western wildfires like the Black Forest Fire in Colorado have been increasing in
frequency and duration in recent years, burning far more land and with greater
intensity. Scientists say climate change is a major factor.

BYLINE: Brad Knickerbocker Staff writer

SECTION: USA

LENGTH: 755 words


Firefighters are beginning to get a handle on the massive Black Forest wildfire
near Colorado Springs - the most destructive fire in the state's history.

Cooler temperatures and some rain helped increase the contained area from just
five percent Thursday to 30 percent Friday, authorities reported.

Still, the fire has been devastating: Two people killed and 38,000 evacuated,
473 homes destroyed as the blaze moved through 25 square miles of forests and
woodland neighborhoods.

The Black Forest Fire in Colorado is part of a pattern in the West: increased
construction in the "wildland-urban interface," as it's called.

Most homeowners adhere to zoning codes and other regulations requiring them to
cut back trees, shrubs, and other natural fuels that can send fires racing
through developed areas. Here in the mountains of southern Oregon, crews
frequently are seen thinning the forested watershed above town.

Lightning strikes spark most wildfires, and unpaved roads into national forests
and wilderness areas provide access to arsonists as well as to hunters and
campers. (What started the Black Forest Fire is yet to be determined, but El
Paso County Sheriff Terry Maketa suspects human causation.)

But experts now have little doubt that climate change has become a major factor
in the number and intensity of wildfires.

"Today, western forests are experiencing longer wildfire seasons and more acres
burned compared to several decades ago," says Todd Sanford, a climate scientist
at the Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS). "The greatest increase has occurred
in mid-elevation Northern Rockies forests, which are having higher spring and
summer temperatures and earlier snowmelt. These conditions are linked to climate
change."

"In general, climate change is increasing the risk for longer wildfire seasons
and more area burned," he says.

The UCS reports that wildfires in the western US have been increasing in
frequency and duration since the mid-1980s, occurring nearly four times more
often, burning more than six times the land area, and lasting almost five times
as long.

"As the climate warms, moisture and precipitation levels are changing, with wet
areas becoming wetter and dry areas becoming drier," the organization reports.
"Higher spring and summer temperatures and earlier spring snow-melt typically
cause soils to be drier for longer, increasing the likelihood of drought and a
longer wildfire season, particularly in the western United States. These hot,
dry conditions also increase the likelihood that, once wildfires are started by
lightning strikes or human error, they will be more intense and long-burning."

To those tasked with preventing and fighting wildfires, climate change has
become a major challenge.

"On average, wildfires burn twice as many acres each year as compared to 40
years ago. Last year, the fires were massive in size, coinciding with increased
temperatures and early snow melt in the West," US Forest Service Chief Tom
Tidwell told the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee in testimony last
week. "The largest issue we now face is how to adapt our management to
anticipate climate change impacts and to mitigate their potential effects."

In its report accompanying Mr. Tidwell's testimony, the Forest Service detailed
the increasing costs of fire-fighting.

Costs of fire suppression have increased to consume nearly half of the entire
Forest Service budget. In fiscal year 1991, fire activities accounted for about
13 percent of the total agency budget. In fiscal year 2012, it was more than 40
percent. Since fiscal year 2000, the 10-year average cost has risen almost every
year - from a little more than $540 million to more than $1 billion in 2010 and
beyond.

During the past 10 years, the Forest Service has made fire transfers from
non-firefighting accounts to pay for fire suppression costs six times, ranging
from a low of $100 million in fiscal year 2007 to a high of $999 million in
fiscal year 2002, and totaling approximately $2.7 billion. Of that total, $2.3
billion was repaid but led to disruptions within many Forest Service programs.

In Colorado, meanwhile, the US Department of Agriculture has designated six
counties as primary natural disaster areas and six more as contiguous disaster
areas due to ongoing severe drought conditions, US Senator Michael Bennet (D) of
Colorado announced this week.

"Despite some relief earlier this year, right now we're seeing how quickly our
weather can get hot and dry, creating hazardous fire and drought conditions,"
Sen. Bennet said.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2013 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                              773 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    The Wilson Daily Times (North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 25, 2009 Saturday

Wildfires bring concern to state

BYLINE: Gina Childress, The Wilson Daily Times, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 494 words


Apr. 25--Even though there is no official ban in place, state forestry officials
are requesting that residents avoid burning yard debris because of the warm and
windy weather we have been experiencing.

This request comes on the heels of the devastating fire that has terrorized the
North Myrtle Beach, S.C. area destroying approximately 69 homes and damaging
hundreds of others.

The North Carolina Division of Forest Resources has said the potential for
wildfires is higher over the next few days. The spring wildfire season usually
lasts from mid-February through mid-May when vegetation has returned, a press
release from forestry officials said.

Late Friday afternoon, forestry officials in South Carolina indicated that a man
burning trash in his yard may have sparked the fires that have charred about 31
square miles. So far, authorities estimate damages to be around $16 million.

The forestry division said burning yard debris is the top cause of wildfires.
Last year, the division responded to 4,361 fires that burned more than 52,000
acres of land, destroyed seven homes and damaged 45 others in North Carolina.

It is illegal in this state to burn paper, trash, construction materials and
other non-vegetative materials. Officials also strongly advise residents against
burning leaves, pine straw, twigs or other yard waste during this high risk
time. Winds, dry conditions, hotter temperatures and organic fuels only increase
the chances that a wildfire can spark.

The N.C. Division of Forest Resources has offered assistance to the S.C.
Forestry Commission to help in extinguishing the 19,600-acre wildfire. In
preparation for providing assistance if asked, a P3 Orion Airtanker has been
readied at the Kinston Regional Jetport.

The P3 Orion Airtanker flies over the wildfire and can drop 2,550 gallons of
flame retardant on a single pass

N.C. Forestry officials have also have firefighting equipment and personnel
stationed at the North Carolina-South Carolina border in case the fire threatens
this state.

Along with the wildfires comes poor air quality.

The N.C. Dept. of Environment and Natural Resources issued a health notice for
the Triangle metropolitan areas, including Nash, Edgecombe and Wilson counties.

They have issued a Code Orange, which means that residents who are sensitive to
air pollution should avoid being outdoors for long periods of time. People who
are at risk are children, the elderly, people who work or exercise outdoors and
those with heart conditions and respiratory conditions.

gina@wilsontimes.com -- 265-7821

To see more of The Wilson Daily Times or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.wilsondaily.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, The Wilson Daily Times, N.C.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090425-ZW-Wildfires-bring-concern-to-state-0425

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZW


                                 Copyright 2009


                              774 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            October 17, 2017 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Better weather gives leg up to crews on California wildfires

BYLINE:  By SUDHIN THANAWALA and BRIAN MELLEY Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 465 words


SANTA ROSA, Calif. - The wind eased, some of the smoke began to clear and the
forecast Monday offered a tantalizing chance of rain to thousands of
firefighters trying to corral the wildfires that have laid waste to the nation's
most celebrated wine-making region.

The progress was tempered by word of the first death from the weeklong
firefighting effort - a driver who was killed Monday when his truck overturned
on a winding mountain road.

The driver, who had been delivering water to the fire lines, crashed before dawn
in Napa County on a roadway that climbs from vineyards into the mountains. No
other details were available about the accident, which was under investigation,
said Mike Wilson, a fire spokesman.

After days of wind gusts that constantly fanned the fires, lighter wind offered
a chance for crews to make greater gains, and thousands more people were allowed
to go home more than a week after the blazes that have killed more than 40
people began.

Many of those who returned to find their homes either standing or reduced to ash
knew their fate in advance. Satellite images, aerial photos and news reports
with detailed maps of neighborhoods had given homeowners in populated areas a
pretty clear idea of the fire's path.

The return home was emotional even for those whose properties were spared.

"When we came up to check on it, we were amazed it was here," said Tom Beckman,
who credited his neighbor's two sheep with chomping vegetation surrounding his
home and keeping the fires at bay.

"All the trivial things we have to work on - cleaning up, replacing the stuff in
the fridge and freezer - that's nothing compared to my friends who lost their
homes," Beckman said.

The smell of smoke remained thick in the air and spread to the San Francisco
area, but skies were clearer in some places.

Although the weather was still hot and dry, the calmer wind and the possibility
of rain later in the week should help crews tamp down the deadliest, most
destructive cluster of blazes in California history.

"Any sort of moisture is welcome at this point," said Scott Rowe, a
meteorologist with the National Weather Service.

He predicted a fraction of an inch of rain would fall late Thursday in Sonoma
and Napa counties.

Firefighters continued to battle flames that have crossed a mountain from Sonoma
County to Napa County. Three helicopters repeatedly dipped water buckets into a
reservoir and made drops to stop flames from crawling downhill toward historic
wineries in the Napa Valley.

Most of the people reported missing have been located, and authorities said many
were false reports from people far away who could not get in touch with friends
or relatives.

About 40,000 evacuees were still waiting for permission to go back to their
communities, down from a high of 100,000 on Saturday.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Members of a search and rescue team search through the rubble of
mobile homes destroyed by a wildfire Monday, Oct. 16, 2017, in Santa Rosa,
Calif. With the winds dying down, fire crews gained ground as they battled
wildfires that have devastated California wine country and other parts of the
state over the past week, and thousands of people got the all-clear to return
home. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong)  A house stands intact above one that was destroyed
by wildfire near Atlas Peak Road Monday, Oct. 16, 2017, in Napa, Calif. State
and local officials say they are trying to get people back into their homes, but
they cautioned that it could take days and even weeks for neighborhoods hard hit
by Northern California wildfires. (AP Photo/Eric Risberg)  Workers at the
Signorello Estate winery install new irrigation pipes to replace ones burned by
wildfire Monday, Oct. 16, 2017, in Napa, Calif. State and local officials say
they are trying to get people back into their homes, but they cautioned that it
could take days and even weeks for neighborhoods hard hit by Northern California
wildfires. (AP Photo/Eric Risberg)  Chris Alejos, left, and his wife, Brittany,
get help from friend Nick Cann as they remove a bed frame from their home in the
Coffey Park area of Santa Rosa, Calif. Monday, Oct. 16, 2017. The Alejos home
was not damaged by the fire that destroyed homes all around theirs, but smoke
damage and no power made it unlivable for now. (AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli)  A
house stands intact above one that was destroyed by wildfire near Atlas Peak
Road, Monday, Oct. 16, 2017, in Napa, Calif. State and local officials say they
are trying to get people back into their homes, but they cautioned that it could
take days and even weeks for neighborhoods hard hit by Northern California
wildfires. (AP Photo/Eric Risberg)  A United States flag flies over the charred
remains of a house in the Coffey Park area of Santa Rosa, Calif., Monday, Oct.
16, 2017. (AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli)  A scorched truck and wheelchair sit
outside the charred remains of a house in the Coffey Park area of Santa Rosa,
Calif., Monday, Oct. 16, 2017. (AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli)  A Pacific Gas and
Electric base camp is visible in the distance at Starmont Winery and Vineyards,
Monday, Oct. 16, 2017, in Napa, Calif. With the winds dying down, fire crews
gained ground as they battled wildfires that have devastated California wine
country and other parts of the state over the past week, and thousands of people
got the all-clear to return home. (AP Photo/Eric Risberg)  Two cars are among
the remains Monday, Oct. 16, 2017, at the house where Sara and Charles Rippey
died a week ago in a fast-moving wildfire in Napa, Calif. The couple, 98- and
100-years-old, respectively, had been married over 75 years. With the winds
dying down, fire crews gained ground as they battled wildfires that have
devastated California wine country and other parts of the state over the past
week, and thousands of people got the all-clear to return home. (AP Photo/Eric
Risberg)  A mailbox stands Monday, Oct. 16, 2017, outside the remains of the
home where Sara and Charles Rippey died a week ago in a fast-moving wildfire in
Napa, Calif. The couple, 98 and 100 years old, had been married over 75 years.
With the winds dying down, fire crews gained ground as they battled wildfires
that have devastated California wine country and other parts of the state over
the past week, and thousands of people got the all-clear to return home. (AP
Photo/Eric Risberg)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              775 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       Grand Forks Herald (North Dakota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 2, 2012 Tuesday

Wildfires force mandatory evacuation of south side in Karlstad, Minn.

BYLINE: Kevin Bonham, Grand Forks Herald

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 496 words


Oct. 02--Wildfires have forced the mandatory evacuation of the south side of
Karlstad, Minn., this afternoon.

Some buildings, which were believed to be unoccupied, were on fire at about 3:30
p.m., according to the Kittson County Sheriff's Department.

The wildfires in the region have been fueled by strong southerly winds that have
topped 40 mph this afternoon.

A large wildfire has been burning southwest of Karlstad since Sunday. It was
reported to cover about 500 acres earlier today.

Local volunteer fire departments from Karlstad and all of Kittson County have
been dispatched to the Karlstad scene.

Meanwhile, he Minnesota National Guard joined the battle today to control the
series of wildfires that have been burning since the weekend in the region.

Two Blackhawk helicopters and at least a dozen Guardsmen were dispatched to
Thief River Falls, upon the directive issued by Gov. Mark Dayton.

The main target was a 700-acre fire, known as the Minnie Fire near Fourtown,
Minn. The fire was about two miles long and about one-half-mile wide Tuesday
morning and access had been difficult, according to the Minnesota Interagency
Fire Center.

It's one of several weekend fires that still were burning Tuesday in what is
considered the Wannaska Complex of northwest Minnesota.

Meanwhile, the National Weather Service extended its red flag fire warning to
cover both western Minnesota and eastern North Dakota through Tuesday, as winds
that topped 40-mph and relative humidity levels of 20 percent or lower turned
the region into a tinderbox.

In addition, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources continued mop-up
operations on two of four fires that were still burning this morning west of
Middle River, Minn.

--East Park, a 150-acre fire in which firefighting efforts have been hampered by
burning peat pockets, according to Jean Bergerson, a Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources public information officer who is part of the incident command
system. Firefighters have been able to extinguish only about five acres per day,
using heavy equipment to dig out and turn the peat.

--West Lincoln, a 15-acre fire in which mop-up work was underway Tuesday in a
hardwood forest area.

--Richardville, a 980-acre fire north of Lancaster, Minn. While most of the fire
was located in Manitoba, one residence and four outbuildings were destroyed
Monday.

--Juneberry, a small area of peat, the site of a fire that initially was
reported in August.

Besides the National Guard, the state has been aided by the use of aerial water
scoopers to drop water and other fire suppressants from the air from Manitoba
and Ontario, according to a report Tuesday.

Local volunteer fire departments also have been assisting.

Call Bonham at (701) 780-1110; (800) 477-6572, ext. 1110; or send email to
kbonham@gfherald.com

More from around the web

___ (c)2012 the Grand Forks Herald (Grand Forks, N.D.) Visit the Grand Forks
Herald (Grand Forks, N.D.) at www.grandforksherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121002-GF-Wildfires
-force-mandatory-evacuation-of-south-side-in-Karlstad-Minn-1002-20121002

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GF


                       Copyright 2012 Grand Forks Herald


                              776 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      News-Topic (Lenoir, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 5, 2008 Saturday

Summer wildfire activity on the rise

BYLINE: Nathan Key, News-Topic, Lenoir, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 796 words


Jul. 5--Summer usually is not a time of heavy wildfire activity in Caldwell
County. This year has not been the norm.

The North Carolina Forest Service and local fire departments in the county
already have seen a number of wildfires as the weather starts to get hotter.

That being said, the wildfire activity in the county during the first six months
is down from what it was at the same time last year when drought conditions
really started taking their toll on the area.

Caldwell County Ranger Rusty Dellinger said his agency has responded to
approximately 100 fires that have burned roughly 210 acres so far in 2008. The
largest of those was a 53-acre fire in eastern Caldwell County off Brandy Place
near the Alexander County line June 18 and a 40-acre fire off Valway Road north
of Lenoir in January. There also was a 25-acre fire between Alfred Hartley and
Millers Creek roads, accounting for the bulk of the acreage burned in the
county.

"Most of our fires have been fairly manageable, usually two acres or less,"
Dellinger said. "We've not had any real issues other than the Valway Road fire
and the Little River fire."

The NCFS responded to 207 wildfires last year in Caldwell County, almost twice
as many as its five-year average of 104. In fact, the last three years have seen
an increase in wildfire activity.

Debris burning remains the primary cause of the most wildfires in the county,
though downed power lines, structure or vehicle fires and stove ashes are some
other prevalent causes during the first six months of the year.

Typically, the summer months do not see a lot of wildfire activity. Showers
brought on by thunderstorms keep things a bit damp and provide liquid for trees
and plants. There is more leaf cover on trees to provide shade and protect
forest floors from the sun, reducing the rate of moisture evaporation.

This year, however, the county has seen several wildfires already in early
summer, and several of those have been caused by dry lightning strikes.

"Normally, summer is not a busy time for wildfire activity. We may only run two
or three fires a month during the summer," Dellinger said. "But as dry as it has
been and with the lack of adequate rainfall we've had, we have seen more fires."

Spring and fall tend to be the major fire seasons for the Forest Service because
of lower humidity, stronger winds and more burning going on as people clean up
foliage around their homes. Dellinger said spring fire season this year was
slower than last, and the numbers were down thanks to more frequent, though not
drenching, rainfalls.

"Spring was slower this year, but it seems any more like fire season is a
year-round thing," he said. "We tend to have more (fires) in spring and fall,
but really we're busy all year long."

And that is not usual for the summer months.

"The fires we have been seeing the last few weeks are not typical of what we
normally see in June and July," Dellinger explained. "This is a good indicator
of the drought we're still in. We just don't anticipate the number of fires
we've had or fires of this intensity this time of year. Normally we see those in
the spring or the fall."

More fires this summer have been attributed to lightning strikes. There were
approximately five strikes that caused wildfires during June alone, and the
Little River fire was one of those.

Dellinger said fires caused by lightning strikes often can be hard to find
because they tend to happen in remote areas often lacking good access. They may
smolder for several days, and by the time they are discovered may have burned a
number of acres.

Dellinger said it is important for people burning during the summer months
Ã¢(EURO)" whether it's debris or even campfires Ã¢(EURO)" to make sure they are
doing so at a time when conditions are favorable, to burn in a good location
away from combustibles, to make sure they have proper tools and a water source
available and that they stay with their fire until it is extinguished
completely.

He went on to add that predictions of a drier summer only will increase the
likelihood of forest fires.

"We may get some rainfall, but it doesn't appear to be anything that will be a
drought buster," Dellinger said. "The fuels in the forest are just so dry and
have been for some time due to the lack of precipitation last year and again
this year. That's why people still need to use caution when they burn."

To see more of the News-Topic or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.newstopic.net/. Copyright (c) 2008, News-Topic, Lenoir, N.C.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20080705-QL-Summer-wildfire-activity-on-the-rise-0705

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QL


                                 Copyright 2008


                              777 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Newcastle Herald (Australia)

                              June 10, 2002 Monday
                                  Late Edition

Wildfires handed Country Week lesson

BYLINE: JAMES GARDINER

SECTION: SPORT; Sport Monday; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 290 words


NEWCASTLE Wildfires co-coach Chris Coleman believes his young players will be
all the better for their first Country Week experience.

The Wildfires meet Western Plains today in a play-off for ninth and 10th places
after losing both games in the second stage of the carnival played at Central
Coast Stadium, Gosford, on the weekend.

The Wildfires, Newcastle's No.2 team, lost to Central West 45-10 on Saturday and
Illawarra 40-17 yesterday.

They began their campaign with a hard-fought 21-9 win over New England in the
first round at Armidale two weeks ago. The win inspired hopes of both the
Wildfires and the Newcastle No.1 side progressing to the semi-finals of the
premier Caldwell Cup division.

The Wildfires were competitive in the first half of both games at Gosford but
could not match the power and precision of the leading zones.

`Our lack of experience, particularly at the set pieces, really hurt us,'
Coleman said.

`You have to remember we were up against the cream of players from every zone.

`For the majority of the Wildfires, the carnival was their first taste of
representative rugby.

`I'm confident the young players will go back to their club sides better players
and hopefully they will mature to the extent that they progress to the No.1
side.'

Singleton winger Daniel Spiterie scored an opportunist try after the half-time
siren to give the Wildfires a chance at 14-10 against Central West.

But a burst of four tries in 20 minutes by Central West sealed a comfortable
win.

It was a similar story against Illawarra yesterday.

The Wildfires trailed 21-10 at half-time and reduced the margin to 21-17 early
in the second half.

But again an inability to win their own ball from set pieces and mistakes at
crucial times sealed their fate.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2002 Newcastle Newspapers Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              778 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                             May 28, 2015 Thursday
                                 Early Edition

Alberta fire season 'hectic,' destructive; Crews facing dry conditions, shifting
winds

BYLINE: Otiena Ellwand and Alexandra Zabjek, Edmonton Journal

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 549 words

DATELINE: EDMONTON


Alberta's wildfire season is only three months in and already it has consumed
significantly more forest than last year.

So far, there have been 720 wildfires in the province, burning just under 30,000
hectares of forest, compared to 400 fires at this time last year that burned
about 700 hectares.

"The actual amount of forest that's been consumed is dramatically different. ...
It's been a significant increase in terms of activity," said wildfire
information officer Richard Horne, adding that the majority of those have been
caused by people.

The wildfire season, which began March 1, has been "very, very hectic," with
some firefighters working up to 24 days straight, said Horne.

"The forested areas of the province have been incredibly dry, so much so that
our meteorologists are talking about this being almost unprecedented," he said
at the Lesser Slave Lake Fire Centre on Wednesday. All evacuation orders related
to wildfires raging in Alberta were lifted as of Wednesday afternoon, but 15
wildfires are still burning out of control, including one that has been creeping
toward oil and gas infrastructure near Cold Lake, Scott Long from the Alberta
Emergency Management Agency told a news conference. Cenovus and CNRL both have
operations in the area.

"There's no rain; that's the biggest concern certainly for the foreseeable
future.

"The conditions remain dry and there is the possibility of further lightning
strikes in the coming days," Long said, adding that shifting winds could further
complicate the situation for fire crews. "They're doing their best to make sure
it does not impinge on any oil and gas infrastructure."

Wildfire information manager Geoff Driscoll said the fire had grown to about
17,000 hectares as of Wednesday, from 10,000 hectares on Tuesday.

However, the blaze remained five kilometres away from oil operations, the same
distance it was before.

As of Wednesday morning, about 250 firefighters and 10 helicopters were fighting
the blaze, which is still considered out of control and is expected to keep
growing in the days ahead.

At least some of 150 extra firefighters coming to Alberta from other provinces
are expected to be deployed to the Cold Lake fire.

"We have been increasing the amount of resources at this fire each day,"
Driscoll said.

Further west, a wildfire near Wabasca that forced the evacuation of almost 5,000
people is now "being held."

Long credited "numerous and significant perimeter guards" that firefighters have
worked on over the last 72 hours on the west, south and east sides of the fire.

The reception centres in Athabasca and Calling Lake are still open, but he said
there is a co-ordinated "re-entry" for residents.

Premier Rachel Notley is getting briefed on the wildfire threats daily.

"Of course, we're very concerned. We know that Albertans across the province are
concerned," Notley said in Calgary.

She said that she was pleased to learn evacuation orders were lifted for
residents.

"But we know this is a critical issue, that it requires constant attention and
oversight and that's why I've asked to be briefed every day," she said.

The Alberta government's provincial operations centre is up and running in
Edmonton, for the first time since the 2011 Slave Lake fire disaster.
!@COPYRIGHT=© 2015 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ryan Jackson, Edmonton Journal; A helicopter drops water on a hot spot
along the edge of a contained wildfire east of Slave Lake, Alta., Wednesday.
Alberta has seen 720 wildfires already this season, compared to just 400 fires
at this time last year.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2015 The Leader-Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              779 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Ashcroft Cache Creek Journal

                             August 11, 2017 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Train rail activity eliminated as cause of Elephant Hill wildfire

BYLINE: Barbara Roden

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 121 words


Investigators from the RCMP and BC Wildfire Service investigating the Elephant
Hill wildfire have eliminated train rail line activities as a possible cause of
the wildfire.

Just before 10 p.m. on Thursday, July 6, BC Wildfire Service received
information that there was a fire just south of the Village of Ashcroft. As of
August 11, 2017, the fire is still active, and is estimated to be more than
117,000 hectares in size.

BC Wildfire Service and the RCMP continue to investigate the Elephant Hill
wildfire, and can confirm that the fire was not caused by train traffic or rail
maintenance-related activities on the rail lines.

Anyone with information about the fire is asked to contact the dedicated RCMP
tip line at 1-855-685-8788.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              780 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Clearwater Times (N. Thompson)

                             August 11, 2017 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Train rail activity eliminated as cause of Elephant Hill wildfire

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 121 words


Investigators from the RCMP and BC Wildfire Service investigating the Elephant
Hill wildfire have eliminated train rail line activities as a possible cause of
the wildfire.

Just before 10 p.m. on Thursday, July 6, BC Wildfire Service received
information that there was a fire just south of the Village of Ashcroft. As of
August 11, 2017, the fire is still active, and is estimated to be more than
117,000 hectares in size.

BC Wildfire Service and the RCMP continue to investigate the Elephant Hill
wildfire, and can confirm that the fire was not caused by train traffic or rail
maintenance-related activities on the rail lines.

Anyone with information about the fire is asked to contact the dedicated RCMP
tip line at 1-855-685-8788.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              781 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 23, 2014 Friday

USPTO grants trade mark "WILDFIRE DEFENSE SYSTEMS" to Wildfire Defense Systems,
Inc. (MONTANA)

LENGTH: 100  words

DATELINE: Alexandria


Wildfire Defense Systems, Inc. (MONTANA), has been granted trademark (4535064)
titled as "WILDFIRE DEFENSE SYSTEMS" from the United States Patent and Trademark
Office.

Status: Registered

Class/es: IC 045. US 100 101. G & S: Inspection services in the field of
wildfire management and control, namely, inspection of homes and other
structures for purposes of identifying and mitigating wildfire risk; wildfire
response services, namely, pre-suppression services, threat notification, and
coordination with incident command; and wildfire monitoring and notification
services. FIRST USE: 20131004.

Filing

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              782 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Fort McMurray Today

                           November 2, 2016 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Fines of up to $1 million included in proposed wildfire bill

BYLINE: Vincent Mcdermott, Fort Mcmurray Today

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 460  words


Proposed changes to Alberta's legislation preventing wildfires includes steep
fines of up to $1 million and imprisonment.

The changes were announced Monday by the provincial government in Bill 24, the
proposed Forest and Prairie Protection Amendment Act.

Under the proposed bill, a maximum fine of $100,000 or two years imprisonment
could be applied to an individual refusing to follow orders related to
preventing forest fires, such as ignoring a fire ban or abandoning a campfire.

Corporations could be fined up to $1 million. They could also be fined up to
$10,000 for not having proper firefighting equipment on site or a suitable
wildfire plan.

In addition to any fines, courts may order an individual or corporation to
reimburse firefighting costs.

"Far too many wildfires are triggered by human activity and we need to take
proactive steps that will help reduce the risk of this happening," said Oneil
Carlier, Alberta's Forestry and Agriculture Minister, in a statement.

According to Carlier's ministry, wildfire crews fought more than 1,300 fires in
2016, including the Fort McMurray fire. Approximately 70 per cent of wildfires
in the last five years have been linked to human activity.

Other powers in the legislation include more authority to stop actions
interfering with firefighting, such as flying drones near fires, and simplifying
the process on restricting certain activities during a fire ban, such as the use
of offroad vehicles during hazardous environmental conditions.

March 1 would be declared the official start of fire season to ensure burning
permit

requirements are in place in a timely manner.

The legislation was also endorsed by Paul Whittaker, president and CEO of the
Alberta Forest Products Association, and Brent Hodgson, president of the Alberta
Off-Highway Vehicle Association.

"Members of the Alberta Off-Highway Vehicle Association are responsible users
and we want to help the government with its efforts in reducing human-caused
wildfires and protecting our forests," said Hodgson.

The May wildfire that displaced tens of thousands of Fort McMurray residents was
likely caused by people.

The fire was first spotted 15 kilometres southwest of the city on the afternoon
of May 1 by an aerial forestry crew. The area had trails popular with offroad
vehicles and hikers. There are also power lines in the area that may have been
undergoing maintenance before the fire.

The investigation does not mean police believe the fire was purposely started
with criminal intent, rather that they are investigating if a criminal activity
was present at the start of the fire. However, there is a chance whoever started
the fire may be unaware they were the cause.

vmcdermott@postmedia.com !@COPYRIGHT=© 2016 Sun Media Corporation. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Jeff Mcintosh, The Canadian Press; Wildfires burn in and around Fort
McMurray, Alberta, Wednesday, May 4, 2016.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2016 Fort McMurray Today
                              All Rights Reserved


                              783 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           The Taos News (New Mexico)

                            August 13, 2009 Thursday

WHERE FORESTS, HUMANS MEET: WILDFIRE PROTECTION PLAN READY

BYLINE: ANDY DENNISON

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 724 words


By Andy Dennison

The Taos News

In 1996, the Hondo-Lama wildfire consumed 10,000 acres of forest and 22 homes in
just 36 hours. Questa residents used their own earth-moving equipment to clear
fire lines to protect the village.

In 2003, the Taos Pueblo Encebado wildfire scorched 5,400 acres and came within
a mile of the pueblo. For 11 days, residents of the pueblo and neighboring
foothills watched as threat of catastrophic loss crawled closer and closer.

Both fires served to highlight the dangers of living in and near forests of the
West -- and how past federal and local land management policies helped
heightened that risk. Not only did these "crown" fires clear off forest
vegetation, they also produced large-scale "sheet erosion" of soils that dumped
sediment into streams and rivers -- and killed off fish -- once the rains came.

Many pointed to the U.S. Forest Service's "last resort" policy on fighting
wildfires, and a reluctance to reduce fire-friendly fuel loads; others said that
Taos County should never allow buildings within forested areas. Still more
blamed the lack of a coordinated wildfire team to fight the blazes effectively.

Whatever the reasons, these two wildfires did set in motion a serious
governmental effort to lessen the risk of loss of homes and property that
adjoins forests. One offshoot was the Healthy Forest Restoration Act of 2003,
which required federal landholders U.S. Forest Service and Bureau of Land
Management to include local communities when managing the surrounding forests.

A result of the federal legislation is the Taos County Community Wildfire
Protection Plan, which is now out in its final form and the guidebook for
education and solutions in communities around the Taos area.

The plan, developed by a 37-member team and directed by watershed planner Ron
Gardiner, of the Questa-based Land and Water Clinic, focuses on ways to reduce
the amount of dead wood and small live trees in a forest and around homes that
accelerates the spread of wildfires. Methods include clearing, thinning,
stacking and burning, controlled burning, and building fire breaks.

"The effort to develop a truly community-based wildfire plan has begun to pay
dividends in Taos County's greater eligibility for community project funding,"
said Gardiner, who wrote the grant for the project.

Where forest meets homes

In the parlance of wildfire protection, these plans deal primarily with
"wildland-urban interface" areas, known as WUIs. These zones delineate where
human-built structures meet undeveloped wildlands -- and heightened risk to
home-dwellers.

The rise in population in Taos County -- from less than 20,000 in 1970 to nearly
35,000 today -- has increased the number of WUIs.

"It is the addition of homes in this area that interrupts the natural cycle of
wildfires," the team wrote in the plan. "Ultimately, this contributes to a
dangerous build-up of old vegetation which can contribute to an uncontrollable
wildfire."

A number of locales in Taos County fit this description: Taos Canyon, Taos Ski
Valley, Red River, Upper Red River Valley, Pot Creek and the Peñasco valley.
Some are more at risk than others, because of higher concentrations of homes and
structures in forests -- and the increased possibility of human-caused ignition.

Others, such as Gallina Canyon and Llano San Juan, are isolated communities
surrounded by thick forest lands.

The plan not only alerts communities and homeowners as to what they can do to
protect themselves from wildfires -- known as developing "defensible space" --
it also puts public agencies on alert about "watershed health" -- the concept of
maintaining natural drainage and ecosystems within a basin or sub-basin.

One map in the plan depicts areas of risk to "post-fire erosion," pinpointing
locations where the loss of soil-holding vegetation would result in a heavy flow
of soils, sands and gravel into arroyos and streambeds.

Another aspect of the plan has been identifying the 14 area-firefighting
agencies and their jurisdictions, including volunteer and federal fire
departments, and pinpointing hydrants, storage tanks and access points within
the county.

And a third, which is about to get under way, is a series of meetings at fire
stations and community centers that will outline what individuals can do to make
their homes "lean, clean and green."

n adennison@taosnews.com

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: See pdf's for exact rendition, caption, graphics and photographer info.


PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 The Taos News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              784 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                               Berwick Advertiser

                           September 15, 2014 Monday

Research helps firefighters

LENGTH: 478  words


Field research carried out in Northumberland over the summer gathered much
needed data that will help to predict how wildfires will spread in peat land and
bog.

Northumberland Fire and Rescue Service, Northumberland National Park Authority
and the Forestry Commission helped researchers from the Netherlands and the USA
to gather the data.

The research project determined how quickly different areas of peat land and bog
took to burn and how different types and amounts of vegetation would affect how
a wildfire might burn and spread over peat land.

This research will help firefighters reliably predict where fires will spread
and where the fires can be safely and effectively extinguished.

Peat fires are one of the hardest types of wildfire to extinguish as a peat fire
can smoulder underground with almost no indication of where the fire is, or how
intense it is.

The field research provided existing wildfire prediction models with much needed
information on peat land vegetation and addressed the knowledge gap in these
models.

Chief fire officer Alex Bennett said: "The research gathered in Northumberland
will be invaluable to firefighters in Northumberland and across the world.

"Peat fires are particularly challenging for firefighters. We have attended
fewer wildfires this year compared to previous years, but as happens every year
we have still attended some significant wildfire incidents and the risk that
wildfires pose to the county of Northumberland remains high."

He added: "We will continue to work closely with our colleagues from the
Netherlands and the USA to better understand how we can use models to predict
how and where wildfires will spread."

The research has been completed by a partnership of institutions including the
Institute of Physical Safety (IFV) and van Hall Larenstein University in the
Netherlands, and the Stephen F. Austin University in Texas, USA.

Andrew Miller, head of conservation at Northumberland National Park Authority
said: "Northumberland National Park contains peatlands of international
importance.

"Peat that has formed over many thousands of years acts as an enormous carbon
store and helps to hold water on the hills reducing flooding downstream. The
vegetation that grows on the peat is home to unusual plants and animals but all
of this can be destroyed in a matter of hours by wildfire.

"It is therefore critical that we learn more about how to prevent these
wildfires in the first place and how to best to manage them if they do occur."

The researchers have delivered two information sessions to practitioners from
Northumberland and the UK during their study visit. The researchers are now
analysing their data and plan to return to Northumberland in October 2014 to
present some of the results of their study.  For more information on the
Wildfire Conference please visit http://www.thesill.org.uk/events

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SBBA


                       Copyright 2014 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              785 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                    Wilkes Barre Times Leader (Pennsylvania)

                            March 29, 2007 Thursday

State officials prep for wildfire season

LENGTH: 193 words


Officials with the state Department of Conservation and Natural Resources are
gearing up for a wildfire season that could erupt any day.

Wind, sun and low humidity are rapidly drying out the ground and raising the
potential for wildfires in the area, according to DCNR Assistant District
Forester Nick Lylo. Similar conditions resulted in 78 wildfires last spring in
Lylo's district, which includes Luzerne, Lackawanna, Wyoming, Wayne and
Susquehanna counties. Only five of the 83 wildfires last year didn't occur in
the spring.

The spring fires burned 557 acres and kept DCNR's 31 fire suppression employees
busy.

"The majority of wildfires are in the spring, and the fire season starts now and
continues to Memorial Day when the forest vegetation turns green," Lylo said.

The bare tree branches contribute to the size of a wildfire because, without a
leaf canopy, sunlight and wind can penetrate the forest floor and quickly dry
what Lylo calls "fine fuels," such as twigs, leaves and grasses.

"Any wildfire is something we don't want," he said. "In our area, they all are
dangerous and potentially harmful to people and property."

Read more in Friday's Times Leader.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Wilkes Barre Times Leader
                              All Rights Reserved


                              786 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Lake Country Calendar (Winfield)

                            September 4, 2017 Monday
                                 Final Edition

UPDATE: Wildfire sparks near Little White Mountain

BYLINE: Carmen Weld

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 308 words


UPDATE: 5:30 p.m.

The BC Wildfire Service reports the Greyback Mountain fire is now 30 hectares in
size.

Fire information officer Jody Lucius says while there was some growth this
afternoon, the increased size is mostly due to crews better mapping out the
fire.

Fire personnel remain on site fighting the blaze, with help from the air.

Insta

--

UPDATE: 1 p.m.

The BC Wildfire Service reports the Greyback Mountain fire is still 20 hectares
in size.

A total of seven fire personnel are on site fighting the blaze, with help from
one helicopter and several air tankers.

An additional 10 firefighters are on the way and more will be sent if needed.

--

UPDATE: 10:45 a.m.

The Greyback Mountain wildfire, 28 kilometres southeast of Kelowna, is now
pegged at 20 hectares in size.

The BC Wildfire Service reports they have four firefighting personnel and air
tankers battling the blaze this morning.

The cause of the fire is under investigation. The fire was sparked in an area
popular with backcountry users.

The fire was first reported late on Sunday and is currently showing rank three
behaviour, categorized as a fire with a organized flame front and open flame.

This fire is not near any homes and therefore is not currently considered an
interface fire.

Related: Peachland wildfire sits at 1,500 hectares

--

ORIGINAL:

Another wildfire has ignited in the Central Okanagan.

According to Central Okanagan Emergency Operations, emergency personnel are on
site at a small wildfire burning by the Canyon Lakes, just north-east of Little
White Mountain and about 19 kilometres outside of the Kelowna city boundary.

Early estimates from BC Wildfire yesterday had it pegged at 10 hectares in size,
but they have not yet released a new size estimate as of Monday morning.

More details to come.

Send your best photos, videos and news tips to us by clicking the 'Contact' tab.

signature

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              787 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 10, 2015 Saturday

Broad Coalition Praises Introduction of Bipartisan Wildfire Disaster Funding
Bill

LENGTH: 1477  words


Washington, D.C.: The Wilderness Society has issued the following news release:

A broad coalition of conservation, timber, tribal, recreation, sportsmen and
employer groups praised Representatives Mike Simpson (R-ID) and Kurt Schrader
(D-OR) for introducing H.R. 167, the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act of 2015
(WDFA).

The bill would change how the federal government budgets for the suppression of
wildfire disasters, to make it similar to the way other disasters are funded.

This would help avoid the disruptive practice of "fire borrowing," which
currently happens when fire suppression funds run out and funds instead have to
come from other programs--including some programs that help reduce fire risk and
costs, such as hazardous fuels removal.

For years, the practice of transferring high suppression costs has negatively
affected the ability of the USDA Forest Service and U.S. Department of the
Interior's ability to implement forest management activities. Since 2002, the
agencies have exceeded their budgets to fight emergency fires eleven times.

This bill is identical to the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act of the last session
of Congress. That bill had 140 bipartisan cosponsors in the House. In addition,
236 organizations signed on to a letter supporting that legislation last year.

"We are grateful for the leadership of Reps. Simpson and Schrader, who have long
led the way in finding a solution to this severe budget problem," said Cecilia
Clavet of The Nature Conservancy, on behalf of the Fire Suppression Funding
Solutions Partner Caucus. "They understand that growing fire suppression needs
must be met without coming at the expense of some of the very programs that
would reduce wildfire risk. They have proposed a fix that is simply fair
budgeting, and will ensure funding for both wildfire first responders and for
other critical land and water programs."

Quotes from some of the many organizations supporting the Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act:

"We applaud Mr. Simpson and Mr. Schrader's continued commitment and support for
the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act and are very pleased with the timely
reintroduction of this important legislation," said Alan Rowsome, senior
director of government relations for lands at The Wilderness Society. "For years
the sharp increases in spending on fire suppression have been paid at the
expense of other important forest programs that could reduce the size and
severity of future fires. This common sense solution of funding fire suppression
the way we fund all other natural disasters[#x200b] is a critical step and we
strongly support passage of this legislation in the 114th Congress."

"Many people may associate wildfire funding with America's publically owned
forests, but the truth is transfers from non-fire accounts the past several
years have significantly affected a much bigger segment of  America's forests,
our family owned forests, too," shared Tom Martin, President and CEO of the
American Forest Foundation. "The 22 million family forest owners, who make up
the largest forest ownership group in the United States, rely on critical Forest
Service technical support, to practice sound stewardship, have been affected by
program disruption and cuts due to this budgeting problem in all corners of our
nation."

"Many people may associate wildfire funding with America's publically owned
forests, but the truth is transfers from non-fire accounts the past several
years have significantly affected a much bigger segment of  America's forests,
our family owned forests, too," shared Tom Martin, President and CEO of the
American Forest Foundation. "The 22 million family forest owners, who make up
the largest forest ownership group in the United States, rely on critical Forest
Service technical support, to practice sound stewardship, have been affected by
program disruption and cuts due to this budgeting problem in all corners of our
nation.""Important USDA Forest Service programs can be and are significantly
impacted by fire transfers, including the Land and Water Conservation Fund,
urban and community forestry, roads and trail maintenance, wildlife, recreation"
said Scott Steen, CEO and President of American Forests, "including the very
programs that would reduce wildfire risk, like State Fire Assistance and
restoration efforts. This mechanism will help stop this from happening."

"We are pleased to see this bi-partisan bill, and hope this Congress can take
decisive action to solve a problem that everyone recognizes needs addressing,"
said Bill Imbergamo, Executive Director of the Federal Forest Resources
Coalition. "This is a fiscally responsible solution with broad support. Anyone
who cares about our National Forests should get behind this bill."

"We deeply appreciate Mr. Simpson and Mr. Schrader's commitment and perseverance
in supporting the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act again in the new Congress," said
Corbin Newman, Executive Director, National Association of Forest Service
Retirees. "This legislation is absolutely necessary for protecting communities,
restoring the health of America's public lands, and reducing the costs of
fighting wildfire. We will work hard with sponsors of this legislation to see
that it is ultimately enacted."

"We're very grateful to Reps. Simpson and Schrader for introducing this
important legislation," noted John Garder, Director of Budget and Appropriations
for the National Parks Conservation Association. "The system for funding fire
suppression has been unsustainable, and this bill would go a long way to
responsibly funding the most catastrophic wildfires. We urge members of Congress
to support this important bill to finally fund catastrophic wildfires like other
natural disasters, ensuring responsible budgeting and helping our national parks
and other public lands."

"State foresters continue to support the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act and the
critically needed changes the bill would make in how federal wildfire
suppression is paid for. We urge Congress to adopt this legislation to end
transfers from land management programs in order to pay for fire suppression.
This fix would enable federal agencies to deliver on their missions to help
sustainably manage the nation's forests," said Jim Karels, Florida State
Forester and President of the National Association of State Foresters. "NASF's
latest state agency survey reports that wildfire control, prevention, protection
and management costs totaled $1.8 billion to states in 2012. State forestry
agencies fully appreciate the need for a wise budgeting mechanism to handle
these annual costs."

"We applaud Congressman Simpson making this one of his first orders of business
in the 114th Congress," said Steve Barker, interim executive director at the
Outdoor Industry Association (OIA). "Outdoor recreation is a $646 billion
economy that relies on funding and infrastructure for recreation assets.
Proactively funding agencies that are dealing with hotter and longer fire
seasons will help maintain dollars allotted for programs that get youth outside,
employ Americans in gateway communities and contribute to the national economy."

"This bill is a welcome shift to long-term planning for fire that will greatly
benefit our communities and our public lands," said Ani Kame'enui forest expert
for Sierra Club's Our Wild America campaign. "Effective fire management requires
not just funding for fighting current fires, but also for projects that will
help reduce the risk of future megafires."

"Improving forest health and resiliency across the country starts with
responsible and predictable wildfire budgeting in Washington, DC," said Bob
Alverts, President of the Society of American Foresters. "WDFA has strong and
diverse support both in Congress and from hundreds of stakeholder groups. It is
time to get this across the finish line and get back to proactive and effective
forest management."

"The Nature Conservancy strongly supports this bill, and it is a top policy
priority for us again this year," said Kameran Onley, Director of U.S.
Government Relations for The Nature Conservancy. "It is essential to meet our
nation's growing need to fight wildfire disasters, and that must not be done at
the cost of some of the very programs that would reduce wildfire risk, among
many other conservation programs."

"The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would restore balance to the U.S. Forest
Service budget, allowing the agency to resume forest management activities like
access enhancement, habitat restoration and wildfire prevention instead of
focusing its efforts to putting out wildfires," said Whit Fosburgh, President
and CEO of the Theodore Roosevelt Conservation Partnership. "With strong
bipartisan support, this is must-pass legislation for the 114th Congress."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              788 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                           January 7, 2015 Wednesday

Jewell's wildfire order aims to protect sage grouse habitat

BYLINE: Amy Joi O'Donoghue Deseret News

LENGTH: 582 words


By Amy Joi

O'Donoghue

Deseret News

SALT LAKE CITY - Interior Secretary Sally Jewell created a rangeland fire task
force via secretarial order Tuesday, and she wants to fast-track response on how
to reduce wildfires on sage grouse habitat lands in the West.

The order commands that a science-based strategy be implemented before the 2015
wildfire season begins, targeting the Great Basin regions that encompass
portions of Utah, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon and California.

"Targeted action is urgently needed to conserve habitat for the greater
sage-grouse and other wildlife in the Great Basin, as well as to maintain
ranching and recreation economies that depend on sagebrush landscapes," Jewell
said. "The secretarial order further demonstrates our strong commitment to work
with our federal, state, tribal and community partners to reduce the likelihood
and severity of rangeland fire, stem the spread of invasive species, and restore
the health and resilience of sagebrush ecosystems."

Jewell's order sets up a rangeland task force that will report to her in less
than a month - Feb. 1 - on how provisions of the order will be implemented. By
March, the group will be asked to detail specific actions that will be
undertaken in the wildfire season with an eye toward protecting sagebrush lands.

The greater sage grouse has seen its habitat throughout the West experience
drastic declines, and the Interior Department is under court order to arrive at
a decision this fall on whether to list the bird under provisions of the
Endangered Species Act.

In 2010, federal wildlife officials identified the onset of invasive grasses and
habitat loss due to wildfires as among the greatest threats to the
football-sized bird. Since then, federal agencies have been working in tandem
with state and local government entities to reduce wildfire risk, an effort that
is part of the most expensive - and expansive - undertaking in history to
protect an imperiled species.

Jason Curry, spokesman for the Utah Division of Forestry, Fire and State Lands,
said the order will augment concentrated efforts already rolled out last
wildfire season when agencies targeted certain responses and resources based on
the location of the sage grouse.

"We worked hard last year with the Bureau of Land Management and with private
land owners and counties to identify as much habitat as possible so we could
work aggressively in the initial attack phase to protect as much as the habitat
as possible," he said.

That effort included positioning of wildfire resources in key sage grouse areas,
doing pre-suppression work such as planting fire-resistant vegetation to serve
as "green" breaks, and some post-fire restoration.

Curry added that wildfire is devastating to sagebrush steppe habitat, wiping out
sagebrush that can take decades if not longer to grow and leaving cheatgrass in
its wake.

The cheatgrass does nothing but fuel more wildfires, serving little benefit to
more than 300 species of plants and animals that make up the Great Basin
ecosystem.

Jewell's order directs the task force to come up with a list of actions that can
be taken prior to the start of the 2015 wildfire season and what strategies will
take longer to implement.

The strategy unveiled Tuesday builds on efforts already underway at the Interior
Department and grew out of conference last fall in Boise where wildfire experts
stressed the need for a science-based, comprehensive approach to the wildfire
problem.

Email: amyjoi@deseretnews.com

Twitter: amyjoi16

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                              789 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Deming Headlight (New Mexico)

                             May 28, 2014 Wednesday

Weather, wildfire events kick up

BYLINE: Deming Headlight

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 310 words


For the Headlight

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. >> The American Red Cross reminds New Mexicans to be firewise
and aware of the extreme drought in our national forests and state parks.
Download the free Red Cross Wildfire app for Android and iPhone platforms and
tablets. The app contains information on current wildfires and what to do for
safety before, during and after a wildfire. Tornadoes can occur anywhere and New
Mexicans can obtain severe weather information including thunderstorms and hail
warnings. In the event of severe weather damage Red Cross apps include the "I'm
Safe" feature so those impacted can register and friends and family can obtain
information on their loved ones.

Below is a quick roundup of events in the southwest:

New Mexico   Severe Weather-Fire Restrictions

Severe storms impacted Eastern New Mexico on Thursday, winds up to 64-mph and
quarter size hail reported. Rain and even snow in the higher elevations is
predicted for this holiday weekend.

There is still a wildfire burning in the southwestern part of the state.
Although no homes are currently impacted, wildfire is always a threat in New
Mexico.

The Red Cross is always on alert when weather and other emergencies impact our
state.

Red Cross volunteers have returned from Tupelo, MS after aiding in the response
to multiple tornados.

There are two Red Cross Volunteers from New Mexico in Amarillo, TX aiding the
response to a wildfire.

Stage One Fire Restrictions are in force in most New Mexico forest areas. Check
before you go this weekend. Out in force

The American Red Cross is responding to multiple weather and wildfire events in
the west with shelters, emergency supplies and information for residents in the
impacted areas. You can help support this response by contributing to Red Cross
Disaster Relief by calling 1-800-RedCross or donate on line at www.redcross.org
.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Courtesy Photo The American Red Cross reminds New Mexicans of the
dangers of wildfires and weather-related events when visiting national and state
parks.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2014 Deming Headlight, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              790 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                      The Goldendale Sentinel (Washington)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                January 15, 2014

Fire hazard reduction grants available for communities in eastern Washington

BYLINE: The Goldendale Sentinel staff

LENGTH: 387  words


The Washington State Department of Natural Resources (DNR) is seeking proposals
for projects to reduce the threat of wildfire in eastern Washington.

Successful projects will reduce wildfire threat by clearing vegetation and
thinning and pruning trees in eastern Washington communities that are at high
risk of wildfire. Projects must be located within a completed Community Wildfire
Protection Plan (CWPP) area. DNR will work with local CWPP groups in several
eastern Washington counties to identify and prioritize projects.

Community Wildfire Protection Plans are part of the fire prevention strategies
for Washington's wildland-urban interface communities, those located in or near
the woods. Many communities have mitigation plans or CWPP's that have already
been completed.

Who: People who have Community Wildfire Protection Plans in eastern Washington.

What: Fire hazard reduction grants.

Where: Eastern Washington.

Why: To reduce the threat of wildfire.

When: Deadline for applications is Feb. 28, 2014.

How: Funding is provided through DNR by the U.S. Forest Service Wildland-Urban
Interface Community Assistance Grant Program.

For information, contact the DNR representative in your county:

In Ferry, Lincoln, Okanogan, Pend Oreille, Spokane, and Stevens counties,
contact Steve Harris, DNR Northeast Region Office, 509-684-7474.

In Asotin, Chelan, Columbia, Douglas, Garfield, Kittitas, Klickitat, Skamania,
Walla Walla and Yakima counties, contact Joe Weeks, DNR Southeast Region Office,
(509)925-8510. DNR's wildfire mission

Administered by Commissioner of Public Lands Peter Goldmark, DNR is responsible
for preventing and fighting wildfires on 13 million acres of private, state and
tribal-owned forestlands. DNR is the state's largest on-call fire department,
with more than 1,000 employees trained and available to be dispatched to fires
as needed. During fire season, this includes more than 700 DNR employees who
have other permanent jobs with the agency and about 400 seasonal employees hired
for fire-fighting duties. Additionally, Department of Corrections' adult
offenders and Department of Social and Health

Services-Juvenile Rehabilitation Administration juvenile offenders participate
in the DNR correctional camps program. DNR also participates in Washington's
coordinated interagency approach to fire-fighting.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Accomplishment

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GLD

                      Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                     Copyright 2014 The Goldendale Sentinel


                              791 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Ruidoso News (New Mexico)

                             July 12, 2012 Thursday

Local government's role in wildfire protection

BYLINE: Molly Mowery

SECTION: OPINION COLUMNISTS

LENGTH: 430 words


National Fire Protection Association

Local government policies and involvement in wildfire risk reduction are
essential to avoid putting lives and property in unnecessary danger.

Government agencies, including those outside fire and emergency services, play
an important role in making sound decisions and shaping policies that reduce

catastrophic wildfire incidents.

This type of proactive planning makes the job of the firefighter easier, and
increases the likelihood that homes, businesses, and lives will be safe during a
wildfire event.

Too often, communities wait until after they experience a devastating fire to do
something about their risk.

In a recent national study that focused on the effectiveness of regulations in
the wildland-urban interface, the National Fire Protection Association found
that communities were most likely to pursue mitigation ordinances AFTER a fire.

This is reassuring for the next disaster, but too late for the damage already
done. Why wait? It is in everyone's best interest to prepare ahead of time.

Important land-use tools such as overlay zoning, development and design
standards, subdivision ordinances, and comprehensive planning can incorporate
important wildfire mitigation policies, including: vegetation management and
defensible requirements, building and construction materials, water supply, and
access and driveway clearance standards.

Incorporating these standards into the development process before development
occurs is more cost effective than retrofits.

Although traditional roles may have dictated that the wildfire problem was
someone else's responsibility, land use planners and community leaders who
sanction development decisions in high wildfire risk areas must recognize their
role in protecting communities.

The wildland-urban interface is not just a wildfire problem, it is a development
location problem - just as building in a floodplain is not only a flood problem
but an issue with dangerously located development.

These efforts can and should be coupled with outreach and education.

Research also shows that regulations and hazard mitigation policies are more
likely to be politically palatable when the public has been educated on

wildfire hazard through programs such as Firewise Communities/USA and Ready,
Set, Go.

Learn more about your role in wildfire risk reduction by visiting the Fire
Adapted Communities website:www.fireadapted.org .

For more information on the study, visit:www.nfpa.org/regulatorytools

Molly Mowery works as the Fire Adapted Communities Program Manager at the
National Fire Protection Association.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2012 Ruidoso News, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              792 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             June 3, 2017 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

US agencies emphasize cooperation entering wildfire season

BYLINE:  By KEITH RIDLER Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 500 words


BOISE, Idaho - The heads of the two largest public land agencies in the U.S.
signed a memorandum Friday emphasizing cooperation among federal, state, tribal
and local agencies in battling wildfires as the main part of the wildfire season
arrives.

Secretaries Ryan Zinke of the Interior Department and Sonny Perdue of the
Agriculture Department signed the document after a briefing at the National
Interagency Fire Center in Boise.

"This is an example of what can happen with collaboration," Perdue said. "Of
what can happen when we work together."

"It really is about a shared stewardship of our public lands," Zinke said.

The agreement doesn't announce any major changes in firefighting strategy for
this year's wildfire season, which both secretaries say will be challenging. The
objectives of firefighter safety and public safety remain top priorities, and
there's a continued emphasis on efficiency and communication.

As in past wildfire seasons, firefighting resources will be deployed based on
human safety, what is being protected and the costs of protection.

"We haven't heard of any major policy shifts," said Dan Buckley, chair of the
National Multi-Agency Coordinating Group, which deploys the nation's wildfire
fighting resources. "I'm glad the secretaries took time early in their terms to
see what we do and how we do it."

Enthusiasm among Idaho's elected leaders hosting top officials from a Republican
administration for the first time in at least eight years was high, with many
expecting significant changes in the future to land management policies having
to do with wildfire prevention. About two-thirds of Idaho is federal public
land.

"Sitting with these two guys and listening to how they talk about land
management and dealing with stakeholders is 180 degrees from what the last
administration did," said Sen. Jim Risch, R-Idaho, after the public signing.
"It's hard to explain in language the difference. It's a feeling as much as
anything."

Protecting sage grouse habitat has become a key part of wildfire strategy in
recent years and a political lightning rod as federal officials try to keep the
chicken-size bird from ending up on the Endangered Species List. Sage grouse are
ground-dwellers found in 11 Western states. As few as 200,000 remain, down from
a peak population of about 16 million.

Gov. C.L. "Butch" Otter has complained bitterly that President Barack Obama's
administration rejected Idaho's suggested sage grouse protection strategies as
inadequate and instead put in place its own restrictions. He said Friday that
under President Donald Trump, "there's a new sheriff in town, and there's a
whole new idea called collaboration and working together."

Zinke said that he was interested in working with states on sage grouse and that
a determination needed to be made on "what a healthy sage grouse population
should look like."

No specific policy proposals were mentioned Friday when Zinke and Perdue
responded to questions from about 300 people at Boise State University.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  U.S. Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, left, and Agriculture Secretary
Sonny Perdue speak in Boise, Idaho, on Friday, June 2, 2017. Both emphasized
cooperation among federal, state, tribal and local agencies in battling
wildfires as the main part of the wildfire season arrives. (AP Photo/Keith
Ridler)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              793 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 7, 2015 Thursday

Idaho: Crapo-Wyden Wildfire Disaster Funding Act Gains Support of More Than 250
Organizations

LENGTH: 443  words

DATELINE: Boise


Mike Crapo of Idaho has issued the following news release:

More than 250 groups from across the country joined Sens. Mike Crapo (R-Idaho),
and Ron Wyden (D-Oregon), to express support for passing the Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act to ensure vital resources in the fight against catastrophic
wildfires in the West ahead of this year's fire season.

The 261 organizations, including the Western Governors' Association, the Nature
Conservancy and the National Rifle Association, wrote to all 535 members of the
U.S. Senate and the House of Representatives to show the importance of passing
the bill.

"These groups are helping sound our call to action, which became even more
urgent today with news that the fire outlook is worsening," said Crapo.
"According to Chief Tom Tidwell, there is a 90-percent chance the Forest Service
will run out of money to fight fires at a time when 58-millon acres of national
forests face a high or very high risk of severe wildfire.  We have got to
perform the management that will reduce catastrophic fires and make sure
resources for that management, and to fight fires, are available."

"Fire season is almost here, and for Oregonians and others in the West, who know
that wildfires are no less destructive than other natural disasters, it's past
time to end the destructive cycle of playing catch-up on wildfire funding,"Wyden
said. "I'm glad to have these groups standing with Sen. Crapo and me as we
continue to push for our fix to address these wildfires before they start."

Wyden and Crapo reintroduced the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act on Jan. 22. The
bill ends the cycle of underfunding fire suppression, which currently forces
federal agencies to steal from fire prevention just to put out fires. Instead,
Wyden and Crapo's bill will end this so-called "fire borrowing" by funding the
largest wildfires from a similar disaster account used to fund other natural
disasters. The Interior Department and the Forest Service estimate these fires -
about 1 percent - consume 30 percent of firefighting budgets.

In March, Crapo and Wyden secured language in the Senate budget to allow a
funding cap adjustment that has prevented agencies from treating wildfires as
natural disasters under the federal budget.

The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would move any fire suppression spending above
70% of the 10-year average to a disaster funding account that is separate from
Forest Service and Interior budgets. The bill now has 14 bipartisan cosponsors
in the Senate and 79 representatives have signed on to the House version.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              794 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The Chronicle (Centralia, Washington)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 9, 2014 Wednesday

DNR: Wildfire Season Officially Begins April 15

BYLINE: The Chronicle, Centralia, Wash.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 237 words


April 09--While wildfire season doesn't officially start until April 15, 20
forest fires have already been reported on state lands this year, according to
the Department of Natural Resources.

Wildfires pose the risk of damaging natural resources as well as homes, and can
threaten the safety of the public as well as firefighters.

In 2013, a total of 764 fires burned more 126,000 acres of land, according to a
press release from the DNR. About 94 percent of those fires were contained to
less than 10 acres. An estimated 70 percent of wildfires on DNR-protected land
in 2013 were believed to be human-caused.

The risk of wildfires increases and changes rapidly during the spring as warmer
and drier weather begins to hit the region, according to DNR. One spark can
start a fire that has catastrophic results, so DNR reminds the public of the
following:

--During fire season, people using motorized equipment in the woods must have
approved spark arresters and follow fire safety precautions. In addition, people
who work in the woods need to have fire prevention and extinguishing equipment
at the job site. Workers must also be trained in how to use that equipment.

--Smoking cigarettes or lighting fireworks in forested areas near roads, gravels
pits, or other clearings is restricted.

___ (c)2014 The Chronicle (Centralia, Wash.) Visit The Chronicle (Centralia,
Wash.) at www.chronline.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140409-1CE-DNR-Wildfire
-Season-Officially-Begins-April-15-0409-20140409

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CE


                          Copyright 2014 The Chronicle


                              795 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 14, 2015 Saturday

Utah State Legislature bill updates: WILDLAND FIRE POLICY

LENGTH: 756  words

DATELINE: Salt Lake City


Utah State Legislature, The State of Utah has issued the following bill updates:


WILDLAND FIRE POLICY

2
2015 GENERAL SESSION

3
STATE OF UTAH

4
Chief Sponsor: Evan J. Vickers

5
House Sponsor: Joel K. Briscoe

6
7     LONG TITLE
8     General Description:
9          This bill modifies the responsibilities of the Division of Forestry,
Fire, and State Lands.
10     Highlighted Provisions:
11          This bill:
12          [#x25b8]     requires the director of the Division of Forestry,
Fire, and State Lands to:


13               o     coordinate the development of a state-wide wildland fire
policy; and
14               o     report to the Natural Resources, Agriculture, and
Environment Interim
15     Committee on the director's recommendation for a state-wide wildland fire

16     policy;
17          [#x25b8]     describes the goals of a state-wide catastrophic
wildfire reduction strategy; and
18          [#x25b8]     states that the division may use funds to promote
wildfire prevention, wildfire
19     mitigation, and wildfire preparedness.
20     Money Appropriated in this Bill:
21          None
22     Other Special Clauses:
23          None
24     Utah Code Sections Affected:
25     AMENDS:
26          65A-8-103, as last amended by Laws of Utah 2011, Chapter 342
27     ENACTS:
28          65A-8-103.5, Utah Code Annotated 1953
29
30     Be it enacted by the Legislature of the state of Utah:
31          Section 1. Section 65A-8-103 is amended to read:
32          65A-8-103. Forestry and fire control funds.
33          (1) The division shall use money available to it to meet the costs
of:
34          (a) controlling forest, range, and watershed fires;
35          (b) controlling insect and disease epidemics;
36          (c) rehabilitating or reforesting nonfederal forest, range, and
watershed lands; [and]
37          (d) promoting wildfire preparedness, wildfire mitigation, and
wildfire prevention; and
38          [(d)] (e) carrying on the purposes of this chapter.
39          (2) All money available to the division to meet the costs of
Subsections (1)(a) through
40     [(d)] (e) is nonlapsing and available to the division until expended.
41          (3) (a) The collection and disbursement of all money made available
to the division
42     shall be in accordance with the rules of the Division of Finance.
43          (b) Money collected by the division from fees, rentals, sales,
contributions,
44     reimbursements, and other such sources shall be deposited in the
appropriate account.
45          Section 2. Section 65A-8-103.5 is enacted to read:
46          65A-8-103.5. Wildland fire policy -- Report.
47          (1) The director shall:
48          (a) coordinate the development of a comprehensive, state-wide
wildland fire
49     prevention, preparedness, and suppression policy; [#x15c]-> [and]
49a          (b) coordinate with applicable state agencies to identify critical
wildlife habitat areas as
49b     the policy described in Subsection (1)(a) is developed; and <-[#x15c]
50          [#x15c]-> [(b)] (c) <-[#x15c] report to the Natural Resources,
Agriculture, and Environment Interim
50a     Committee
51     by November 30, 2015, on the director's recommendation for the policy
described in
52     Subsection (1)(a).
53          (2) The goals of the state-wide catastrophic wildfire reduction
policy described in
54     Subsection (1)(a) shall be to:
55          (a) restore and maintain landscapes, ensuring landscapes across the
state are resilient to
56     wildfire-related disturbances in accordance with fire management
objectives;
57          (b) create fire-adapted communities, ensuring that human populations
and
58     infrastructure can withstand a wildfire without loss of life or property;
[#x15c]-> [and] <-[#x15c] 59          (c) improve wildfire response, ensuring
that all political subdivisions can participate in
60     making and implementing safe, effective, and efficient risk-based
wildfire management
61     decisions [#x15c]-> [.] ; and
61a          (d) reduce risks to wildlife, such as the greater sage grouse,
which can be devastated by
61b     wildfire. <-[#x15c]
62          (3) In developing the wildland fire policy described in Subsection
(1)(a), the director
63     shall coordinate with representatives of counties, cities, and towns in
the state, along with any
64     other stakeholders the director considers necessary and relevant,
including the Catastrophic
65     Wildfire Reduction Strategy Statewide Steering Committee and six regional
work groups.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              796 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 26, 2014 Monday

USPTO Published Patent application of Wildfire Defense Systems, Inc titled as "
WILDFIRE RISK ASSESSMENT"

LENGTH: 304  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an application no.
20140132409, published on May 15, 2014, by Wildfire Defense Systems, Inc, titled
as "WILDFIRE RISK ASSESSMENT" for the registration of patent.

Inventors:  Billman; Bradly Jay; (San Antonio, TX) ; Hartman; Wayne; (San
Antonio, TX) ; Bhide; Arti; (San Antonio, TX) ; Oakes, III; Charles L.; (Boerne,
TX) ; Rubin; Elizabeth; (San Antonio, TX) ; Zuwala; Mark; (San Antonio, TX) ;
Gray; Emily; (San Antonio, TX) ; Sausman; Sandra; (San Antonio, TX)
Assignee:  Wildfire Defense Systems, Inc.
Red Lodge
MT

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
system and method provide determining a wildfire risk associated with home and
identifying mitigatable features located on and around the home. An inspection
list of questions is presented to a user through a mobile computing device, and
images are captured by a camera included in the mobile computing device. In an
embodiment, an image can be captured using augmented visual assistance through a
mobile application. A wildfire risk associated with the home can be determined
at least based on answers to the questions in the inspection list and captured
images. In another embodiment, a virtual reality game for simulating a wildfire
behavior is provided. The wildfire behavior can be re-simulated during the game
after removing or modifying mitigatable features on or around the home. In yet
another embodiment, a system and method for determining a building status and
location is provided in real-time during an active fire."

The Patent was filed on November 15, 2012 under application No. 20140132409

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              797 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 19, 2017 Friday

Idaho: 5th Annual Southwest Idaho Wildfire Mitigation Forum to be Hosted in
Boise

LENGTH: 467  words




Boise: The City of boise, Idaho has issued the following news release:
Southwest Idaho Wildfire Mitigation Forum will be hosted in Boise. This
presentation is supported by Promoting Ecosystem Resilience and Fire Adapted
Communities Together, a cooperative agreement between The Nature Conservancy,
USDA Forest Service and agencies of the Department of the Interior through a
subaward to the Watershed Research and Training Center; this institution is an
equal opportunity provider.


Wildfire Mitigation Coordinator Captain Jerry McAdams states that "the Southwest
Idaho Wildfire Mitigation Forum provides an opportunity for regional
stakeholders in wildfire mitigation to meet, network and to share their latest
efforts in wildfire mitigation. For homeowners, fire managers, non-profits,
funding agencies, utility companies and other stakeholders, the forum is
designed to encourage new cooperative partnerships and build efficiencies in
area wildfire mitigation efforts."
Attendees from past forums have included members and representatives from
multiple fire departments, the Bureau of Land Management, US Forest Service,
Idaho Department of Lands, Idaho Office of Emergency Management, Idaho Firewise,
Idaho State Fire Marshal's Office, County managers, local university professors,
city planners, open space managers, conservation organizations, non-profit
organizations, as well as residents and Firewise advocates that live in the
wildland urban interface. Captain McAdams stated that "with the increased
incidence and severity of wildfires that threaten lives and property in our
area, the need to address mitigation efforts in a cooperative fashion with
limited resources has become increasingly important."
The forum is being hosted by Ada County Parks & Waterways, whose mission is to
protect "...resources and natural habitats for the safe enjoyment of our
residents and visitors."  The forum is financially sponsored by the Fire Adapted
Communities Learning Network (FACLN), which "...encourages the development and
sharing of best practices and innovations in order to accelerate the adoption of
fire adapted community concepts nationwide.National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA), Wildfire Field Representative, Gary Marshall, will be in attendance to
provide an update on national Firewise efforts.  The Firewise Communities/USA
program teaches people how to adapt to living with wildfire and encourages
neighbors to work together and take action to annually reduce their risk from
wildland fire.  Additionally, Kraig Stevenson, Senior Regional Manager,
International Code Council (ICC) Government Relations, will be speaking on WUI
code development and implementation.

 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              798 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             Mayerthorpe Freelancer

                          December 13, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Take precautions during winter burns

SECTION: NEWS; Marcia Love; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 438  words


The wildfire risk is low in the Whitecourt area, but Alberta Wildfire is still
asking residents to take precautions when burning this winter.

If you ignite a fire and it causes a wildfire, you are responsible for it, the
province warned.

A fire permit is not required for burning within the Forest Protection Area of
Alberta from Oct. 31 -Feb. 28. But those planning a burn should contact the
Whitecourt Forest Area at 780-778-7272 to notify authorities of the start and
end dates of the burn.

Fires can smoulder in the winter, particularly if they are in organic soils with
a lot of fine fuel for them to burn in, Alberta Wildfire reported. Even though
temperatures are low and the material is covered in snow, it can burn all winter
and into the spring. When it is exposed to higher temperatures and wind in the
spring, it can create the potential for it to flare-up and surface as a wildfire
, quickly growing and spreading in dead, dry grass.

Temperature, relative humidity, wind and precipitation all have an impact on how
dry forest fuels are at any time of the year. In a patch of snow-free grass in
-30 C, the grass provides a dry fuel that is susceptible to a wildfire that
could be driven by high winds. Despite the lower temperature, a lack of
precipitation and generally drier winter air can cause the grass to ignite,
Alberta Wildfire said.

To prevent a wildfire this winter, residents are asked to prepare their site,
report it, control it and check it.

Choose a location on high ground where the pile to be burned can be at least 25
metres away from trees and structures. Surround the pile with a fireguard at
least 15 metres wide - preferably bare, mineral soil.

Check the weather forecast for wind speed and the possibility of temperature
inversions. Low winds and temperatures will help to minimize the build-up of
smoke during the burn, reducing the amount drifting to neighbouring properties.

Contact the Whitecourt Forest Area to report the start and end dates of your
burn, as well as a description of materials to be burned and the legal land
description.

Ensure the site is monitored the entire time and have adequate tools, water and
equipment on site when burning. If the fire gets out of control, immediately
call the Whitecourt Forest Area at 780-778-7272.

After the burn is complete, spread out the remaining material within the pile,
then soak the area and ensure both heat and smoke are no longer being produced
by the pile. It should be cool to the touch.

Check the burn site multiple times in the following weeks to ensure it has not
reignited.

For more information on winter burns, visit wildfire.alberta.ca.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Metro Creative Graphics; Although the wildfire risk is low in the
Whitecourt area, Alberta Wildfire is reminding residents to take precautions
when conducting winter burns.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Mayerthorpe Freelancer
                              All Rights Reserved


                              799 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Whitecourt Star

                          December 13, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Take precautions during winter burns

BYLINE: Marcia Love, Whitecourt Star

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 438  words


The wildfire risk is low in the Whitecourt area, but Alberta Wildfire is still
asking residents to take precautions when burning this winter.

If you ignite a fire and it causes a wildfire, you are responsible for it, the
province warned.

A fire permit is not required for burning within the Forest Protection Area of
Alberta from Oct. 31 -Feb. 28. But those planning a burn should contact the
Whitecourt Forest Area at 780-778-7272 to notify authorities of the start and
end dates of the burn.

Fires can smoulder in the winter, particularly if they are in organic soils with
a lot of fine fuel for them to burn in, Alberta Wildfire reported. Even though
temperatures are low and the material is covered in snow, it can burn all winter
and into the spring. When it is exposed to higher temperatures and wind in the
spring, it can create the potential for it to flare-up and surface as a wildfire
, quickly growing and spreading in dead, dry grass.

Temperature, relative humidity, wind and precipitation all have an impact on how
dry forest fuels are at any time of the year. In a patch of snow-free grass in
-30 C, the grass provides a dry fuel that is susceptible to a wildfire that
could be driven by high winds.

Despite the lower temperature, a lack of precipitation and generally drier
winter air can cause the grass to ignite, Alberta Wildfire said.

To prevent a wildfire this winter, residents are asked to prepare their site,
report it, control it and check it.

Choose a location on high ground where the pile to be burned can be at least 25
metres away from trees and structures. Surround the pile with a fireguard at
least 15 metres wide - preferably bare, mineral soil.

Check the weather forecast for wind speed and the possibility of temperature
inversions. Low winds and temperatures will help to minimize the build-up of
smoke during the burn, reducing the amount drifting to neighbouring properties.

Contact the Whitecourt Forest Area to report the start and end dates of your
burn, as well as a description of materials to be burned and the legal land
description.

Ensure the site is monitored the entire time and have adequate tools, water and
equipment on site when burning. If the fire gets out of control, immediately
call the Whitecourt Forest Area at 780-778-7272.

After the burn is complete, spread out the remaining material within the pile,
then soak the area and ensure both heat and smoke are no longer being produced
by the pile. It should be cool to the touch.

Check the burn site multiple times in the following weeks to ensure it has not
reignited.

For more information on winter burns, visit wildfire. alberta.ca.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Metro Creative Graphics; Although the wildfire risk is low in the
Whitecourt area, Alberta Wildfire is reminding residents to take precautions
when conducting winter burns.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Whitecourt Star
                              All Rights Reserved


                              800 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      Farmington Daily Times (New Mexico)

                            April 29, 2015 Wednesday

Traditional start to wildfire season in San Juan County coming soon

BYLINE: By Dan Schwartz The Daily Times

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 539 words


FARMINGTON   Fires historically begin to burn in riverbed scrub around San Juan
County in May, though several weeks of intermittent rain can prevent a wildfire
season entirely, county Deputy Fire Chief Craig Daugherty said.

But from late March to mid June, "dry air dominates," Albuquerque National
Weather Service meteorologist Mark Fettig said.

"You're not normally going to see daily or near-daily showers or thunderstorms,"
he said.

June is the peak wildfire month in the region, and fires typically continue to
burn until monsoon rains wash them away in early July, Daugherty said.

The county fire department has 262 volunteer firefighters. When wildfire season
is in full swing, Farmington, Aztec and Bloomfield firefighters will help put
out the blazes. But as is the case with the county, the Aztec fire department is
staffed with volunteers, and the Bloomfield Fire Department is mostly comprised
of volunteers. That has some local fire officials wishing more people would
volunteer for that duty.

"We're struggling," Daugherty said.

In his department, he would prefer to have almost 100 more firefighters, and
Aztec Chief Kevin Simpson said he has 17 volunteers but could use 24.

Bloomfield's fire department has 12 career firefighters and approximately 24
volunteers, but its staffing for now is sufficient, Fire Chief George Duncan
said. The Farmington Fire Department has 84 full-time, paid firefighters, Deputy
Chief David Burke said, which he described as enough to staff the department's
engines and ladder trucks.

County firefighters respond to the most wildfire calls because they cover almost
60,000 square miles of mostly rural land, which is where many of the fires
start, Daugherty said.

Of the more than 10,000 calls that county firefighters responded to last year,
"hundreds" were from residents who lost control of debris they were burning,
Daugherty said.

Farmington firefighters responded to 15 wildfires total in fiscal years 2012,
2013 and 2014, Burke said; Aztec firefighters respond to about 30 or 40
wildfires a year, Simpson said; and Bloomfield had 24 wildfire calls last year,
Assistant Fire Chief John Mohler said.

"This time of year, we get a lot," Duncan said.

Bloomfield firefighters already have responded to several wildfire calls, and
many of those calls are related to debris burns or trash fires, he said.

A campfire in June 2012 started what became a three-day wildfire in Blanco that
burned 352 acres, consuming three homes and 12 smaller structures, Daugherty
said.

"The majority are really preventable," he said.

Many municipalities have ordinances related to the burning of such material. In
Bloomfield, firefighters will inspect land before a burn to ensure it is safe.

Residents should also create a "defensible space" from wildfires by clearing
away tall grass or other vegetation that is close to their home and trimming low
tree branches, Duncan said. Homeowners with wooden shingle roofs are advised to
replace them, he said.

If residents are conducting burns, the best time is during the morning when
winds are low, Duncan said, and they are advised to have a garden hose
available.

Dan Schwartz covers government for The Daily Times. He can be reached at
505-564-4606 and @dtdschwartz on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Robert Trujillo, owner of Excel Excavating, clears away brush and trees
Wednesday along the Animas River in Flora Vista in anticipation of wildfire
season in San Juan County.
Robert Trujillo, left, with Excel Excavating, walks with Joe Carrillo, timber
management officer for the Chama District State Forestry Division, Wednesday as
Carillo takes GPS coordinates for the work done by Trujillo along the Animas
River in Flora Vista.
Gary Hathorn, left, project coordinator for the San Juan Soil and Water
Conservation District, talks with Robert Trujillo of Excel Excavating and Joe
Carrillo, timber management officer for the Chama District State Forestry
Division, Wednesday near a work site near the Flora Vista bridge along the
Animas River.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2015 Farmington Daily Times, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              801 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       The Daily Gleaner (New Brunswick)

                            September 4, 2017 Monday

B.C. failed to reduce wildfire risk: communities

SECTION: Pg. A8

LENGTH: 904 words


VANCOUVER ? The fire in Logan Lake started like so many others in British
Columbia's worst wildfire season on record - a smouldering campfire, not fully
extinguished, sparked flames that spread across the forest floor.

But unlike other blazes that have grown catastrophically, engulfing homes,
forests and farmland, the Logan Lake fire in June was kept to a half-hectare.
The reason, a local official says, is because the town has conducted extensive
wildfire mitigation, in spite of a provincial system he describes as
under-funded, burdensome and unfair.

"Had (the fire) been in that area when we did not mitigate that area, we
would've had a severe fire on our hands," said Fire Chief Dan Leighton. "That's
proof that the work we're doing will work."

In the wake of the 2003 wildfire crisis, which destroyed more than 300 homes and
businesses, the British Columbia government asked former Manitoba premier Gary
Filmon to conduct a thorough review. In his report, Firestorm 2003, he warned
that unless action was taken to reduce fuels such as seedlings, shrubs and wood
debris in forests near communities, there would be more severe wildfires.

The province launched the strategic wildfire prevention initiative, a program
that provides funding to communities for fuel treatment. To date, the province
has provided $78 million to the initiative, a fraction of the amount spent
battling blazes or preparing for earthquakes, and less than seven per cent of
high-risk land has been treated.

This summer, the wildfire season surpassed 2003, burning 10,600 square
kilometres of land and forcing 45,000 people from their homes. The bill is $400
million and rising. The devastation has left community leaders and experts
saying the province could have done more to reduce the risk.

"The amount of fuel management to protect communities was minuscule relative to
the scale of the challenge," said Bob Simpson, Quesnel mayor and a former NDP
forestry critic in the legislature.

The province estimates about 13,470 square kilometres of forest are at high risk
of wildfires spreading into communities. The figure is considered rough,
provincial-level data and must be verified on the ground, but it's the best
estimate available. Some 923 square kilometres have undergone fuel treatment -
or just under seven per cent.

John Rustad, the forests minister prior to the B.C. Liberal government's defeat
in July after 16 years in power, said the government worked seriously with
communities to reduce fuel loads. The province expanded the community forest
program, which allows towns to harvest nearby timberlands and make them more
fire-resistant, he said.

Unfortunately, the mountain pine beetle epidemic has led to fuel buildup even in
places where work was done a decade ago, he said, adding treatment is costly and
must be done continuously.

"Could we have spent more? Obviously, hindsight is 20/20," he said. "But when
you look at the fires that came in toward Cache Creek or Ashcroft, I don't think
there would have been any strategy possible to prevent that kind of an interface
(fire) and those kinds of damages."

Madeline Maley, executive director of the B.C. Wildfire Service, said managing
wildfire risk is a shared responsibility and the province counts on local
governments and homeowners to meet the standards of a program called FireSmart.

The Forest Practices Board estimated in 2015 that the average cost of treating a
hectare of land was $10,000, although some experts put the figure at $5,000.
That means the lowest cost of treating 13,470 square kilometres would be $6.7
billion. The board said the cost per hectare could be reduced through increased
competition and incentives.

In Logan Lake, careful removal of so-called ladder fuels, including tall
grasses, shrubs and branches, is what kept the wildfire in June from growing
upward and becoming what's known as a crown fire, which leaps from treetop to
treetop and is much harder to contain.

But Leighton, the fire chief, said his frustrations with the strategic wildfire
initiative are growing. Communities are required to do the work at considerable
cost before being reimbursed, he said, adding it can take up to a year to
receive funds.

Then there's the fact that the land they are treating is Crown land surrounding
the municipality, but the province only pays for 75 per cent of the planning and
90 per cent of the treatment, he said.

"The province should be paying 100 per cent," said Leighton.

Paul Taylor, a spokesman for the Union of B.C. Municipalities, said if the
up-front cost is prohibitive for communities, they can ask to submit regular
claims to receive payments throughout the process.

The B.C. government created a forest enhancement society last year that has
received $235 million for activities including wildfire risk reduction, bringing
the total spent on mitigation, when combined with the strategic wildfire
initiative, to $313 million.

In contrast, it has spent billions preparing for a major earthquake - a worthy
use of funds, but one expert wonders why wildfires have not been made an equal
priority.

"Here we are with wildfires with severe consequences," said Lori Daniels, an
associate professor of forest and conservation sciences at the University of
British Columbia.

And unlike a major earthquake, she said, "It's not if it's going to happen in
our lifetime. It happens every summer in our lifetime." !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 The
Daily Gleaner (Fredericton)

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 The Daily Gleaner
                              All Rights Reserved


                              802 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                      The Goldendale Sentinel (Washington)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                               September 24, 2014

Forest management needs a new outlook and approach;
Guest commentary

BYLINE: The Goldendale Sentinel staff

LENGTH: 815  words


It only takes a quick look in the newspaper to know that this year's wildfire
season has been bad--endangering communities, destroying hundreds of thousands
of acres of forest, and costing millions of dollars to contain the destructive
flames. Over the past 20 years the U.S. Forest Service has had to more than
double the resources necessary to fight wildfires. Each year, they drain their
wildfire fighting budget and must dip into funds marked for maintenance work in
our national forests. The result is disease and fire-prone forests and an even
greater risk of catastrophic wildfire.

It's time to change how we combat wildfires in the short term, and do more to
prevent catastrophic fires in the future. First, we need to alter the way we
fund federal wildfire management so we have the necessary resources for these
emergencies. Second, it's time to actively manage our national forests so that
they're healthy and fire-resilient, rather than diseased tinderboxes prone to
disastrous wildfires that threaten private and state managed lands and
surrounding communities.

The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act of 2014 would give the federal government an
immediate tool to more effectively fight wildfires. Currently, the same
wildfires that forced the evacuation of homes in North-Central Washington and
displaced families to seek shelter at a local high school are not eligible for
the same emergency funding as other natural disasters. This bill changes that,
allowing the U.S. Forest Service to access emergency resources without having to
deplete the rest of its budget. My colleagues on the U.S. House Appropriations
Committee and I have been working to build bipartisan support for this
legislation. The Obama Administration has voiced its support for this
initiative, and I'm optimistic that we can get this necessary change written
into law.

Fixing the way we fund wildfires is important, but it's only a start. The
constant increase in wildfires points to a larger root problem: the chronic
mismanagement of our federal forests. Twenty years ago, the well-intended but
deeply flawed Northwest Forest Plan was adopted, ushering in a "hands-off"
forest management style. The ensuing surge in wildfires in combination with
other troubling symptoms--insect infestations, a decline in wildlife species,
the rapid spread of disease--have spurred a growing number of scientists,
wildlife biologists, conservation organizations and academics to sound the alarm
that our federal forests are in trouble. Year after year of overgrowth and fuel
build-up continues to compound the problem, leading to the fires we've seen in
recent summers that burn hotter and longer. In turn, wildlife habitat is being
destroyed and our clean water is being severely threatened. We desperately need
to remove fuel build-up and create openings throughout the forest landscape to
help provide natural fire breaks.

Forest openings are not only important for wildfire prevention, but they are
also necessary to support healthy habitat for many species within the forest. A
healthy forest has a mosaic of age classes, each habitat able to support
different species. Many species rely on the plant life that is found only in
early forest conditions for foraging and survival.

But we must avoid some of the riskier "active" approaches that could cause more
harm. In July, the head of the U.S. Forest Service stated in a congressional
hearing that the agency would intentionally burn 65 million acres of national
forests in the name of fire prevention. This approach would be extremely costly
and risky--experienced Forest Service veterans and firefighters warn that such
large scale prescribed fires could easily burn out of control.

What's really needed is a sustainable, ecosystem-based, long-term rotating
mosaic of age classes across the forest landscape that will provide a variety of
habitats for a broad spectrum of wildlife and vegetation species. This is
imperative for overall forest health and it will also benefit the communities
who live and breathe in the shadow of our forests.

Responsible timber harvests that meet the level determined as "sustainable" by
scientists would be a win-win for the Forest Service and our communities. These
would provide needed revenue for the Forest Service to carry out forest
management and fund emergency services, schools and roads in the rural
communities devastated by twenty years of "hands off" federal forest policy.

The long-term prevention of devastating wildfires hinges on better forest
management. Fortunately, forest management does not have to be a choice between
harvesting every stick of timber or putting a fence around the forest and
walking away. As someone who grew up in Southwest Washington and now represents
this region in Congress, I'll keep fighting for common sense solutions that give
our forests and communities the best chance of a healthy future.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Guest Opinion

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GLD

                      Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                     Copyright 2014 The Goldendale Sentinel


                              803 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         The Mercury News (California)

                            October 31, 2017 Tuesday

Wine Country wildfires destroy part of Hewlett-Packard archives

BYLINE: The Associated Press

LENGTH: 485 words



HIGHLIGHT: California's deadly wildfires destroyed much of an archive from tech
pioneers William Hewlett and David Packard, such as a decades-old memo in which
Hewlett proposes designing a calculator that can fit in his pocket, authorities
involved with the archives say.


SANTA ROSA  Californias deadly wildfires destroyed much of an archive from tech
pioneers William Hewlett and David Packard, such as a decades-old memo in which
Hewlett proposes designing a calculator that can fit in his pocket, authorities
involved with the archives say.

Monterey County residents arrested for stealing from Santa Rosa fire victims

Klay Thompson increasing his donations for North Bay fire relief efforts

Bill would stop utilities from passing wildfire costs onto California ratepayers

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill      The more than 100 boxes of letters and other materials from the early
days of Hewlett-Packard, now called HP, were stored in two modular buildings at
the Santa Rosa offices of Keysight Technologies, an electronics measurement
company that acquired the historical trove through a series of spinoffs, the
Santa Rosa Press Democrat reported .

The two modular buildings burned to the ground in this months wildfires , which
killed 43 people and destroyed more than 7,000 homes and other structures. The
rest of Keysights campus, including its permanent buildings, survived with
minimal damage, Ron Nersesian, the companys chief executive, told the newspaper.

Packard and Hewlett pioneered Californias tech industry when they started an
electronics firm in a Palo Alto garage with $538 in cash.

The destroyed archives had been valued at nearly $2 million in 2005. Former HP
staff archivist Karen Lewis called the collection irreplaceable.

When Lewis first began assembling the materials in the 1980s, I realized, Oh, my
God, this is the history of Silicon Valley  This is the history of the
electronics industry.'

Lewis said the destroyed documents include the memo from Hewlett to engineers
that led to the companys HP-35 pocket calculator, in 1972. Another memo proposed
an open-office floor plan, now a staple of valley companies, the San Francisco
Chronicle said .

Lewis faulted the recent handling of the archives, saying previous owners had
stored the collections in vaults within permanent facilities, safeguarded by
foam fire retardant.

This could easily have been prevented, and its a huge loss, Lewis said.

Keysight Technologies spokesman Jeff Weber said his company had taken
appropriate and responsible steps to protect the archives, but the most
destructive firestorm in state history prevented efforts to protect portions of
the collection.

This is a time to begin healing, not assigning blame, Weber said.

Another HP spokeswoman, Dana Lengkeek, told the Chronicle that other archive
material survives elsewhere, including speeches and letters from the firms
founders.

Like our Facebook page for more conversation and news coverage from San Jose,
the Bay Area and beyond.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              804 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                            April 16, 2011 Saturday

Wildfire Prevention Week begins today

BYLINE: Pioneer Press

SECTION: MINNESOTA-TWIN CITIES

LENGTH: 137 words


Today marks the start of Wildfire Prevention Week in Minnesota.

Larry Himanga, wildfire prevention coordinator for the state Department of
Natural Resources, encouraged people to make a special effort to control their
fires not only this week, but also all year long. The No. 1 cause of wildfires
in Minnesota is debris-burning fires that escape.

Spring wildfire activity usually begins in southern Minnesota and moves
northward as the snow disappears. Most wildfires occur in the spring, between
when the snow melts and vegetation turns green. DNR personnel respond to more
than 1,500 wildfires annually.

Official wildfire prevention efforts in Minnesota began after the Great Hinckley
Fire of 1894, which killed 418 people and destroyed the town of Hinckley and
nearby communities in east-central Minnesota.

-- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              805 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 19, 2018 Friday

Washington: SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA WILDFIRES INCREASE FLOOD VULNERABILITY; SOME
RESIDENTS MAY BE ELIGIBLE FOR IMMEDIATE FLOOD INSURANCE COVERAGE

LENGTH: 405  words



Washington: Federal Emergency Management Agency has issued the following news
release:

Because wildfires can make the ground more vulnerable to flooding, FEMA
encourages those who live near land that has suffered from a wildfire to protect
their homes with flood insurance, even if their home hasn't flooded before.
Residents who live near wildfires on federal lands, such as the Thomas Fire, may
be eligible to receive coverage immediately for a future flood without the
typical 30-day wait.


In general, newly purchased flood insurance policies become effective following
a 30-day waiting period.  However, the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act
of 2012 provided an additional exception to this requirement related to flooding
caused by post-wildfire conditions, referred to as the "Post-Wildfire
Exception."
Under the Post-Wildfire Exception, those purchasing a flood insurance policy may
not be required to meet the 30-day waiting period for their new flood insurance
policy, if
    a flood that originates on federal land damages the policyholder's property;

     post-wildfire conditions on federal lands caused or worsened the flooding;
and
     the policyholder purchased the policy either:
         before the fire containment date or
         during the 60-calendar day period following the fire containment date.

The National Interagency Fire Center determined that the Thomas Fire was
contained on January 12, 2018.
Regardless of the waiting period, FEMA encourages everyone to consider buying
flood insurance, as those who are insured recover more quickly and more fully
following a flood.
"We are urging residents to purchase a flood insurance policy to protect their
family and home today, before the next storm hits," said FEMA's Deputy Associate
Administrator for Insurance and Mitigation Roy Wright. "The NFIP recognizes that
some situations are unique. It's important that residents in California know
that it's not too late to purchase flood insurance."
Wildfires may char the ground to the point where it can no longer absorb water
quickly--creating the ideal conditions for flash flooding and mudflows that can
strike without warning.  Burnt ground can be affected for about five years,
which is why residents are encouraged to take important steps to protect their
families and homes by purchasing flood insurance.  NFIP flood insurance policies
cover damage from flooding and mudflows.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              806 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Abbotsford News

                             August 25, 2017 Friday
                                 Final Edition

30 new fires in BC since yesterday

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 248 words


A total of 30 new wildfires began burning around the province on Thursday,
making it one of the busiest days in recent weeks.

Kevin Skrepnek with the BC Wildfire Service says many were caused by lightening
and most were contained at a small size - around one hectare or less - with the
exception of the Joe Rich fire burning east of Kelowna.

RELATED: Firefighters battle biggest blaze in BC history

That wildfire quickly grew out of control and now sits at 380 hectares. It was
fanned by high winds in the Central Okanagan, with gusts reaching up to 70 km/h
that contributed to its aggressive growth.

Joe Rich wildfire tweet

It is now one of 157 fires burning throughout British Columbia, which have
charred well over 1,000,000 hectares.

The largest fire burning in the province continues to be in the
Cariboo-Chilcotin. That fire is roughly 492,000 hectares in size or roughly the
size of Prince Edward Island.

RELATED: BC wildfires burn into one large blaze

Camp fires are now allowed in much of northern B.C., but are restricted
everywhere else except for the fog zone along the west coast of northern
Vancouver Island and Haida Gwaii. Back country closures have been relaxed in
some areas too, with the exception of the Cariboo, Kamloops and Southeast fire
zones.

RELATED: Wildfires cost ICBC $500,000

The ban on backcountry vehicles remains in place.

Since April 1, there have been 1,109 wildfires burning in B.C. This wildfire
season has cost the Province $384.3 million.

facebook wildfire embed

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              807 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Aberdeen Press and Journal

                              May 13, 2016 Friday

Fire chief's warning after massive wildfire

BYLINE: Sue Restan

SECTION: NEWS; OTHER; Others; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 401 words


One of Scotland's most senior firefighters is urging the public to take care not
to start wildfires after a huge blaze in the Highlands this week.

Recent hot, dry weather has left vegetation on the hills and moors tinder-dry,
dramatically increasing the risk of wildfires.

Much of the region has been basking in temperatures in the mid to high 20s this
week and the Met Office is forecasting the weather will remain "relatively dry"
over the weekend.

The warning has been issued by Scottish Fire and Rescue Service deputy assistant
chief officer Andy Coueslant, who is the chair of the Scottish Wildfire Forum.
He said: "It's vital that people are aware of the danger of wildfires during
periods of warmer weather, when the risk is at its highest.

"The wildfire that started in Sutherland on Tuesday night - which covered an
area of seven square kilometres (2.7 square miles) at its peak - showed how
quickly these fires can spread.

"It was testament to the fantastic work of our fire crews in the local area that
we were able to avert any risk to property or power lines.

"These fires have the potential to change markedly from day-to-day and its
all-the-more important people are vigilant and act responsibly while this period
of high pressure affects the country."

He added that many rural and remote communities had been hugely impacted by
wildfires, which could cause significant environmental and economic damage.

Mr Coueslant said: "Livestock, farmland, wildlife, protected woodland and sites
of special scientific interest can all be devastated by these fires, as can the
lives of people living and working in rural communities.

"Human behaviour can significantly lower the chance of a wildfire starting so
it's crucial people act safely and responsibly in rural environments and follow
the countryside code."

He said the public could help prevent wildfires by making sure they disposed of
litter and smoking materials carefully while in rural areas and ensuring
barbecues were properly extinguished.

Met Office spokeswoman Nicola Maxey said temperatures in the Highlands and
islands would dip a bit on the highs of the past few days and it would become
more cloudy.

However, she said the weather was expected to remain relatively dry over the
next couple of days and into the weekend.

Anyone who sees what they believe to be a wildfire with no obvious signs of
people managing it is urged to call 999 immediately.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DID WELL: Fire service deputy assistant chief officer Andy Coueslant
has praised the efforts of north crews in dealing with recent wildfires

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PJ


                      Copyright 2016 Aberdeen Journals Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              808 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    Columbia Basin Herald, Moses Lake, Wash.

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            February 19, 2016 Friday

Lessons learned Wildfire presentation coming to Moses Lake, Ephrata libraries

BYLINE: Cheryl Schweizer, Columbia Basin Herald, Moses Lake, Wash.

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS

LENGTH: 403 words


Feb. 19--MOSES LAKE -- Nature photographer John Marshall will talk wildfire and
what he's learned through his documentation in lectures at two local libraries
next week.

Presentations are scheduled in Ephrata and Moses Lake. The Ephrata lecture will
be 7 p.m. Tuesday at the Ephrata Public Library, 45 Northwest Alder St. Marshall
will be in Moses Lake at 6:30 p.m. Wednesday at the Moses Lake Public Library,
418 East Fifth Ave.

Marshall's interest in fires and their impact dates to 1994 and a summer of big
wildfires, according to a press release from the North Central Regional Library.
The presentations are part of the library's program on wildfires following
severe fire seasons in 2014 and 2015.

Wildfire and its impact will be a focus of lectures and a question-and-answer
session during February, March and April, leading up to a visit to Wenatchee by
Timothy Egan, author of "The Big Burn." The book is the subject of the Columbia
River Reads program for 2016. Columbia River Reads participants all read the
same book, with a lecture by the author as the program finale.

The idea is to talk about "how we came to where we are and where we're going
from here," said Michelle McNiel, NCRL public relations specialist. Events
include a question and answer session about the Firewise program, which shows
people how to improve the chances of property surviving a wildfire. An
historical presentation on wildfire in North Central Washington is planned also.

Marshall's lectures are the only two events in Grant County, McNeil said. The
NCRL outreach program is focusing on Washington history in 2016, according to
the library system website. The program will shift to a new topic in May, McNeil
said.

Marshall said he took the 1994 picture without exactly knowing why. In the 21
years since, "he's photographed dozens of burned areas, documenting dynamic
changes in the landscape as forest and sage lands grow back after fires," the
press release said.

Marshall has a degree in fishery science from Oregon State University and a
master's degree in wildlife resources from the University of Idaho. He is
working with the U.S. Forest Service to compare historic and contemporary
pictures of Washington forests and rangeland to show how they have changed over
time.

___ (c)2016 the Columbia Basin Herald, Wash. Visit the Columbia Basin Herald,
Wash. at www.columbiabasinherald.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160219-1CO-Lessons-learned-Wildfire
-presentation-coming-to-Moses-Lake-Ephrata-libraries-0219-20160219

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CO


                      Copyright 2016 Columbia Basin Herald


                              809 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 7, 2015 Thursday

Wyden-Crapo Wildfire Disaster Funding Act Gains Support of More than 250
Organizations

LENGTH: 449  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator Ron Wyden, U.S Government has issued the following news
release:

More than 250 groups from across the country joined Sens. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., and
Mike Crapo, R-Idaho, to express support for passing the Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act to ensure vital resources in the fight against catastrophic
wildfires in the West ahead of this year's fire season.

The 261 organizations, including the National Cattlemen's Beef Association, the
Nature Conservancy and the National Rifle Association, wrote to all 535 members
of the U.S. Senate and the House of Representatives to show the importance of
passing the bill.

"Fire season is almost here, and for Oregonians and others in the West, who know
that wildfires are no less destructive than other natural disasters, it's past
time to end the destructive cycle of playing catch-up on wildfire funding,"
Wyden said. "I'm glad to have these groups standing with Sen. Crapo and me as we
continue to push for our fix to address these wildfires before they start."

"These groups are helping sound our call to action, which became even more
urgent today with news that the fire outlook is worsening," Crapo said.
"According to Chief Tom Tidwell, there is a 90-percent chance the Forest Service
will run out of money to fight fires at a time when 58-millon acres of national
forests face a high or very high risk of severe wildfire.  We have got to
perform the management that will reduce catastrophic fires and make sure
resources for that management, and to fight fires, are available."

Wyden and Crapo reintroduced the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act on Jan. 22. The
bill ends the cycle of underfunding fire suppression, which currently forces
federal agencies to steal from fire prevention just to put out fires. Instead,
Wyden and Crapo's bill will end this so-called "fire borrowing" by funding the
largest wildfires from a similar disaster account used to fund other natural
disasters. The Interior Department and the Forest Service estimate these fires -
about 1 percent - consume 30 percent of firefighting budgets.

In March, Wyden and Crapo secured language in the Senate budget to allow a
funding cap adjustment that has prevented agencies from treating wildfires as
natural disasters under the federal budget.

The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would move any fire suppression spending above
70% of the 10-year average to a disaster funding account that is separate from
Forest Service and Interior budgets. The bill now has 14 bipartisan cosponsors
in the Senate and 79 representatives have signed on to the House version.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              810 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 6, 2015 Wednesday

Crapo-Wyden Wildfire Disaster Funding Act Gains Support of More Than 250
Organizations

LENGTH: 448  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator Mike Crapo, U.S Government has issued the following news
release:

More than 250 groups from across the country joined Sens. Mike Crapo (R-Idaho),
and Ron Wyden (D-Oregon), to express support for passing the Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act to ensure vital resources in the fight against catastrophic
wildfires in the West ahead of this year's fire season.

The 261 organizations, including the Western Governors' Association, the Nature
Conservancy and the National Rifle Association, wrote to all 535 members of the
U.S. Senate and the House of Representatives to show the importance of passing
the bill.

"These groups are helping sound our call to action, which became even more
urgent today with news that the fire outlook is worsening," said Crapo.
"According to Chief Tom Tidwell, there is a 90-percent chance the Forest Service
will run out of money to fight fires at a time when 58-millon acres of national
forests face a high or very high risk of severe wildfire.  We have got to
perform the management that will reduce catastrophic fires and make sure
resources for that management, and to fight fires, are available."

"Fire season is almost here, and for Oregonians and others in the West, who know
that wildfires are no less destructive than other natural disasters, it's past
time to end the destructive cycle of playing catch-up on wildfire funding,"Wyden
said. "I'm glad to have these groups standing with Sen. Crapo and me as we
continue to push for our fix to address these wildfires before they start."

Wyden and Crapo reintroduced the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act on Jan. 22. The
bill ends the cycle of underfunding fire suppression, which currently forces
federal agencies to steal from fire prevention just to put out fires. Instead,
Wyden and Crapo's bill will end this so-called "fire borrowing" by funding the
largest wildfires from a similar disaster account used to fund other natural
disasters. The Interior Department and the Forest Service estimate these fires -
about 1 percent - consume 30 percent of firefighting budgets.

In March, Crapo and Wyden secured language in the Senate budget to allow a
funding cap adjustment that has prevented agencies from treating wildfires as
natural disasters under the federal budget.

The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would move any fire suppression spending above
70% of the 10-year average to a disaster funding account that is separate from
Forest Service and Interior budgets. The bill now has 14 bipartisan cosponsors
in the Senate and 79 representatives have signed on to the House version.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              811 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 24, 2014 Tuesday

US Patent granted to Wildfire Defense Systems, Inc. (MT) on June 24 titled as "
Wildfire risk assessment"

LENGTH: 293  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,760,285, on
June 24, 2014, to Wildfire Defense Systems, Inc. (MT), titled as "Wildfire risk
assessment"

Inventors: Billman; Bradly Jay (San Antonio, TX), Hartman; Wayne (San Antonio,
TX), Bhide; Arti (San Antonio, TX), Oakes, III; Charles L. (Boerne, TX), Rubin;
Elizabeth (San Antonio, TX), Zuwala; Mark (San Antonio, TX), Gray; Emily (San
Antonio, TX), Sausman; Sandra (San Antonio, TX)
Assignee: Wildfire Defense Systems, Inc. (Red Lodge, MT)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
system and method provide determining a wildfire risk associated with home and
identifying mitigatable features located on and around the home. An inspection
list of questions is presented to a user through a mobile computing device, and
images are captured by a camera included in the mobile computing device. In an
embodiment, an image can be captured using augmented visual assistance through a
mobile application. A wildfire risk associated with the home can be determined
at least based on answers to the questions in the inspection list and captured
images. In another embodiment, a virtual reality game for simulating a wildfire
behavior is provided. The wildfire behavior can be re-simulated during the game
after removing or modifying mitigatable features on or around the home. In yet
another embodiment, a system and method for determining a building status and
location is provided in real-time during an active fire."

The patent was filed on. November 15, 2012 Application no. 13/678,308

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              812 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            The Eagle (Bryan, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 29, 2013 Wednesday

Bryan City Council discusses wildfire plan, new traffic lights

BYLINE: Allen Reed, The Eagle, Bryan, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 654 words


May 29--The Bryan City Council took up a pair of safety initiatives Tuesday.

The council during its workshop session was introduced to a new style of traffic
light and a wildfire protection plan.

The wildfire plan was developed in response to the 2011 fire season, in which 97
wildfires burned 763 acres in Brazos County and 2,947 Texas homes were
destroyed. The Bryan Fire Department partnered with the Texas A&M Forest Service
on the plan, which was developed between January and May.

Dubbed the "Community Wildfire Protection Plan," it highlights dangerous areas
around Bryan and suggests safety improvements. The report will not be made
public until an official signing ceremony at City Hall on June 11.

The high-risk areas in Bryan were identified on the outskirts of town near open
grassy areas. Out of the 54 Bryan neighborhoods assessed, 32 were at high risk
for wildfire damage, 21 were at moderate risk and one was at low risk. The risk
was determined by vegetation, home construction, defensible space, water sources
and access.

That data was compiled into a pre-attack plan that designates local water
sources, incident command post locations, staging areas, safety zones and
shelter locations.

"It's a great benefit to the Bryan Fire Department as well as any other fire
departments if there are larger wildfires around the area, if there's folks
coming in from out of the area that don't know it, and this really helps them
get familiar with the area and what the potential risks are," said Jared Karns,
regional fire coordinator for the service.

Karns said the plan was the first of its kind in the state and one of the first
in the nation. He said he hopes it can serve as a model for other communities.

"This will be the only plan that they need," Karns said. "It's a document that
they can always go back to, and if neighborhoods that were there that weren't
before, they can add that."

The fire department and forest service also combined to create a wildfire smart
phone app for the area. It's the brainchild of Bryan Fire Chief Randy McGregor,
who said the program was designed in-house for no cost to the city.

McGregor said the app will have the high-risk areas, water sources and paperwork
that firefighters unfamiliar with the area might need.

"We're just trying to keep up with the new generation of firefighters," McGregor
said.

The city also rolled out a new type of turn signal -- a flashing yellow light at
intersections along Briarcrest Drive. The flashing yellow arrow, which is common
throughout larger metropolitan areas, replaces the older solid green light and
lets drivers know to yield when making a turn. The first light was installed at
Briarcrest Drive and Country Club Drive on Thursday, and the other three lights
will go live before August.

Staff said the lights will only be displayed for traffic turning from
Briarcrest, and not the side streets. The same type of turn signal was
introduced in College Station near Easterwood Airport within the past six
months, staff said.

"They found that the green ball display had a lot of confusion, some drivers
think they can turn when they have a green in front of opposing traffic and the
flashing yellow arrow was a display that a lot of drivers understood better,"
said Bryan Transportation Manager Dale Picha of traffic studies.

He said the new lights will allow staff to modify the length of the lights to
help alleviate traffic during peak hours.

"Overall, we expect to decrease delays with this," Picha said. "Safety and
operational improvements are our goal in this."

The bulk of the $5 million road redevelopment project is paid for by the Texas
Department of Transportation, with the city contributing $584,000. Staff said
the lights will be installed throughout the city over time during routine
upgrades and maintenance.

___ (c)2013 The Eagle (Bryan, Texas) Visit The Eagle (Bryan, Texas) at
www.theeagle.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130529-EG-Bryan-City-Council-discusses-wildfire
-plan-new-traffic-lights-0529-20130529

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EG


                            Copyright 2013 The Eagle


                              813 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                            Island Park News (Idaho)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                August 27, 2015

UI and WSU Receive Grant to Help Communities Prepare for, Recover from Wildfires

BYLINE: Island Park News staff

LENGTH: 634  words


MOSCOW, Idaho -- Aug. 24, 2015 -- More than 6,000 fires have burned more than 1
million acres in the Northwest so far in 2015, with experts predicting
continuing severe wildfires in coming years. To help Northwest communities
prepare for the future, University of Idaho and Washington State University
researchers are studying ways to increase communities' ability to withstand and
recover from wildfires with the support of a new $2.8 million grant from the
National Science Foundation. An interdisciplinary research team will focus on
improving models that predict where fires are likely to occur, how severe they
will be and whether they are likely to produce post-fire floods and landslides.
The team will then create a virtual early warning system to help identify
particularly vulnerable communities and ecosystems in the region. The
researchers will work closely with an advisory team of academic, government and
industry stakeholders to help translate the research results into action plans
for communities at risk.

The project is led by Crystal Kolden, assistant professor in the UI Department
of Geography and a faculty member in the university's Center for Resilient
Communities (CRC). The team includes nine faculty members from UI's College of
Science, College of Natural Resources, College of Art & Architecture and College
of Agricultural and Life Sciences, as well as four faculty members across three
colleges from Washington State University.

The research is particularly critical in the Northwest, where recent wildfire
seasons have broken records thanks to contributing factors such as drought,
insect damage to forests and changing human behaviors. In 2014, the Carlton
Complex near Wenatchee, Washington, became the largest wildfire in recorded
history for the state, burning 400 square miles and 300 homes. In 2013, large
wildfires near Boise denuded hillsides of vegetation and led to post-fire flood
and mudflow events that threatened the Anderson Ranch Reservoir and dam, which
store water for agricultural needs in southern Idaho. The project's
interdisciplinary approach speaks to the integrated nature of the research,
Kolden said, which is necessary to effectively address the complex issue of
wildfires. By improving our understanding of how compounding disturbance
factors, such as drought and insects, contribute to wildfire growth and
severity; how wildfires translate to post-fire hazards such as floods,
landslides and mudflows; and what social factors contribute to community
vulnerability to wildfire-induced hazards, we can develop vulnerability maps and
early warning systems for the region," Kolden said. "This will allow us to work
with land managers and community planners to develop more holistic mitigation
and adaptation strategies." Lilian Alessa, a professor in the UI College of Art
& Architecture and director of the CRC, said the project reflects a needed shift
toward integrated science. "Our affiliated faculty, like Crystal, exemplify the
commitment the CRC has not only to advancing the well-being and vitality of
Idaho and her citizens, but also to contributing to actionable science across
the nation," Alessa said. Alessa is one of the project's co-principal
investigators, along with UI faculty members John Abatzoglou and Jeff Hicke in
the Department of Geography. Jennifer Adam in WSU's Voiland College of
Engineering and Architecture (VCEA) is another co-PI and leads the project's WSU
team with support from the Center for Environmental Research, Education and
Outreach. Adam is the lead of BioEarth, a modeling platform that will be
improved for wildfire. The WSU team also includes Mingliang Liu in VCEA, Jon
Yoder in the School of Economic Sciences and Chad Kruger, who is director of the
Center for Sustaining Agriculture and Natural Resources.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Community

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IPN

                      Copyright 2015 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                        Copyright 2015 Island Park News


                              814 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                  Korea Times

                              May 10, 2016 Tuesday

Alberta's mega-wildfire '

LENGTH: 1064 words


A helicopter battles a wildfire in Fort McMurray Alberta, on Wednesday, May 4,
2016. The raging wildfire emptied Canada's main oil sands city, destroying
entire neighborhoods of Fort McMurray, where officials warned Wednesday that all
efforts to suppress the fire have failed. (Jason Franson /The Canadian Press via
AP) MANDATORY CREDIT

Heat waves are seen as cars and trucks try and get past a wild fire 16 km south
of Fort McMurray, Alberta, on highway 63, Friday, May 6, 2016. Chad Morrison,
Alberta's manager of wildfire prevention, said the cause of the fire hasn't been
determined, but that it started in a remote forested area and could have been
ignited by lightning. (Jonathan Hayward/The Canadian Press via AP)

Animal rescue workers wait to get entry to Fort McMurray, Alberta, Friday, May
6, 2016, as smoke from a wildfire rises in the background. Officials said
shifting winds were giving the embattled northern Alberta city a break, but they
added the fire that forced 80,000 people from their homes remained out of
control and was likely to burn for weeks. (Jason Franson/The Canadian Press via
AP) MANDATORY CREDIT

Flames a smoke rise from a wildfire in Fort McMurray, Alberta, Friday, May 6,
2016. More than 80,000 people have left Fort McMurray in the heart of Canada oil
sands, where the fire has torched over 1,000 homes and other buildings. (Jason
Franson /The Canadian Press via AP) MANDATORY CREDIT

A plane drops fire retardant on a nearby wildfire in Fort McMurray, Alberta, on
Friday, May 6, 2016. Chad Morrison, Alberta's manager of wildfire prevention,
said the cause of the fire hasn't been determined, but that it started in a
remote forested area and could have been ignited by lightning. (Jonathan
Hayward/The Canadian Press via AP) MANDATORY CREDIT

A firefighter wears a mask as he drives his truck pass a road block 16kms south
of Fort McMurray, Alberta, on Friday, May 6, 2016. Displaced residents at oil
field camps north of Fort McMurray, Alberta got a sobering drive-by view of
their burned out city Friday in a convoy that moved evacuees south amid a
massive wildfire that officials fear could double in size by the end of
Saturday. (Jonathan Hayward/The Canadian Press via AP) MANDATORY CREDIT

A bird flies over the horizen as the sun rises near a wildfire in Fort McMurray,
Alberta, Canada on Friday, May 6, 2016. The Alberta provincial government, which
declared a state of emergency, said more than 1,100 firefighters, 145
helicopters, 138 pieces of heavy equipment and 22 air tankers were fighting the
fire, but Chad Morrison, Alberta's manager of wildfire prevention, said rain is
needed. (Jason Franson/The Canadian Press via AP) MANDATORY CREDIT

Smoke fills the air as a RCMP officer stands near a road block 16kms south of
Fort McMurray, Alberta on Friday, May 6, 2016. Displaced residents at oil field
camps north of Fort McMurray, Alberta got a sobering drive-by view of their
burned out city Friday in a convoy that moved evacuees south amid a massive
wildfire that officials fear could double in size by the end of Saturday. As
police and military oversaw the procession of hundreds of vehicles, a mass
airlift of evacuees also resumed. (Jonathan Hayward/The Canadian Press via AP)
MANDATORY CREDIT

epa05290165 A handout picture made available by NASA's Earth Observatory on 05
May 2016 shows an image acquired by the Operational Land Imager (OLI) on the
Landsat 8 satellite, combining shortwave infrared, near infrared, and green
light (OLI bands 7-5-3), of destructive wildfires burning through the Northern
region of Alberta, Canada, 03 May 2016. In picture is seen the city of Fort
McMurray (top-R), which experienced the forced evacuation of some 70,000
inhabitants due to forest fires. Another 18,000 people in nearby towns have also
been evacuated to centers both north and south of the city, where thousands of
workers in Canada's petroleum industry, many of them foreigners, reside. In
picture active fires appear in red and burned areas in brown. EPA/NASA/EARTH
OBSERVATORY/JOSHUA STEVENS HANDOUT EDITORIAL USE ONLY

A family takes refuge in the back of their boat after evacuation at a rest stop
near Fort McMurray, Alberta, Canada, on Wednesday, May 4, 2016. Thousands of
residents were ordered to flee as flames moved into the Canadian oil sands city,
destroying whole neighborhoods. (Jason Franson/The Canadian Press via AP)
MANDATORY CREDIT

A group of people camp out in their van at a beach south of Fort McMurray,
Alberta, Canada on Wednesday May 4, 2016. Thousands of residents were ordered to
flee as a wildfire moved into the Canadian oil sands city, destroying whole
neighborhoods. (Jason Franson/The Canadian Press via AP) MANDATORY CREDIT

Evacuees from the Fort McMurray wildfires look through donated supplies in Lac
la Biche, Alberta, on Friday, May 6, 2016. More than 80,000 people have left
Fort McMurray in the heart of Canada' oil sands, where the fire has torched
1,600 homes and other buildings. (Ryan Remiorz/The Canadian Press via AP)
MANDATORY CREDIT

A wildfire burns south of Fort McMurray, Alberta, near Highway 63 on Saturday,
May 7, 2016. Canadian officials hoped to complete the mass evacuation of work
camps north of Alberta's main oil sands city of Fort McMurray on Saturday,
fearing the growing wildfire could double in size and reach a major oil sands
mine and even the neighboring province of Saskatchewan. (Jonathan Hayward /The
Canadian Press via AP) MANDATORY CREDIT

Evacuees watch the wildfire near Fort McMurray, Alberta, on Wednesday, May 4,
2016. Alberta declared a state of emergency Wednesday as crews frantically held
back wind-whipped wildfires. No injuries or fatalities have been reported.
(Jason Franson/The Canadian Press via AP) MANDATORY CREDIT

Burned ground surrounds a sign welcoming visitors to Fort McMurray during a
media tour of the fire-damaged Alberta city on Monday, May 9, 2016. A break in
the weather has officials optimistic they've reached a turning point on getting
a handle on the massive wildfire. (Ryan Remiorz/The Canadian Press via AP)

Burned wreckage is viewed in the Beacon Hill neighborhood during a media tour of
the fire-damaged city of Fort McMurray, Alberta, Monday, May 9, 2016. A break in
the weather has officials optimistic they have reached a turning point on
getting a handle on the massive wildfire. (Jonathan Hayward/The Canadian Press
via AP) MANDATORY CREDIT

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2016 The Korea Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              815 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                           September 21, 2012 Friday

NZ startups can thrive, says Ransom

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY; General

LENGTH: 638 words


In the cut-throat world of Silicon Valley, Victoria Ransom says it"s a blessing
she came out on top.

"There"s a lot of great success stories that come out of tech startups and those
success stories tend to get a lot of publicity but the norm is that businesses
don"t succeed," she told the Business Herald.

"The majority of companies either don"t succeed at all or have reasonably modest
outcomes."

Six weeks after Google gobbled up her company Wildfire for hundreds of millions
of dollars, the 36-year-old said the buzz of the sale hasn"t worn off.

"We always had a big vision for Wildfire," said Ransom, who was born and raised
in the central North Island.

"We can have an even bigger one now and the challenge and excitement is figuring
out how to do that."

Despite being busier "than she even imagined" after moving to Google"s head
office in the heart of Silicon Valley, she does have a holiday on the horizon
and will be returning home - to Scotts Ferry, near Bulls - for Christmas. The
Herald understands she will also be back for her wedding in March.

Ransom couldn"t reveal what Google paid for Wildfire but at the time of the sale
in August, the Wall St Journal reported the deal could have been worth US$250
million ($304 million).

And although she"s "well off", Ransom has no plans to leave Wildfire and try
something new.

"I"ll continue to be involved for several more years and who knows it may turn
into a long, long career with Google."

Ransom founded Wildfire in 2008 with her partner and former professional
snowboarder, Alain Chuard.

The pair worked as investment bankers in New York, but after ditching the
finance sector to start an adventure tourism company, they stumbled across the
idea for Wildfire almost by accident - or as Ransom calls it "an unexpected
opportunity".

"I"ve definitely been a risk taker and haven"t tried to plan my career at all,"
she said.

"When you try to plan too much you miss out on unexpected opportunities."

Despite technology being a male-dominated industry, Ransom didn"t feel she
needed to break into a "kind of old-boys club". "If anything the fact I was a
woman helped me because it was any interesting story in the media and there were
other women who were really keen help."

Wildfire is not a pure New Zealand success story, the company having being
formed and grown in the US, but Ransom believed it was perfectly possible for
this country to build and keep technology startups here.

For that to happen she said New Zealand needs to encourage young people into the
tech sector and create a culture where people are driven to start businesses.

"In Silicon Valley there is just kind of this mindset that this is what you do,
you start companies," she said.

Victoria Ransom

* Age: 36

* Sold a social media marketing company, Wildfire, to Google for hundreds of
millions of dollars.

* Born and raised in Scotts Ferry (population 64) near Bulls.

What Wildfire does:

Wildfire builds online tools to help companies with their marketing over social
networks such as Facebook, Twitter or Google+.

For example, if an online clothing retailer was setting up their Facebook page
and wants to present picture galleries of their products to customers, Wildfire
gives them templates to enter and update these effectively.

Wildfire can also run an organisation"s advertising campaign over social
networks to direct traffic, for instance, towards their Facebook page.

Within this it has tools to allow a business to target different demographics
and to test different combinations of pictures and words in ads to see which are
the most effective.

When customers engage with a business on social networks, Wildfire has tools to
track what people are saying about them online and manage how the company
responds. It also has products to analyse which brand pages are performing the
best over which social networks.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              816 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             Mayerthorpe Freelancer

                           October 11, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Fire season a fizzle for forest area

BYLINE: Peter Shokeir, Mayerthorpe Freelancer

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 331  words


The Whitecourt region experienced a largely uneventful fire season this year
thanks to wet weather, strong enforcement and vigilant residents, according to
Alberta Wildfire.

Shannon Stambaugh, a wildfire information officer with Alberta Agriculture and
Forestry, said the area had 28 wildfires that burned 11.43 hectares with the
largest singular fire being eight hectares in size. This was below the five-year
average of 58 wildfires burning 184.06 hectares.

"It was a quieter year for the Whitecourt Forest Area," Stambaugh said. "No
communities were threatened by any of these wildfires. Our firefighters were
always busy, helping out around the province or staying in the Forest Area to
carry out normal duties."

This year was wetter in the spring compared to previous years, Stambaugh said,
adding that the region typically sees many wildfires between March and May.

"We also had help from many people out working and enjoying the forest who took
the time to prevent wildfires or helped to report them," she said.

Many residents also called in to get fire permits. Stambaugh said the province
issued almost 80 permits for people in the surrounding forest area this year.
The Whitecourt Fire Department, meanwhile, is responsible for issuing permits
within town boundaries "Fire permits help our firefighters know where there is
planned burning on the landscape so they are free to (fight) real wildfires and
not end up in someone's backyard while they are having a cooking or warming
fire," she said.

Other areas of Alberta were busier fighting wildfires, such as High Level, Slave
Lake and Rocky Mountain House, Stambaugh said, adding that British Columbia had
an exceptionally active year.

The Calgary Forest Area was also extremely hot and dry until the last few weeks
of the fire season, resulting in a fire ban and off-highway vehicle prohibition
that evolved into a full forest closure, Stambaugh said.

Firefighters within the Whitecourt area went to help these neighboring
communities.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: File Photo; The amount of forest fires were below average in the
Whitecourt Forest Area this year.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Mayerthorpe Freelancer
                              All Rights Reserved


                              817 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 20, 2015 Monday

Minnesota: Wildfire Prevention Week April 19-25

LENGTH: 322  words

DATELINE: Saint Paul


Department of Natural Resources, Minnesota has issued the following news
release:

Gov. Mark Dayton has declared April 19-25 as Wildfire Prevention Week in
Minnesota to increase awareness of outdoor wildfire hazards.

In Minnesota, most wildfires occur in the spring between snow melt and
vegetation green up because last year's dry vegetation can quickly catch fire.
So far this year, more than 800 fires have burned over 15,000 acres. The DNR has
already responded to almost twice as many fires as the agency did in the entire
last year.

On average, fire agencies in Minnesota annually respond to 1,200 wildfires that
burn over 38,000 acres at a cost of tens of millions of dollars.

"With last year's drought, lack of winter snow fall and early spring, wildland
firefighters and rural fire departments are already battling wildfires this
spring," said Linda Gormanson, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
wildfire prevention coordinator.

Most wildfires fires are human-caused, and the number-one cause is escaped
debris from burning fires. Finding alternatives to burning such as mulching or
composting can go a long way to avoiding these fires in the first place.

A burning permit is required to burn vegetative material unless there is at
least 3 inches of snow on the ground. The DNR or local governments may also
restrict burning if weather conditions warrant.

Current information on statewide fire danger and burning restrictions is
available online.  Burning permits are available online, from local fire wardens
or DNR forestry offices.

Campfires, defined as a fire no larger than 3 feet in diameter and height, and
surrounded by a cleared area, may be used without a permit. Be safe with fire.
Keep a shovel and water at hand, never leave the fire unattended, and make sure
fires are completely out before leaving.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              818 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 18, 2015 Saturday

Minnesota: Wildfire Prevention Week April 19-25

LENGTH: 322  words

DATELINE: Saint Paul


Department of Natural Resources, Minnesota has issued the following news
release:


Gov. Mark Dayton has declared April 19-25 as Wildfire Prevention Week in
Minnesota to increase awareness of outdoor wildfire hazards.

In Minnesota, most wildfires occur in the spring between snow melt and
vegetation green up because last year's dry vegetation can quickly catch fire.
So far this year, more than 800 fires have burned over 15,000 acres. The DNR has
already responded to almost twice as many fires as the agency did in the entire
last year.

On average, fire agencies in Minnesota annually respond to 1,200 wildfires that
burn over 38,000 acres at a cost of tens of millions of dollars.

"With last year's drought, lack of winter snow fall and early spring, wildland
firefighters and rural fire departments are already battling wildfires this
spring," said Linda Gormanson, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
wildfire prevention coordinator.

Most wildfires fires are human-caused, and the number-one cause is escaped
debris from burning fires. Finding alternatives to burning such as mulching or
composting can go a long way to avoiding these fires in the first place.

A burning permit is required to burn vegetative material unless there is at
least 3 inches of snow on the ground. The DNR or local governments may also
restrict burning if weather conditions warrant.

Current information on statewide fire danger and burning restrictions is
available online.  Burning permits are available online, from local fire wardens
or DNR forestry offices.

Campfires, defined as a fire no larger than 3 feet in diameter and height, and
surrounded by a cleared area, may be used without a permit. Be safe with fire.
Keep a shovel and water at hand, never leave the fire unattended, and make sure
fires are completely out before leaving.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              819 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          

                            December 31, 2017 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Fire Next Time

BYLINE: By BRENDAN I. KOERNER.

Brendan I. Koerner is a contributing editor at Wired and the author, most
recently, of ''The Skies Belong to Us: Love and Terror in the Golden Age of
Hijacking.''

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; NONFICTION; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1331 words


MEGAFIRE The Race to Extinguish a Deadly Epidemic of Flame By Michael Kodas 365
pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $28.

FIRESTORM How Wildfire Will Shape Our Future By Edward Struzik 257 pp. Island
Press. $30.

On Aug. 20, 1910, unusually vicious winds whipped through Idaho's Coeur d'Alene
Mountains, where firefighters had been keeping a number of small yet pesky
wildfires in check all summer. Aside from nearly knocking the men off their
horses, the gales caused isolated blazes to combine, yielding a single giant
conflagration that would come to be known as the Big Blowup. A forest ranger
named Ed Pulaski was among those encircled by the fire, and he feared death was
as certain as the smoke that blotted out the sun. ''The whole world seemed to us
men back in those mountains to be aflame,'' he would later recall. ''Many
thought that it really was the end of the world.''

Pulaski guided 45 firefighters to shelter in a mine shaft, where he fended off
the encroaching flames with wet blankets. When one firefighter panicked and
tried to flee, Pulaski saved the man's life by holding him at gunpoint. Although
the whole crew eventually passed out from lack of oxygen, all but five of them
survived the ordeal. Scores of their colleagues weren't so lucky: In addition to
scorching a swath of land the size of Connecticut, the Big Blowup claimed the
lives of at least 78 firefighters, some of whom opted to commit suicide rather
than burn alive.

Staggered by the scale of the destruction and the vitriol of the resulting
newspaper headlines, the five-year-old United States Forest Service felt
compelled to declare an all-out war on wildfires. Instead of letting minor fires
run their course to rejuvenate the land, the Forest Service began to snuff out
any blaze, no matter how tiny or remote -- preferably by 10 o'clock on the
morning after it was first spotted. Zero tolerance thus became the core tenet of
modern wildfire management; to this day, legions of firefighters equipped with
special axes known as ''Pulaskis'' attack every wildfire with militaristic zeal.

And yet, like many well-intentioned policies that arise in the wake of tragedy,
the war on wildfires has proved to be self-defeating. As detailed in Michael
Kodas's bracing ''Megafire'' and Edward Struzik's drier ''Firestorm,'' today's
forests are often clogged with desiccated vegetation because -- unlike in
countless millenniums past -- they are seldom cleansed by naturally occurring
blazes. With such an abundance of fuel to feast on, wildfires like those
currently raging in California have become increasingly ruinous and intense. Ten
million acres of the United States burned in 2015, over three times more than
the annual average throughout the 1970s. And the Forest Service now spends more
than half its budget fighting fires, compared with just 16 percent in 1995.

The bureaucrats and scientists who have tried to warn against the folly of
treating every wildfire like a mortal foe have discovered their message is a
nonstarter. That's partly because so many businesses are keen to preserve the
status quo: About 40 percent of America's wildfire-fighting resources, from
helicopters that can cost as much as $7,000 an hour to catering services that
charge $100,000 a day, are now provided by private companies. ''Most don't get
paid if they're not actively fighting a fire,'' Kodas points out, ''so they
lobby to fight as many fires as they can.''

But the most powerful constituency in favor of perpetuating the futile war on
wildfires is the people who've chosen to inhabit risky terrain. According to a
2015 study, America's 13 Western states contain 1.1 million homes deemed
''highly vulnerable to wildfires'' because of their proximity to forests full of
tinder. There is no easy way to convince the owners of those homes that a fire
they can glimpse from their bedrooms should be allowed to burn for long-term
strategic purposes. Nor have denizens of the so-called ''wildland-urban
interface'' been receptive to the idea that controlled burns, set and supervised
by government employees, are necessary to thin out cluttered woodlands. In fact,
when the Forest Service attempted to burn off some high-risk brush near
Prescott, Ariz., a few years ago, angry locals threatened to kill anyone
involved in the operation.

As mammoth wildfires have been turning more and more forests into charred
moonscapes, they've also been accelerating climate change. Blazes that penetrate
the soil spur the release of substantial quantities of greenhouse gases,
particularly in chilly places like Alaska, where carbon and methane have been
sealed beneath the permafrost for eons. The warming effects of these gases
create a devastating feedback loop: A hotter climate extends the length of the
wildfire season, which in turn leads to more wildfires that produce more
greenhouse gases.

Carbon and methane aren't the only substances wildfires shake loose. As Struzik
observes in the most frightening chapter of ''Firestorm,'' blazes often churn up
the hazardous remnants of old mining activity -- asbestos, arsenic, even
uranium. That phenomenon should be of grave concern even to city folk who never
venture within a thousand miles of a burning forest. ''Wildfire experts and
public health officials are just beginning to appreciate that toxins that are
liberated by fire can migrate to far-flung places where most people are
completely unaware of the consequences,'' Struzik warns. (He cites a 2016 study
by Australian and Canadian epidemiologists who found that wildfire smoke could
be responsible for as many as 600,000 deaths per year, worldwide.)

Though ''Megafire'' and ''Firestorm'' cover much of the same alarming ground,
Kodas's book is far better at capturing the Sisyphean struggles of the men and
women who battle blazes for a living. The author of a previous book about the
tourist trade on Mount Everest, Kodas has a knack for fluid prose and an eye for
ghoulish detail. In recounting one Colorado firefighter's brush with fiery
death, for example, he notes that her severely burned fingers ''felt like
balloons about to pop''; later, he evokes the desolation of a burned-out
wilderness by describing how ''thousands of incinerated ponderosas looked like
brushstrokes of black ink against the gray ash.''

Struzik, an academic and environmental journalist whose most recent book dealt
with the effects of climate change on the Canadian Arctic, writes with a certain
stiffness, even when narrating the moment-by-moment drama of a 2016 wildfire
that forced 88,000 people to evacuate the Canadian oil town of Fort McMurray.
(''Formulating a wildfire management plan is as much an art as it is a science''
is one of his typically anodyne observations.) ''Firestorm'' comes alive when
Struzik discusses the work of offbeat scientists, like the man who has been
''monitoring the fate of flammulated owls in the Manitou Experimental Forest on
the front ranges of the Colorado Rockies since 1981.'' But lay readers might
have a limited appetite for such geeky tangents.

''Megafire'' may be the more engaging of the two books, but I also found it to
be the more downbeat -- although unintentionally so. Kodas concludes by
chronicling the story of the Granite Mountain Hotshots, a group of 19
firefighters who perished under mysterious circumstances in an Arizona inferno
in 2013. He expresses hope that these deaths will begin to awaken people to the
fact that, ever since the Big Blowup, wildfire policy has been guided by a
''tangled tree of legends'' rather than solid science. But that sentiment struck
me as depressingly naïve. In recent years, high-profile tragedies have rarely
transformed public discourse; instead, they've tended to inspire people to cling
ever more fervently to their customary beliefs, as if it would be dishonorable
to admit the existence of complexity and nuance. Such is life in the era of the
knee-jerk double down, which is why the era of megafires is likely here to stay.




URL:
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/12/books/review/megafire-michael-kodas-american-
wildfires.html

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY MARK PERNICE)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper




                              820 of 987 DOCUMENTS

                        Calgary Herald (Alberta, Canada)

                       May 14, 2004 Friday Final Edition

Wildfire looks for early spark: W-League debut for Calgary side

SOURCE: Calgary Herald

BYLINE: Murray Rauw

SECTION: Sports; Pg. D10 / FRONT

LENGTH: 463 words

When members of the Calgary Wildfire board their flight to Vancouver today,
they're off to an unknown world.

They've never played a game as a team. Many players on the roster have never
seen a W-League soccer game.

But the Wildfire opens its inaugural season with games in Vancouver tonight
against the Whitecaps, and at Seattle Saturday against the Western Conference
champion Sounders.

The trip could bring anything from disaster to euphoria. Wildfire coach Lisa
Unsworth says she'll know more of what lies ahead by the time the team returns.

"We haven't played an exhibition game -- we were snowed out -- but I think we're
ready," said Unsworth following the team's final tuneup Thursday, which was
forced indoors, to the Calgary Soccer Centre, because of available playing
conditions.

"It will be a great challenge against an established team on their turf. What
we'll be looking for is good decision making and 100 per cent pure work ethic."

The Wildfire plays its first three in 14-game schedule on the road. Calgary
plays in Arizona next weekend, and its home opener is set for May 29 when
Arizona pays a return visit. By then, Wildfire players should be getting to know
each other.

The Wildfire roster includes 16 players, seven of them from Calgary. Two are
from as far away as Quebec. The one thing they have in common is a desire to
take their game to a higher level.

Unsworth said the Wildfire hasn't named a captain, but she expects Megan Durgado
to assume the role within a week.

"I couldn't ask for more. There are players on the Whitecaps that play for the
national team," said Stephanie Hoogveld, who will play her first W-League game
at the striker's position.

She has two years of varsity-level soccer with the Calgary Dinosaurs on her
resume.

"We won't be taking the Whitecaps lightly, but who knows? Maybe they'll take us
lightly."

Hoogveld said the emphasis has been on conditioning since the final evaluation
camps concluded.

"I'm finding we were pretty rusty," said Hoogveld, who will return to the
University of Calgary in the fall to play more soccer and continue working
towards a math and education degree.

Emilie Mercier has had only three practices with the Wildfire, but she has
secured a defender's assignment for the season opener.

The 17-year-old Mercier was at a national-team training camp in Montreal when
she was spotted by Umsworth and recruited by the Wildfire, although there is a
W-League team in Montreal.

"They had a national-team player at my position so I would have been with the
team in Montreal, but I wouldn't be playing much," said Mercier.

So with age on her side, she decided to be adventurous and move west.

"I'm here to play and get some experience," said Mercier.

mrauw@theherald.canwest.com

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Colour Photo: Lorraine Hjalte, Calgary Herald; Stephanie Hoogveld,
left, and Emilie Mercier are looking forward to the Calgary Wildfire's season
opener tonight.

TYPE: Sports

               Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              821 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Ashcroft Cache Creek Journal

                           December 19, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Investigation into cause of Elephant Hill wildfire ongoing

BYLINE: Barbara Roden

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 317  words


The investigation into the cause of the Elephant Hill wildfire is still ongoing;
but the BC Wildfire Service's (BCWS) Jody Lucius, communications specialist for
the Kamloops Fire Centre, says that they expect to complete their report early
in 2018.

"BC Wildfire Service fire origin and cause personnel continue to work on their
report regarding the cause of the Elephant Hill wildfire," says Lucius. "Once
the report is complete, it will be turned over to the RCMP to be included as
part of their ongoing investigation." She notes that the RCMP are the lead
investigators on the file, and that the results of their investigation will
determine what, if any, further action should be taken by the BCWS.

The fire started late in the evening of July 6, when it was reported as being
2.1 hectares in size. It was not declared 100 per cent under control until late
September, by which time it had spread to 185,000 hectares and destroyed more
than 200 residences and buildings and forced the evacuation of thousands of
people.

The site of origin of the fire was identified at an early stage, and it was
determined that the fire was human-caused. In late July the RCMP activated a
dedicated tip line (1-855-685-8788) for anyone with information about the cause
of the fire.

On August 11, investigators from the RCMP and BC Wildfire Service who were
investigating the Elephant Hill wildfire said that they had eliminated train
rail line activities as a possible cause of the wildfire. "[The RCMP and BCWS]
can confirm that the fire was not caused by train traffic or rail
maintenance-related activities on the rail lines," said an official statement.

Lucius says that the BC Wildfire Service has done its "typical investigation",
and that the results will go into the report that will be presented to the RCMP.
"They will incorporate that into their process, but the BCWS report is separate
at this point."

Contacts

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              822 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             April 25, 2006 Tuesday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

Spreading a message to prevent wildfires

BYLINE: ABBIE VANSICKLE

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


You shouldn't toss burning cigarettes from car windows. Warn your children of
the dangers of setting fires. Pay close attention to weather conditions before
burning. Trim back your foliage. Keep hoses on hand.

Those are all good safety precautions at a time of heightened concern for
wildfires. But in the Tampa Bay area, the leading cause of wildfires isn't human
error.

It's arson.

Arson is suspected in more than a quarter of wildfires in Hillsborough County
and about 6 percent in Pinellas County. It's hard to say why: "There's no rhyme
or reason to it," said state agriculture spokeswoman Liz Compton.

This came into focus Monday as Charles Bronson, commissioner of the state
Agriculture and Consumer Affairs Department, visited the Tampa Bay area to warn
that weeks without significant rainfall have left us especially vulnerable to
brush fires.

"We can all work together to stop any major blaze," he said.

Bronson met with reporters Monday afternoon at the Florida State Fairgrounds.
Tampa was the first stop on his statewide campaign to raise awareness of the
danger of wildfires during this dry part of the year.

Nearly 23,000 acres have burned across the state in wildfires so far this year.
Officials are urging people to use extra caution to prevent additional fires.

Bronson also planned to visit Orlando, West Palm Beach, Tallahassee and Alachua
County to urge people to heed the fire danger.

How does the danger in this region compare with other parts of the state?

It's hard to say, Compton said.

Palm Beach County has a higher number on the Keetch-Byram Drought Index than
Hillsborough County. The index, a measure of the dampness in the soil, is an
indicator of the potential for wildfires. But each part of the state has
different factors to take into account, she said.

The important thing to know is that much of the state is at risk and to be
careful, Bronson said.

Officials are doing what they can to cut down the risk, including controlled
burns, he said.

Controlled burns are used to trim down underbrush, reducing the "fuel" available
if a wildfire starts. Unlike wildfires, controlled burns don't get hot enough to
kill trees, he said, so it's better to have a controlled burn than an
out-of-control blaze.

"One saves the ecosystem, the other one destroys it," Bronson said.

Officials are still conducting controlled burns, but Bronson asked that
residents check with the state Division of Forestry before burning.

Most of all, he said, just pay close attention and let authorities know if
there's a fire.

"In these conditions, everyone is at risk," he said.

FIGHTING FIRE WITH FIRE

Controlled burns, sometimes referred to as "prescribed burns," are intentionally
set fires administered by state-certified burn crews. They are used to reduce
dangerous forest fuels like grass, shrubs and vegetation that may help intensify
a wildfire. With much of the state often under red flag warnings indicating
wildfire danger, burn crews are doing fewer burns for fear that they will get
out of hand. The state of Florida averages an estimated 2-million acres of
controlled burns per year.

Benefits of a burn

Economical: More affordable than chemical or mechanical methods.

Environmentally friendly: Improves wildlife habitat and helps the ecosystem.

Dangers

Smoke inhalation: A risk to work crews and homeowners within vicinity of the
fire.

Wildfires: High winds and improper training can lead to out of control fires.

Controlled burn area: Creates a buffer between the advancing fire and the rest
of the forest. Fire loses strength and energy. Fire crews start by burning one
side of the buffer and set a back fire on the other side.

GOVERNMENT FIRES

A look at the average number of acres burned by federal agencies:

Agency                     Acres burned
                             per year
National Park Service          98,079
Bureau of Land Mgmt.          131,469
U.S. Forest Service         1,090,937
Fish and Wildlife Service     210,462


LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, CHRIS ZUPPA; PHOTO, Associated Press; DRAWING, CHARLOS GARY
State Agriculture Commissioner Charles Bronson discusses wildfire threats Monday
at the Florida State Fairgrounds in Tampa.; A firefighter uses his drip torch to
start a blaze.; Drawing depicts how state-certifified burn crews start a
controlled
burn area at the front of an advancing wildfire. Gives benefits and dangers.
Also includes a chart listing the total number of acres burned by federal
agencies.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              823 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                             June 4, 2003 Wednesday
                    Flagler/palm Coast News-tribune Edition

How to survive wildfire

BYLINE: Morris Sullivan Correspondent

SECTION: PREPAREDNESS & SAFETY GUIDE; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 748  words


Some say Florida has two seasons: hurricane season and wildfire season.

That's not quite accurate, but the saying does help remind us that wildfires,
too, are serious business.

The folks who fight the fires and protect our homes and land say there are a few
ways homeowners can prepare for a threatening wildfire and help out with the
effort to defend against it.

Mike Kuypers is the district manager of the Bunnell district of the Forestry
Department, which includes Volusia, Flagler and St. Johns counties.

Hurricane season just started, but the county is in the middle of wildfire
season. April and May are the biggest months for wildfires. In May, some fires
threatened residential and commercial areas in Flagler County. Kuypers said
there were close to 30 fires by the third week of May.

Florida can have wildfires any time of the year, but they usually peak in May
and June.

"That's when we're in the driest part of the year," Kuypers said. "And in May
and June, plants are actively growing. A lot of ground moisture disappears very
quickly

The folks who fight the fires and protect our homes and land say there are a few
ways homeowners can prepare for a threatening wildfire and help out with the
effort to defend against it.

because of the heat, the lack of rain, and new growth sucking all the water from
the ground."

With the resulting dry soil, he said things like lightning or cigarettes landing
on the dry shoulder of the road can set fires.

"If it's a windy day, those fires can really take off in a hurry," he said.

Kuypers said the most important thing homeowners can do to protect their homes
is to take a look around for things that can burn.

"Look at things like pine needles in gutters or valleys in the roof line,"
Kuypers said. "Those need to be cleaned out. And if there's a lot of debris in
the yard that could catch fire, like stacks of firewood, old lumber, or piles of
leaves, those should be removed."

Landscaping also should be "firewise." Homes near wooded areas should have a
fire buffer between the structure and the surrounding flammable plants.

"We recommend a minimum of 30 feet between the home and brush or wood piles,"
Kuypers said. "That seems to be a good distance to keep homes from burning from
direct contact."

However, burning embers will often float out ahead of wildfires, he said.

"They'll catch pine needles or wooden fences, and then the home can catch fire,"
Kuypers said. Even if the home itself is not highly flammable, burning leaves or
fencing can catch the house on fire if the flame is sustained long enough.

Flagler County Fire Services division chief Jim Cooper suggests an even larger
buffer.

"If homeowners would create a defensible area about 35 feet around the house,
that gives us enough area that we can generally protect their residence," he
said.

Homeowners should have hoses hooked up to spigots or sprinklers, Kuypers said.
"So if a wildfire comes into the area, they can water the yard area."

Fighting a wildfire is "a two-pronged attack," Cooper said. "The Division of
Forestry is charged with containing the fires in the woods area. Our main charge
is protecting structures, and when we can assist in knocking (the fire) down
around houses, we will.

"Also, our helicopter starts water bucket drops ahead of the fire to help
control it and knock it down."

He said in residential areas wetting things down really doesn't help. It could
even hinder the fire service.

"It can take water away that the fire service needs to fight a wildfire. It
might also put the public in danger. People will get up on top of their house
with a hose, and when the roof gets wet, slip and get hurt. Then we not only
have a fire to deal with, we have an injured person, too."

Kuypers and Cooper said readiness is critical with wildfires. "We don't get a
lot of notice, like we do with hurricanes," Cooper said.

"You might only get 15 minutes warning," Kuypers added.

Consequently, important documents should be readily available.

Kuypers cautions that the best protection is prevention. "This time of year, we
certainly discourage burning yard trash and ask people to be careful with
outdoor fires," he said. "Fireworks can be a big problem this time of year,
too."

He also cautions parents to talk to children about the issue.

"Kids are out of school, and they like to play in the woods," he said. "Some
will experiment with campfires and lighters. Parents should talk to their kids
about not doing that sort of activity at all, but particularly this time of
year."

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
Caption: Where there's smoke ... folks in Flagler County tend to pay attention.
A dangerous wildfire can cause a great deal of destruction in short order. File
photo

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2003 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2003 News-Journal Corporation


                              824 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Deming Headlight (New Mexico)

                            April 9, 2014 Wednesday

Wildfire app can save lives

BYLINE: For the Headlight

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 445 words


ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. >> As New Mexico faces another year of major drought and busy
wildfire season, the American Red Cross reminds you to download the official
Wildfire App. The app puts lifesaving information right in the hands of people
who live in or who visit wildfire prone areas.

This free app available in English or Spanish was created by the American Red
Cross, the nation's leader in emergency preparedness, for use on both iPhone and
Android platforms.

The Wildfire App includes the "Blaze Tracker" trio of features-which can be
customized for alerts specific to locations where they live, travel or have
loved ones:

"Blaze Warnings" which let users see areas where NOAA has issued warnings that
conditions are favorable for potential wildfires;

"Blaze Alerts" inform users when a wildfire has begun within 100 miles of any
locations monitored; and

"Blaze Path" fromInciweb.org which provides users with a current view of an
existing wildfire's perimeter, how it has spread and the fire's current location
when available.

Additional features include:

One touch "I'm safe" messaging that allows users to broadcast reassurance to
family and friends via social media outlets that they are out of harm's way;

Locations of open Red Cross shelters;

Preloaded content that gives users instant access to critical action steps, even
without mobile connectivity;

Toolkit with flashlight, strobe light and audible alarm; and

Badges users can earn through interactive quizzes and share on social networks.

The Wildfire App can be found in the Apple App Store and the Google Play Store
for Android by searching for American Red Cross. Apps can help prepare people
for disasters, but they are not a substitute for training. Red Cross First Aid
and CPR/AED training empowers people to know how to respond to emergencies in
case advanced medical help is delayed. People can gotoredcross.org/takeaclass to
find a course near them.

The Red Cross responds to nearly 70,000 disasters each year and we help people
get ready to respond to emergencies by providing apps for free except for the
Pet First Aid app which has a minimal charge.About the American Red Cross

The Red Cross depends on the generosity of the American people to fulfill our
mission. To help the Red Cross continue to save lives, contributions may be made
to the American Red Cross Local Disaster Relief Fund by calling 1-800-560-2302.
Contributions to the Local Disaster Relief Fund may also be sent to the American
Red Cross in New Mexico by mail: American Red Cross in New Mexico, 7445 Pan
American West Fwy. NE, Albuquerque, NM 87109 or made
onlineatwww.redcross.org/newmexico . Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2014 Deming Headlight, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              825 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Clearwater Times (N. Thompson)

                            July 12, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

New fire found on west side of river on Wednesday

BYLINE: Keith McNeill

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 598 words


The wildfire situation in the Little Fort to Clearwater area took another twist
on Wednesday with a new fire on the west side of the North Thompson River.

The fire was found on Wednesday morning near the headwaters Lemeiux Creek
northwest of Little Fort near Mann Lake. As of early Wednesday evening it was
reported on the BC Wildfire Service website to be 2.5 hectares in size.

According to the District of Clearwater website, as of early Wednesday evening
it was four hectares in size. Air tankers responded immediately and two Initial
Attack crews were on site. Another IA crew was on its way from Kamloops.

Crews from Blackpool Fire Department continue to make regular patrols along
Highway 5 towards Little Fort to help prevent more spot-fires from developing on
the west side of the river.

Clearwater Fire Department members are patrolling along Dunn Lake Road.

According to a posting made on the District of Clearwater website, the three
wildfires known as the Little Fort Complex - K20675 (located southwest of the
community), K20666 (located northeast of the community on Boulder Mountain), and
K20706 (located on Queen Bess Ridge, to the north of Boulder Mountain) are still
are estimated at a collective 1,300 hectares.

Poor visibility due to smoke continues to hinder efforts to accurately ascertain
the fires' size.

At the time, all three were primarily exhibiting Rank 1 and 2 fire behaviour,
which ranges from smouldering ground fire to an open surface flame. Some pockets
of Rank 3 have also been observed, which is a more vigorous surface flame.

BC Wildfire Service has 126 firefighters, two response officers, two line
locators, six helicopters, eight pieces of heavy equipment, two water tenders,
and six structural protection personnel assigned to the Little Fort complex of
wildfires. Contractors, including those from the local area, were working in
conjunction with the BC Wildfire Service in the Little Fort area.

The terrain involved in these incidents is very steep and rocky, and fire is
causing debris to roll downslope unexpectedly.

As of Wednesday evening the residents of Little Fort remained at home after the
order to evacuate was rescinded on Tuesday.

Also on Tuesday, the Thompson-Nicola Regional District expanded the evacuation
order at Dunn Lake to include one residence at the south end of the lake.

The evacuation order for the area north of Hallamore Lake around Beaver Lake was
rescinded as well.

However, the evaccuation order for the area around Hallamore Lake continues.

According to BC Wildfire Service, the purpose of evacuations and closures is to
ensure the safety of the public, as well as to ensure the safety of responders
and access for heavy equipment.

If members of the public see increased wildfire activity or safety hazards, they
are asked to call the BC Wildfire Service or local emergency services
immediately and not to attempt to access the site.

Please note than a public access area restriction is in effect for the Little
Fort Complex wildfires. It is important that members of the public obey the
evacuation orders, road closures and prohibited access areas for safety
purposes.

Regular updates are posted electronically to www.bcwildfire.ca under the
"Current Wildfire Situation" tab, and then under "Wildfires of Note", and listed
with the Kamloops Fire Centre under the incident names.

FOR THE RECORD: The original version of this story was based on the
misunderstanding that there were two new fires on July 12, one at Lemeiux Creek
and the other at Mann Lake. It now appears that there was in fact just one. We
apologize for the error.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              826 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Brunswick News (Georgia)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 14, 2012 Saturday

Wildfires diminishing

BYLINE: Gordon Jackson, The Brunswick News, Ga.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 598 words


April 14--Georgia Forestry officials will not issue permits today for outdoor
burning in Glynn County as they continue to monitor conditions that have fueled
wildfires since Wednesday.

Dry conditions persist throughout the region, but the ban imposed Friday on
buring is only for Glynn County, said Jason Gillis, Georgia Forestry Commission
district manager.

The reason for the order in Glynn County is that fire fighting resources are
stretched very thin monitoring smoldering hot spots to make sure they don't
reignite, Gillis said.

Forestry officials said there were no reports of active fires in Glynn County
Friday. Forestry officials were also monitoring a wildfire that has burned more
than 60 acres in Brantley County.

Firefighters responded Friday afternoon to a wildfire near Cabin Bluff, in
Camden County. Camden Fire Rescue Chief Dennis Gailey said the fire was at the
site of a four-acre controlled burn ignited two weeks ago.

Winds fanned smoldering hot spots into flames and ignited a bed a pine needles
that had fallen off trees. Gailey said five county firefighters and three trucks
responded to the blaze. Georgia Forestry officials supported Camden firefighters
with three tractors.

Gailey said the fire was contained and he believed the chances were remote that
it would spread.

"We're quite confident it will be fine," he said. "We'll go out every day to
make sure it doesn't spread."

Burning permits will not be issued in Camden County until April 20, because of
the dry conditions, he said.

"The only thing people can do is burn on a grill," Gailey said.

Burning permits are still being issued elsewhere in the 17-county forestry
district, but Gillis said the potential exists for permit requests to be denied
in other areas if more wildfires ignite.

Lightning strikes cause many wildfires during the summer, but most fires this
time of year are caused by people who fail to monitor burning yard waste. "Once
you light a fire, stay with it until it's completely out," Gillis said.

Anyone caught burning without a permit will be cited, Gillis said. But the more
serious penalties will be imposed against anyone with or without a burn permit
who is found responsible for causing a wildfire, even if it is accidental.

If fire investigators determine who caused a wildfire, Gillis said the person
responsible will have to pay the cost of fire suppression, which Gillis said
happens frequently.

And it's not cheap. It costs $90 an hour for a tractor plow, and in most
instances more than one is sent to cut suppression lines to contain a wildfire.

"It could get into thousands of dollars a day, easy," Gillis said.

The potential for this to be a busy fire season is very real, he said.

The early arrival of spring the past two years has spurred extra growth of
grasses, shrubs, palmettos and other plants that provide ground cover in wooded
areas. Combine the extra growth with existing drought conditions, and the recipe
for a wildfire needs only one ingredient -- a flame.

Georgia Forestry has added supplemental firefighters to its staff part-time to
respond to fires in the area, Gillis said. Current state budget cuts have not
affected staffing or equipment, he said.

The only thing the district currently needs is some help from Mother Nature,
Gillis said.

"We need a substantial amount of rain," he said. "We don't need inches of rain.
It's going to take feet of rain, hopefully not all at one time, to get us out of
this drought."

___ (c)2012 The Brunswick News (Brunswick, Ga.) Visit The Brunswick News
(Brunswick, Ga.) at www.thebrunswicknews.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120414-GE-Wildfires-diminishing-0414-20120414

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GE


                       Copyright 2012 The Brunswick News


                              827 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            South Wales Evening Post

                             July 14, 2011 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

56,000 wildfires started but not one conviction in 8 years

BYLINE: RICHARD YOULE

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 563 words


MORE than 56,000 wildfires in South Wales between 2000 and 2008 did not result
in a single conviction, according to a major new report.

It said wildfire arson was very tricky to detect and claimed it had not been a
priority for South Wales Police.

The report added there was a higher instance of fires at weekends but a marked
reduction on Fridays, with firefighters suggesting this was due to firebugs
staying in to watch BBC rugby show Scrum V. Matthew Jollands, the author of the
107-page Wildfires in Wales report, said young people start fires in the
countryside to relieve boredom, for fun, or for no particular reason.

There were 55,331 recorded grass fires and 527 forest fires in South Wales from
2000 to 2008, with each one costing the fire service £1,000 to £1,950 in time
and resources.

Fires were more likely in the region's most deprived areas, with the majority
happening in March and April when undergrowth was dead.

South Wales is the worst place in the UK for wildfires.

The report found that Swansea was the second most "prone" authority to wildfires
, while the Afan Valley was also a hotspot, especially Cymmer and Glyncorrwg.

More than 1,000 people were questioned as part of the report, funded by Forestry
Commission Wales and South Wales and Mid and West Wales fire services.

Primary motivations for arson were to relieve boredom, an act of rebellion, as
part of associated criminality, a result of socioeconomic or mental health
factors, an unclear motive - or as a method of land clearance.

Recommendations to combat the scourge included preventative measures focused on
arson hotspots rather than as a blanket approach across the region, and low-key
tackling of wildfires to reduce the thrill factor for some perpetrators.

Landowners and the fire services should share the cost of firefighting
helicopters, added the report.

Around 14 per cent of Wales is covered by woods, with 38 per cent of this
managed by the FCW.

The report said: "Because there have been no convictions there is little solid
information about the identity of wildfire arsonists in South Wales."

Arson, said Mr Jollands, should be seen as part of broader issues around
deprivation and a lack of investment in the area.

Peter Cloke, FCW deputy district manager in South Wales, said woodlands were
essential habitats.

"Deliberately started forest fires cost millions of pounds to tackle, blight
huge areas of the landscape and put lives at risk every year," he said. "By
identifying the causes and understanding why people commit these wanton acts of
destruction, we hope it will enable more effective policies to be designed to
tackle wildfire arson.

"The insights provided by the report and the recommendations on how to combat
wildfire arson throughout South Wales point the way forward."

He added: "The reality is that dealing with this issue is in everyone's
interests because it may delay firefighters from responding to emergencies in
people's homes and towns if they are busy tackling wildfires."

Wildfires singed many parts of the region this spring, which was unseasonable
dry and warm.

Kilvey Hill, Rotherslade and the hillside near Morriston Hospital were among
those affected.

"Deliberate fire starting is a crime," said the assistant county commander for
Swansea, Gary Williams, at the time. "The community, and parents in particular,
have a major part to play."

? richard.youle@swwmedia.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PROSECUTION PROBLEMS Firefighters battle a grass fire on Garngoch
Common. SWPD20110301A-041_C

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SWP


                    Copyright 2011 South Wales Evening Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              828 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Vernon Morning Star

                           February 8, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Lumby ready to tackle wildfires

BYLINE: Richard Rolke

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 197  words


Lumby wants to ensure it doesn't capture headlines for wildfires and
evacuations.

Council received a presentation Monday from consultant John Davies about the
community wildfire protection plan.

"He is pleasantly surprised by how interested people are in the plan," said
Coun. Lori Mindnich.

"Our area is very progressive in wanting to do fire prevention."

Parts of the community have already been tackled to reduce the potential
wildfire risk, and funds are now being sought for mitigation efforts in the
Cedar Ridge area.

In his report, Davies indicates that pruning back trees and shrubs and using
certain landscaping materials will reduce the potential of wildfire.

He also looked at the need for Fire Smart development such as restricting
building materials that could be flammable.

Eighty-five to 90 per cent of homes without flammable roofs and 10 metres of
clearance will survive a major wildfire, according to Davies, while more than 50
per cent of homes destroyed by wildfires are ignited by embers.

Mindnich says all efforts must be taken as wildfires can be devastating to
communities.

"Think of Barriere and Kelowna. We don't want that here. We're surrounded by
forest," she said.





LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              829 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                     Hells Canyon Journal (Halfway, Oregon)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                               September 23, 2015

Wildfire Aid Meetings Set for September 28-29 in Baker City, John Day

BYLINE: Hells Canyon Journal staff

LENGTH: 363  words


Eastern Oregon residents who suffered losses from recent wildfires will have the
opportunity at a meeting on September 28 in Baker City to talk with federal and
state officials about what resources may be available to help after the
devastating wildfires this summer. A similar meeting will be held the next day
on September 29 in John Day.

"The wildfires that have ripped through our state have left many Oregonians
trying to put their lives back together," said U.S. Sen. Ron Wyden, whose staff
is convening the September 28 meeting in Baker City and the September 29 meeting
in John Day.

"These meetings will provide one convenient spot, where anybody who's been
touched by wildfires can come to get all their questions answered about what's
available to help rebuild their homes and livelihoods," Wyden said.

"This summer eastern Oregon was ravaged by wildfires and now too many Oregonians
are facing the challenges of putting their lives back together," said U.S. Sen.
Jeff Merkley. "Thanks to Senator Wyden for organizing this one-stop shop for
those affected by these wildfires to get the answers and help they need."

"Recovery from this year's wildfires begins with access to the many state and
federal resources being made available," said Governor Kate Brown. "These
meetings are a way to help Oregonians adapt to the challenges that adverse
conditions presented and prepare for the future."

The meetings will include officials from the office of Governor Kate Brown, the
state Department of Emergency Management, as well as the insurance divisions of
the Oregon Watershed Enhancement Board, Oregon Housing and Community Services,
Department of State Lands and the state's Department of Consumer and Business
Services. Also attending will be officials from the federal Agriculture
Department's Natural Resources Conservation Service, Rural Development and Farm
Service Agency

The meeting in Baker City will take place from 6:00 to 8f00 p.m. on Monday,
September 28 at the Baker County Events Center, 2600 East Street in Baker City.

The John Day meeting will take place from 6:00 to 8:00 p.m. on Tuesday,
September 29 at Grant-Union High School, 911 S. Canyon Blvd. in John Day.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Community

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HEL

                      Copyright 2015 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                      Copyright 2015 Hells Canyon Journal


                              830 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 2, 2015 Saturday

Washington: Make Your Community Safer on National Wildfire Community
Preparedness Day

LENGTH: 414  words

DATELINE: Washington


U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Wildfires can occur anywhere in the country with the potential to destroy homes,
businesses, infrastructure, natural resources, and agriculture. Last year, the
United States experienced over 63,000 wildfires that burned more than three
million acres. National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day is Saturday, May 2,
and people across the nation will dedicate time to making their communities a
safer place should a wildfire occur.

Wildfires can start in remote wilderness areas, national parks, or even your
backyard. They can start from natural causes, such as lightning, but most are
caused by humans, either accidentally--from cigarettes, campfires, or outdoor
burning--or intentionally.

"When our citizens prepare and adopt the principles of fire-adapted communities,
the loss of life and property from wildland fires is greatly reduced," said
United States Fire Administrator Ernest Mitchell.

Protect your family and community from a wildfire by taking action before one
happens. On National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day, join your friends,
family members, faith-based group or youth organization, and volunteer your time
to improve your community's ability to withstand and recover from a wildfire,
which also may improve the safety of firefighters.

There are many ways to help protect homes, neighborhoods, businesses, and entire
communities:

Reduce the amount of flammable materials and brush that can burn around your
home or business;
 Create a fire-free area within the first five feet of your home using
non-flammable materials and high moisture-content plantings;
 Maintain an area that is clear of flammable materials and debris for at least
30 feet on all sides from your home or business; and
 Move wood piles and propane tanks to at least 30 feet from your home or
business.

National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day is part of America's PrepareAthon!
a grassroots campaign for action to get people better prepared for emergencies
through group discussions, drills and exercises. You can take steps to prepare
to reduce the devastating effects of any disaster by creating a family
communication plan and practicing how you will evacuate and communicate with
friends and family members in an emergency. Register your action at
www.ready.gov/prepare.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              831 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      Nelson Daily News (British Columbia)

                              April 5, 2004 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Bracing for wildfire season: RDCK praised for emergency preparedness at forest
fire recent symposium; approaching season predicted to be hotter than 2003

BYLINE: Kathy Kiel, Nelson Daily News

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 452  words


Fire experts have praised the Regional District of Central Kootenay for having
the best emergency preparedness plans in the province when it comes to
addressing the issue of wildfires.

"We were recognized on three or four occasions as being the most proactive
regional district in the province," said Area F director Al Dawson at last
month's RDCK meeting in Nelson.

Dawson recently attended the BC Wildfire Symposium in Penticton and said the
district received accolades for their upcoming plan to educate area residents on
how to best prepare their homes for wildfire season.

On Saturday, RDCK directors passed a recommendation to earmark $16,500 for
wildfire education in the local area. As part of this, consultant Nancie Dohan
was hired to carry out 45 meetings in locations across the district to teach
them how to mitigate potential loss due to wildfire.

Dawson said by teaching the public to be better prepared for wildfires they will
be able to protect their homes and property in the event of a forest fire.

He added that this risk management process will lower future insurance claims
and coverage.

Regional district chair Hans Cunningham said the education campaign will
"definitely" reduce the potential loss that home and property owners will face
in future fire years.

"The thought is, of course, that indeed by showing people how they can protect
their houses by clearing defensible areas and using non-combustible materials...
it's hoped that in fact the next time something like this happens -- because it
will happen it's only a question of when... that the loss is much, much less and
the impact is much, much less," Cunningham said.

Cunningham, who is also chief of the Ymir Fire Department, said homes were
triaged when wildfires were in the area last year. As part of this plan,
professionals would examine homes to see if they were indefensible from wildfire
because trees were growing directly adjacent to the home or if roofs had shakes,
dried leaves or needles covering them.

"This way when they were fighting fire they would go instead to the homes that
they could defend because why try and defend a house that you can't," Cunningham
told the Daily News following the meeting.

Fire experts at the symposium are also predicting that this coming summer's
wildfire season will be "equal to or worse" than what British Columbia and
southern Alberta witnessed last year.

"Not only is the prediction for worse weather," said Dawson. "But the prediction
is that what we had in B.C. and in Alberta last year, they're predicting right
through Manitoba and into part of Ontario."

Dawson said this will equate to less resources and fire crews from other
provinces to help area residents if fire does break out.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2004 Nelson Daily News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              832 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                               Sherwood Park News

                              May 3, 2016 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

County not burned by fire budget; Provincial cuts to wildfire tanker trucks
don't carry any major perceived impacts for Strathcona County Emergency Services

BYLINE: Megan Voss, Sherwood Park News

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 525  words


Despite a recent announcement by the provincial government for nearly $15
million worth of cuts to its wildfire budget, the county remains unscathed.

Part of the new provincial budget is cuts to tanker contracts by $5.1 million
and $9.6 million less for its base wildfire management budget.

Strathcona County Emergency Services (SCES) deputy fire chief Vern Elliott noted
the changewill apply to them if they require the service, but it wouldn't affect
them until September.

"What is that risk? I don't know," he said. "If all of the province is burning
and B.C. is burning, it might be harder to get resources mobilized, sooner than
later. The way I see it, that's the risk that's being run here. If we were the
only area that was burning in the province at that point andweneeded it, I am
very comfortable that those resources-we have a really good working relationship
with the province when it comes to wild land interface fires-I'mpositive
thatwewould have the resources fairly quickly."

However, base programs such as Firesmart are not being cut.

"Those are the prevention and that's where our efforts are as well - the focus
should be on preventing first of all the fires, but preventing any
damage,andthat fundingwas not cut at all," Elliott added.

Sherwood Park MLA Annie McKitrick said wildfire season has started earlier this
year because of dry conditions.

"We already have units that are working around the wildfires," she noted. "What
happens around wildfire seasonyouset up a base budget and then you add emergency
funds if the wildfires become more intense, or more developed as the season
moves

forward." If more money is needed as forest fires develop, fundswill be added,
McKitrick said.

"In this tough budgetary time that we're in, the government has chosen to review
all of its costs and to ensure thatwehavethemoneyto protectand support homes and
the rural areas," she stated.

"Our budget is similar to other provinces, as we provide baseline funding and
add in emergency funds if needed," echoed Strathcona-Sherwood Park MLA Estefania
Cortes-Vargas.

"That is where prevention is critical. While many folks have been waiting
toenjoy gathering aroundfirepits, it's also really important for people to be
very careful."

The fact that wildfires are very unpredictable was also a factor in the
decision, McKitrick said.

"You never know where the firefighter resources are going to be needed and the
extent of it, because it depends on a lot of things around weather and how
careless somebody may be out in the forest or on the grassland," she said.

Cortes-Vargas said she would like to encourage everyone to be cautious.

"Remember, conditions are very dry and hot for this time of year and the risk of
fires ishigh," she said.

"I was grateful to see the full fire ban in Strathcona County. We will be

keeping an eye on the wildfires but our government remains committed to
supporting the work to attend to the wildfires and will extend the contracts if
needed."

mvoss@postmedia.com twitter.com/journovoss

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Lindsay Morey Postmedia Network; The province has cut wildfire tanker
truck funding by $5.1 million, and hacked another $9.6 million from overall
wildfire management, but Strathcona County Emergency Services deputy fire chief
Vern Elliott says it carries only small potential risks.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2016 Sherwood Park News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              833 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                   The McDowell News (Marion, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 23, 2009 Thursday

State officials: Burning a bad idea

BYLINE: Mike Conley, The McDowell News, Marion, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 377 words


Apr. 23--The N.C. Division of Forest Resources is urging folks statewide not to
burn leaves, twigs and other yard debris during the next few days as warm, windy
and dry weather is expected to increase wildfire danger.

Spring wildfire season typically lasts from mid-February until mid-May when
vegetation has returned. During the spring wildfire season, North Carolina
typically experiences fewer rain events and more warm, windy days that can dry
leaves as well as downed trees and other forest fuels.

This is also the season people do a lot of yard work such as burning leaves. In
North Carolina, careless debris burning is the No. 1 cause of wildfires.

County Ranger John Reese of the N.C. Forest Service said Wednesday that McDowell
is experiencing some windy weather that won't die down until sometime today. The
high winds can dry out the leaves and make it easier for wildfires to spread.

"That is why people still need to be alert and cautious," he said. "Springtime
is our worst time because of the windy situation.

"Things can change from morning to evening. I wasn't concerned about fire danger
(Tuesday) morning but I am this evening."

The division responded to 4,361 wildfires last year that burned more than 52,119
acres on state and private land across North Carolina.

In 2008, seven homes were destroyed and 45 homes were damaged by wildfires
throughout North Carolina. Also, state firefighters protected 5,490 homes and
other structures from wildfires. This year, more than 2,159 wildfires have
burned more than 9,233 acres in North Carolina.

Reese said it was a very active year for McDowell too.

Since Jan. 1, the local office of the N.C. Forest Service has dealt with 23
reportable fires in McDowell. Those fires burned less than 130 acres. The
largest one was the Graphite fire that burned 118 acres of private land on March
10.

To see more of The McDowell News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.mcdowellnews.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The McDowell News, Marion, N.C.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090423-MQ-State-officials-Burning-a-bad-idea-0423

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MQ


                                 Copyright 2009


                              834 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                              May 13, 2013 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Raging wildfires force residents from homes; Nordegg, Lodgepole evacuated

BYLINE: Jason van Rassel and Clara Ho, Calgary Herald

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 627 words


A raging wildfire near the central Alberta hamlet of Nordegg forced officials to
issue an evacuation order and declare a local state of emergency Sunday evening,
nearly two years after a wildfire destroyed most of the town of Slave Lake.

The evacuation order for the former mining community, about 170 kilometres west
of Red Deer, was posted to the Alberta Emergency Alert website shortly before 6
p.m.

Residents were sent to the curling rink in Rocky Mountain House for shelter and
registration, while roadblocks were set up at all access points into the hamlet.

By early evening, the fire was only 1.5 kilometres from Nordegg and had burned
at least 110 hectares of land.

"We had been able to put a perimeter around the fire, but the high winds and
overall conditions just were greater than we could deal with," said Richard
Horne, a provincial wildfire information officer.

"The fire has gone beyond the perimeter at this point."

Horne said about 40 to 250 residents in Nordegg were affected.

The out-of-control wildfire, fuelled by strong winds, began a week ago near the
Frontier Lodge west of Nordegg. Residents had been on evacuation notice since
Thursday.

On Sunday, an evacuation order and local state of emergency was also issued for
Brazeau County, southwest of Edmonton, after heavy winds caused a wildfire to
jump the Pembina River eight kilometres south of the hamlet.

Residents in the hamlet of Lodgepole were directed to the Omniplex in Drayton
Valley. By evening, the fire was about 250 hectares in size and about three
kilometres west of Lodgepole.

Dry weather and strong chinook winds pushed the risk of wildfires to "extreme"
levels, provincial officials said in an advisory Sunday morning.

The last time the province issued a similar advisory was two years ago, just
before a wildfire destroyed approximately one-third of the structures in the
town of Slave Lake and damaged many more.

The bulletin said winds in some parts of the province were forecasted to reach
between 70 and 80 km/h on Sunday and Monday.

The fire weather advisory means all burning permits within the Forest Protection
Area of Alberta have been cancelled and no new permits will be issued.

Geoffrey Driscoll, another provincial wildfire information officer, said the
area of the advisory covers about 50 per cent of Alberta from as far north as
Fort McMurray to much of central and southern Alberta.

As of Sunday evening, Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development
cited about 30 wildfires burning across the province.

The advisory comes as fire bans blanket many areas of the province - including a
prohibition imposed in Calgary on Saturday at 10 p.m.

The Calgary ban suspends any existing burn permits and bans open fires outdoors,
except for propane or natural gas grills.

A few Calgarians who planned to celebrate Mother's Day with a cookout were taken
off guard by the ban.

Calgary Fire Department battalion chief Ernie Molineaux said crews responded to
complaints about open fires at picnic areas in Fish Creek Park, Edworthy Park
and others around the city.

"A few people are disappointed, but everybody's been co-operative," Molineaux
said.

Calgary fire crews were also called about a grass fire burning on the Tsuu T'ina
Nation near the city's southwest, but Molineaux said it appeared the reserve's
fire department quickly brought it under without the need for assistance.

Much of the area between Calgary and Edmonton, from the foothills east to the
Saskatchewan border, remains under fire bans.

In the Calgary region, bans have been issued in Foothills, Rocky View and
Mountain View counties, Airdrie, Chestermere and Cochrane.

The conditions also prompted Parks Canada to cancel prescribed burns scheduled
in Waterton Lakes National Park, just north of the U.S. border.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Alberta Environment And Sustainable Resource Development; Crews battle
a wildfire near Nordegg on Sunday, about 170 kilometres west of Red Deer.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2013 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              835 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 13, 2017 Tuesday

Washington: Tipton Supports Wildfire Disaster Funding Act

LENGTH: 439  words




Washington: Office of the MP Scott Tipton has issued the following news release:


Reinforcing his support for proactive forest management, Congressman Scott
Tipton (CO-03) signed on as an original cosponsor of  the Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act (H.R. 2862), a bill that would reform the federal budgeting process
for wildfire prevention and suppression efforts.


    "For too long, the process the federal government has used to allocate money
to fight catastrophic wildfires has undermined forest management efforts that
could prevent these types of fires from igniting in the first place," said
Tipton. "By changing the way money is appropriated for agencies' firefighting
efforts, we can end the 'fire-borrowing' practice that has robbed the Forest
Service and other land management agencies of the resources they need for active
management."
Congress currently sets funding for wildfire suppression based on the average of
the annual firefighting costs over the previous ten-years. If firefighting costs
exceed an agency's budget, it must shift money from non-firefighting accounts to
make up the difference. Fewer resources are then left to support the active
forest management that helps prevent catastrophic wildfires.
The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act would treat wildfires like other natural
disasters after an agency's wildfire suppression funds are exhausted. The cost
of any "extraordinary" firefighting that goes beyond the agency's annual budget
would be funded through a budget cap adjustment similar to what is currently
used by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for other natural
disasters.
During a recent hearing in the House Natural Resources Subcommittee on Federal
Lands, Tipton questioned Mr. Lyle Laverty, Former Assistant Secretary of the
Interior for Fish, Wildlife and Parks, about the impact the current budget
process has had on reforestation efforts.
Laverty said, "I really believe as I look around and talk to folks across the
country - one of our big challenges comes in reforestation after burns. And part
of it goes back to this wildfire funding issue. We don't have the resources in
place to be able to bring back actual reforestation of these burned areas."
Watch his full remarks here.
Tipton has been a long-time advocate of empowering states and local communities
to collaborate with the federal government to restore forest health and reduce
the risks of catastrophic wildfires. Language from Tipton's bill to support this
collaboration, the Healthy Forest Management Act, passed the House of
Representatives as part of the Resilient Federal Forest Act in the 114th
Congress.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              836 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    Walla Walla Union-Bulletin (Washington)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           November 14, 2015 Saturday

EDITORIAL: DNR proposal to reduce wildfires make sense

BYLINE: Walla Walla Union-Bulletin, Wash.

SECTION: COMMENTARY

LENGTH: 451 words


Nov. 14--Summer has turned to fall but the devastating wildfires that hit
Washington state, including our corner, remain in our minds. What can be done to
make sure next summer isn't as bad or even worse?

Commissioner of Public Lands Peter Goldmark wants the Legislature to allocate an
additional $24.3 million to equip and train more in-state wildland firefighters
and to make forests and communities more resistant to wildfires.

A worthy goal. Yet, squeezing even a few million out of the state budget when
billions are needed to fully fund education will be challenging.

"I don't know where we're going to budget (the request) from," said Terry
Nealey, R-Dayton, who serves on the House Finance Committee. "We need to
scrutinize where it's going and what it's going to be used for, then we can sort
it out."

Beyond that, this would not be a one-time expense. The wildfire-protection
effort would be ongoing and the cost would escalate year over year.

Washington state can't go it alone, nor should it have to fully fund fire
prevention efforts.

Earlier this year, U.S. Secretary of the Interior Sally Jewell said wildfires
­-- suppression and prevention -- should be funded just as the federal
government funds relief efforts involving other natural disasters such as
tornadoes in the Midwest and hurricanes in the South.

She wants Congress to fund fire prevention budgets for thinning dense forest
stands, rehabilitating areas after wildfires and making sure communities are
more resilient to fire.

It was reported DNR officials estimated in January that about 10 percent of the
state's unhealthy forest acreage is managed by the state, while 43 percent
belongs to the federal government, 14 percent to tribes and 31 percent to
private landowners.

While the state needs to fund wildfire prevention efforts, it doesn't have the
cash to address the overall problem in a comprehensive way to include all forest
land. Fire does not stop at boundaries established by ownership.

Jewell said President Obama called for a new framework to allow agencies such as
FEMA to respond in the same way it does with hurricanes and tornadoes.

If this came to fruition it could provide more certainty in funding wildfire
suppression so the state would save cash that could be used to fund fire
prevention and forest rehabilitation efforts.

While the Legislature should give serious consideration to Goldmark's request
for more funding, it must also push Congress to fund fighting wildfires in our
forest just like other natural disaster efforts are funding.

___ (c)2015 Walla Walla Union-Bulletin (Walla Walla, Wash.) Visit Walla Walla
Union-Bulletin (Walla Walla, Wash.) at union-bulletin.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20151114-UN-EDITORIAL-DNR-proposal-to-reduce-wildfires
-make-sense-1114-20151114

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UN


                   Copyright 2015 Walla Walla Union-Bulletin


                              837 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    Prince George Citizen (British Columbia)

                             July 30, 2016 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfires burned up oil company's revenue

SECTION: WORKLIFE; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 251 words

DATELINE: CALGARY


Imperial Oil had a $181-million loss in its second quarter, mostly due to the
wildfires that raged through northern Alberta in May, sparking a massive
evacuation and curtailing oilsands production.

The Calgary-based company says the wildfires accounted for $170 million of the
reduction in its net income from last year's second quarter, when the company
was profitable.

It says the wildfires reduced its production by 60,000 barrels per day.
Excluding the wildfires, it estimates production would have increased by 45,000
barrels per day or 13 per cent.

Imperial's loss amounted to 21 cents per share and compared with a yearearlier
profit of 14 cents per share or $120 million.

Total revenue also declined, falling by 14.4 per cent or nearly a billion
dollars to $6.25 billion.

In addition to the wildfires, Imperial's operations felt the impact of planned
maintenance at its Kearl and Syncrude oilsands operations, and its Strathcona
refinery east of Edmonton and Nanticoke refinery on the shore of Lake Erie in
Ontario.

"Although our facilities were not damaged by the wildfires, operationally both
Kearl and Syncrude were significantly impacted," Rich Kruger, Imperial's
chairman, president and CEO, said in a statement.

"Syncrude operations were halted in early May, the first complete shutdown in
the site's nearly 40-year history, with a staged restart of operations in
mid-June."

Syncrude is one of the world's oldest oilsands operations - owned by a
partnership that includes Suncor Energy and Imperial Oil.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2016 Prince George Citizen
                              All Rights Reserved


                              838 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              The Pioneer (India)

                            March 12, 2015 Thursday

Champawat gets 53 crew stations to contain wildfire

LENGTH: 309 words

DATELINE: Haldwani


Haldwani, March 12 -- To contain wildfire during the summer ahead, the Champawat
forest division has set up as many as 53 crew stations across the district. Out
of these, four crew stations have been set up in Lohaghat, while as many as
eight such stations have been set up in Champawat region, three in Kalikumaon,
10 in Bhingrada area, eight in Devidhura region, three in Dogaari and 17 in Boom
range, officials of the Champawat forest department said. Each of these crew
stations would be manned by five forest personnel, they said.

Side by side, seven watchtowers have also been installed at different locations
across Champawat district to keep vigil on the wildfire related incidents. Since
wildfire causes huge loss not just to the forests but also to the wildlife and
environment, Champawat forest division has focused on community participation in
this wildlife safety campaign to strengthen its wildfire safety mechanism. This
is why Champawat forest department is launching this safety campaign in
coordination with the local district police and Revenue department has also set
up fire safety committees in villages which are nearby to the forests.

Meanwhile, to prevent forest fire, the district administration also directed the
officials concerned of the District Forest department to raise awareness among
the people about wildfire safety. At the same time, the administration has asked
the Forest department to strictly deal with those who are found guilty of
causing the wildfire. Besides, it has also stressed the need to intensify
patrolling during this period so that any fire incidents could be prevented and
forests could be saved from wildfire.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Pioneer. For any query with
respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor
at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 CMYK Printech Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              839 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       The Star (Shelby, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 22, 2009 Wednesday

BRIEF: Forestry: Don't burn this week: WInd, dryness dangerous combo

BYLINE: The Shelby Star, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 270 words


Apr. 22--State forestry officials urging people not to burn during dry, windy
weather

RALEIGH --The N.C. Division of Forest Resources is urging residents statewide
not to burn leaves, twigs and other yard debris during the next few days as
warm, windy and dry weather is expected to increase wildfire danger.

Spring wildfire season typically lasts from mid-February until mid-May when
vegetation has returned. During spring wildfire season, North Carolina typically
experiences fewer rain events and more warm, windy days that can dry leaves as
well as downed trees and other forest fuels. This is also the season people do a
lot of yard work such as burning leaves. In North Carolina, careless debris
burning is the No. 1 cause of wildfires. The division responded to 4,361
wildfires last year that burned more than 52,119 acres on state and private
land. In 2008. seven homes were destroyed and 45 homes were damaged by wildfires
. Also, firefighters protected 5,490 homes and other structures from wildfires.
This year, more than 2,159 wildfires have burned more than 9,233 acres.

For more information, contact Brian Haines, public information officer with the
state Division of Forest Resources, at (919) 857-4828.

To see more of The Shelby Star or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.shelbystar.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, The Shelby Star, N.C.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090422-SS-BRF-Forestry-Don-t-burn-this-week-0422

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SS


                            Copyright 2009 The Star


                              840 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                  Computerworld

                                 April 3, 2000

Wildfire FinallyGetting Started;
Compaqs very late enterprise Alphaserver is close to shipping at last

BYLINE: Jaikumar Vijayan

SECTION: NEWS - HIGH; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 432 words


Compaq Computer Corp.'s long-delayed Wildfire enterprise Alpha server --
originally due from Digital Equipment Corp. in mid-1998 -- is finally close to
shipping.
Compaq is planning a second-quarter launch of the 32-processor system, a company
executive confirmed last week.
The first systems should become available in mid-May, with volume shipments
expected in the second half of the year, according to a report that appeared in
"Shannon Knows Compaq," a newsletter published by Terry C. Shannon in Ashland,
Mass.
The new servers mark Compaq's first major high-end hardware technology upgrade
since its acquisition of Digital nearly two years ago. The servers are the first
upgrades to Digital's 14-processor TurboLaser systems, which debuted in 1995.
Wildfire systems, initially based on 729-MHz Alpha chips, can run both OpenVMS
and Unix applications.
Each 32-processor Wildfire system can be partitioned into smaller virtual
systems, which will allow administrators to take the load off multiple smaller
servers and consolidate it on one large Wildfire box. Clustering technology will
let them tie multiple Wildfire systems into one giant configuration, for
increased scalability and reliability.
Such features -- when combined with the raw number-crunching capabilities of the
Alpha chip -- should put Wildfire systems among the performance leaders in the
technical computing market, said Carl Ludwig, a senior vice president at BlueSky
Studios Inc. in New York.
The computer animation studio used Alpha servers in creating an Oscar-winning
film last year. "The idea of using multiple processors and applying it to large
rendering applications is something that interests us," Ludwig said.
Wildfire's support for very large main memory is also crucial, said Marshall
Peterson, director of infrastructure at Celera Genomics Inc., a beta tester in
Rockville, Md.
Celera, which uses Alpha servers for its gene sequencing work, recently placed
an order for two Wildfire systems, after benchmarking them against systems from
other vendors.
"Nothing came close to it... They exceeded our expectation by a wide margin,"
Peterson said.
Wildfire should finally give Compaq the ammunition it needs to compete in the
enterprise market against IBM, Sun Microsystems Inc. and Hewlett-Packard Co.,
said Joseph Pollizzi, deputy head of the Space Telescope Science Institute in
Baltimore.
"Wildfire should stop them from being constantly compared to Dell instead of
IBM," Pollizzi said. But he added that Compaq's success will largely depend on
how the company markets the server.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 2000 Computerworld, Inc.


                              841 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                           January 28, 2012 Saturday
                                  City Edition

EDMOND FIREFIGHTERS URGE PREPARATION FOR WILDFIRES

BYLINE: DIANA BALDWIN, Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS EDMOND/STATE; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 279 words

DATELINE: EDMOND


EDMOND - Firefighters are urging Edmond property owners to take precautions to
make sure their homes are safe from possible wildfires this winter.

Wildfires in Edmond that started Aug. 4 and rekindled Aug. 6 caused $1.8 million
in damage and burned 1,100 acres.

Destroyed were 10 homes, eight outbuildings, four trucks and two tractors.

Fire Maj. Kelly Lewis said dry conditions this winter have already fueled grass
fires.

The benefits of this week's rain will be gone quickly because of the winds and
unseasonably warm temperatures, Lewis said.

National Weather Service officials said continuing windy and warm conditions
will elevate wildfire concerns through the weekend and Monday.

Firefighters are urging people to follow principles of the Firewise Communities
program to reduce the threat to homes by addressing preventive measures,
survivable space and a disaster plan.

During last summer's wildfires, Edmond firefighters went door to door
distributing information about the Firewise program.

"Removing dead and overhanging branches from around a home will reduce the
possibility that flames and sparks could travel from a tree to the roof of a
structure," Lewis said. "Removing dead leaf accumulation and tall, dry grasses
from areas around a home can reduce the amount of fuel ... and reduce the size
of a fire."

Bushes and shrubs also should be trimmed regularly, and gutters should be
cleaned, he said.

"People need to remove flammable vegetation," Lewis said. "A good example is
cedar trees."

The Firewise program was developed by federal agencies in cooperation with the
National Fire Protection Association.

TO LEARN MORE

For information, go to www.firewise.org.


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo 1: The home of George Reich on Blackjack Lane was destroyed in
August wildfires in Edmond. OKLAHOMAN ARCHIVE PHOTO
Photo 2 (Metro/State North, Page 15A): August wildfires destroyed 10 homes and
eight outbuildings in Edmond. Damage was estimated at $1.8 million. Local
firefighters are warning residents to take precautions against wildfires as dry
weather continues. THE OKLAHOMAN ARCHIVES PHOTO
Photo 3 (Metro/State North, Page 15A): George Reich tries to salvage items after
his home was destroyed in the August wildfires in Edmond. Reich's home and nine
others were destroyed. PHOTO BY SARAH PHIPPS, THE OKLAHOMAN ARCHIVES

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2012 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                              842 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            September 8, 2017 Friday

Washington: Merkley, Wyden Announce Funding to Help Address Wildfire Crisis

LENGTH: 458  words



Washington: Office of the Senator Jeff Merkley has issued the following news
release:

Oregon's Senators Jeff Merkley and Ron Wyden today announced that they have
successfully included funding to help cover the cost of fighting the devastating
wildfires that are currently burning in Oregon in the disaster and government
funding bill expected to pass Congress this week. The legislation passed the
U.S. Senate today with overwhelming bipartisan support.


    "Oregon is on fire. This is a frightening time for our communities, and they
deserve to know that they will have the resources and support they need to fight
these fires all the way through to the end of the season," said Merkley.
"Passing this wildfire funding is a huge step forward, but there's more to do.
We won't stop fighting until Oregon has all of the resources it needs to
confront and recover from this ongoing disaster."
"When Oregon's skies are glowing orange at night from wildfires and families are
forced to evacuate their homes, our state and the West need money to fight these
fires now," said Wyden. "I am glad the Senate has heeded our call to provide
some help for the short-term. I am also pulling out all the stops to fight for
our bipartisan, long-term wildfire funding solution that tackles the
skyrocketing cost of fighting fires and ends the backwards cycle that
shortchanges wildfire prevention every year. These fires are getting hotter,
bigger and tougher to fight. Congress needs to step up and treat these infernos
like the natural disasters they are."
Since joining the Senate Appropriations Committee in 2015, Senator Merkley has
aggressively pushed for increased funding for fighting wildfires, and worked
with Senator Wyden to fix the way that fighting the biggest wildfires is funded.
The agreement secured in today's funding bill will ensure that the Forest
Service and other agencies will be able to retroactively cover the remaining
costs of fighting fires for the 2017 fire season, which is on track to reach
$300 million beyond the previously-set firefighting budget for 2017. Without
this funding, agencies would not have the flexibility to quickly repay accounts,
like hazardous fuels reduction and fire prevention, that are expected to be
raided to fund the remaining cost of wildfire suppression for this fire season.

Senator Wyden and Senator Merkley have also joined with their western colleagues
on both sides of the aisle to push for a long-term fix that would fund the cost
of fighting the largest wildfires in the same way that the response to other
natural disasters is funded. This would permanently end the practice of fire
borrowing, and ensure that the biggest wildfires are appropriately treated
similarly to other natural disasters.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              843 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    San Gabriel Valley Tribune (California)

                            December 18, 2015 Friday

California is the wildfire capital of the nation

BYLINE: Kevin Smith

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 510 words


Living in California isn t easy.

We have some of the nation s highest housing costs, gas prices are high, we re
in the middle of a four-year drought and companies constantly complain that this
is one of the toughest places to do business.

Those factors alone should be enough to give one pause. But now the Insurance
Information Institute has added yet another distinction to our Golden State   we
are living in the most wildfire-prone state in the U.S.

Yep, figures released in June of this year from Verisk Analytics show that more
than 2 million California households are at  high  or  extreme  risk from
wildfires.

We handily beat Texas, which had 706,200 homes at risk, and Colorado, which
ranked third with 363,900.

From there the list drops precipitously, with Arizona clocking in at 227,100;
Idaho, 163,500; and Washington, 157,900.

Wyoming landed at the bottom of the list of the top 13 states at risk with just
35,200 homes in danger.

When ranked on a percentage basis, California came in third with 15 percent of
its homes at high or extreme risk from wildfires.

Montana was the highest at 27 percent, but that state s total number of at-risk
homes was just 130,200, far fewer than the more than 2 million at risk here in
California.

Additional figures from Verisk detail the nation s biggest insured wildfire
losses, regardless of year.

California earned a gold star again with an insured wildfire loss of $1.7
billion in 1991   the biggest ever.

That was well above Colorado, which ranked second with an insured loss of $450
million in 2012.

Over the 20-year period running from 1995 to 2014, fires   including wildfires
accounted for 1.5 percent of insured catastrophe losses in the U.S., totaling
about $6 billion, according to the Property Claims Services unit of the
Insurance Services Office.

In short, California is the epicenter of wildfire activity in the U.S. In fact,
seven of the 10 costliest wildfires in U.S. history in terms of insured losses
have occurred in California.

As Jimi Hendrix might say,  Let me stand next to your fire.

So here s yet another factor that could draw people to California   the risk of
their homes being burnt to the ground by wildfires!

I can just imagine the new marketing pitch from the California Chamber of
Commerce:

Tired of all that snow? Bored from living in a state with no movie stars or Kim
Kardashian-types floating around? Well, come to California. We ve got your
number! Yessiree, we have plenty of wide open spaces, lots of mountains and, of
course   the Pacific Ocean!

And now the disclaimer.

But watch out for those wildfires! We get lots of  em. And while you re at it,
you might want to cut back on your driving because gas isn t cheap out here. But
you ll love it here when you get settled into your new ... well, apartment. You
ll probably want to rent for a while because our home prices are pretty darned
steep.

And if you do eventually buy a home you might want to hold off on filling up
that swimming pool because we re a little short on water at the moment. But
aside from that - we re here for you!

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2015 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              844 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Whittier Daily News (California)

                           December 9, 2015 Wednesday

California is the wildfire capital of the nation

BYLINE: Kevin Smith

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 510 words


Living in California isn t easy.

We have some of the nation s highest housing costs, gas prices are high, we re
in the middle of a four-year drought and companies constantly complain that this
is one of the toughest places to do business.

Those factors alone should be enough to give one pause. But now the Insurance
Information Institute has added yet another distinction to our Golden State   we
are living in the most wildfire-prone state in the U.S.

Yep, figures released in June of this year from Verisk Analytics show that more
than 2 million California households are at  high  or  extreme  risk from
wildfires.

We handily beat Texas, which had 706,200 homes at risk, and Colorado, which
ranked third with 363,900.

From there the list drops precipitously, with Arizona clocking in at 227,100;
Idaho, 163,500; and Washington, 157,900.

Wyoming landed at the bottom of the list of the top 13 states at risk with just
35,200 homes in danger.

When ranked on a percentage basis, California came in third with 15 percent of
its homes at high or extreme risk from wildfires.

Montana was the highest at 27 percent, but that state s total number of at-risk
homes was just 130,200, far fewer than the more than 2 million at risk here in
California.

Additional figures from Verisk detail the nation s biggest insured wildfire
losses, regardless of year.

California earned a gold star again with an insured wildfire loss of $1.7
billion in 1991   the biggest ever.

That was well above Colorado, which ranked second with an insured loss of $450
million in 2012.

Over the 20-year period running from 1995 to 2014, fires   including wildfires
accounted for 1.5 percent of insured catastrophe losses in the U.S., totaling
about $6 billion, according to the Property Claims Services unit of the
Insurance Services Office.

In short, California is the epicenter of wildfire activity in the U.S. In fact,
seven of the 10 costliest wildfires in U.S. history in terms of insured losses
have occurred in California.

As Jimi Hendrix might say,  Let me stand next to your fire.

So here s yet another factor that could draw people to California   the risk of
their homes being burnt to the ground by wildfires!

I can just imagine the new marketing pitch from the California Chamber of
Commerce:

Tired of all that snow? Bored from living in a state with no movie stars or Kim
Kardashian-types floating around? Well, come to California. We ve got your
number! Yessiree, we have plenty of wide open spaces, lots of mountains and, of
course   the Pacific Ocean!

And now the disclaimer.

But watch out for those wildfires! We get lots of  em. And while you re at it,
you might want to cut back on your driving because gas isn t cheap out here. But
you ll love it here when you get settled into your new ... well, apartment. You
ll probably want to rent for a while because our home prices are pretty darned
steep.

And if you do eventually buy a home you might want to hold off on filling up
that swimming pool because we re a little short on water at the moment. But
aside from that - we re here for you!

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2015 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              845 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                            August 17, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

B.C. wildfires set record for devastation; Aid Promised: Almost 9,000 square
kilometres affected and 149 blazes are still burning across province

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 290 words


B.C. wildfires have destroyed a record amount of forest, brush and grassland,
surpassing the devastation of nearly 60 years ago.

Kevin Skrepnek with the B.C.

Wildfire Service said about 8,944 square kilometres have been scorched by fires,
breaking the 1958 record of 8,550 square kilometres.

With no rain in the forecast for the wildfire-ravaged southern parts of the
province, Skrepnek said more land will be burned.

"Temperatures should be relatively seasonal going forward, so that's one silver
lining," he said. "But the presence of wind and the lack of rain are going to be
much more critical factors."

A total of 1,029 fires have occurred since the April 1 start of the wildfire
season, and 149 of them are still burning.

A fire that destroyed dozens of homes near Ashcroft six weeks ago has now
consumed even more structures in the Green Lake area almost 100 kilometres away.

Thompson-Nicola Regional District spokeswoman Debbie Sell said crews have not
been able to access the site to determine exactly what has been lost as the
blaze that is more than 1,600 square kilometres in size continues to pose a
danger.

Sell said affected property owners will be contacted as soon as specifics of
damage are available.

RCMP is continuing to investigate human-caused fires and suspected arson.

Spokeswoman Dawn Roberts said charges against four males, all under the age of
18, are pending after a fire was set in a suburb of Williams Lake.

She said the four are also believed to be connected with a series of
break-and-enters in the area that happened at the same time.

A trailer home that was destroyed in a fire 40 kilometres east of Alexis Creek
has also been deemed a suspicious occurrence. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia
Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Canadian Press Files; Wildfires have already destroyed almost 9,000
square kilometres of B.C.'s forests, brush and grassland with dry conditions
threatening to push that record figure substantially higher.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 The Vancouver Province
                              All Rights Reserved


                              846 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        The East Bay Times (California)

                            October 30, 2017 Monday

Teen girl dies of burn injuries from North Bay wildfire

BYLINE: The Associated Press

LENGTH: 201 words



HIGHLIGHT: A teenage girl has died in a Northern California hospital three weeks
after she was severely burned in a fire that tore through Mendocino County. Her
death raises the number of those killed in the state's wildfires this month to
43.


REDWOOD VALLEY  A teenage girl has died in a Northern California hospital three
weeks after she was severely burned in a fire that tore through Mendocino
County. Her death raises the number of those killed in the states wildfires this
month to 43.

The Santa Rosa Press Democrat reports 17-year-old Kressa Shepherd died Sunday
night at a Sacramento hospital.

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

UC, CSU extend application deadline for wildfire victims

Firefighters have effectively contained the Wine Country blazes

Full recovery from California wildfires may take years      Kressas aunt, Mindi
Ramos, says officials from Shriners Hospital for Children told her Kressa did
not register pain during a change of the dressing on her burns.

Doctors performed a CAT scan on her brain and according to Ramos determined she
was brain-dead.

She says doctors turned off the ventilator and let her go.

Kressas brother, 14-year-old Kai Shepherd, was among the youngest who died in
the wildfires.

Their parents are hospitalized.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              847 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         The Mercury News (California)

                            October 30, 2017 Monday

Teen girl dies of burn injuries from North Bay wildfire

BYLINE: The Associated Press

LENGTH: 201 words



HIGHLIGHT: A teenage girl has died in a Northern California hospital three weeks
after she was severely burned in a fire that tore through Mendocino County. Her
death raises the number of those killed in the state's wildfires this month to
43.


REDWOOD VALLEY  A teenage girl has died in a Northern California hospital three
weeks after she was severely burned in a fire that tore through Mendocino
County. Her death raises the number of those killed in the states wildfires this
month to 43.

The Santa Rosa Press Democrat reports 17-year-old Kressa Shepherd died Sunday
night at a Sacramento hospital.

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

UC, CSU extend application deadline for wildfire victims

Firefighters have effectively contained the Wine Country blazes

Full recovery from California wildfires may take years      Kressas aunt, Mindi
Ramos, says officials from Shriners Hospital for Children told her Kressa did
not register pain during a change of the dressing on her burns.

Doctors performed a CAT scan on her brain and according to Ramos determined she
was brain-dead.

She says doctors turned off the ventilator and let her go.

Kressas brother, 14-year-old Kai Shepherd, was among the youngest who died in
the wildfires.

Their parents are hospitalized.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              848 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                               

                            August 6, 2015 Thursday
                         

The Key Numbers in the California Wildfires

BYLINE: By CHRISTINE HAUSER

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 320 words


Dozens of wildfires have burned tens of thousands of acres in California and
prompted the evacuation of entire communities. The fires are part of a regional
phenomenon of severe drought and heat that has gripped the West.

Here are the latest statistics on the California wildfires:

California is now in its fourth year of drought. This has turned much of the
state into what Gov. Jerry Brown described as a ''tinderbox.''

There have been thousands of lightning strikes in the past few weeks alone that
have sparked fires on drought-parched land, emergency officials said.

From the beginning of the year through Aug. 3, states and national forest
services have responded to nearly 5,500 wildfires. That is about 1,200 more
fires than in the same period last year.

Those fires have so far charred 180,000 acres, compared with about 87,600 acres
in the same period in 2014.

There are at least 23 locations where wildfires are burning in California,
according to the latest statistics. Some of the locations have individual fires
within them, a California fire spokesman, Daniel Berlant, said.

More than 10,000 firefighters are trying to extinguish and contain the wildfires
.

The largest wildfire, nicknamed the Rocky Fire, encompasses three counties --
Yolo, Lake and Colusa -- and has so far spread over 68,000 acres.

In the largest order of its kind now in effect, about 13,000 people, most in the
last week, have been told to evacuate or advised that they may need to leave
their homes.

One firefighter has been killed. David Ruhl, 38, from Rapid City, S.D., died
last week while on assignment near the border with Oregon. There have been no
reports of civilians killed or injured in the 23 wildfires.

About $71 million, which is the general budget plus emergency funds, has been
spent so far on firefighting from the beginning of the fiscal year on July 1.
The total 2014 figure was estimated at $432 million.




URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/06/us/california-wildfires.html

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                


                              849 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       The Record ( Stockton, California)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              June 6, 2014 Friday

BRIEF: Smoke from wildfires will likely be a concern for Valley residents this
summer

BYLINE: The Record, Stockton, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 146 words


June 06--As if drought and an early fire season aren't bad news enough, the San
Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District reminds residents that smoke from
wildfires will also likely be a concern this summer.

Wildfires in the surrounding mountains often send pollution, including
particulates and ozone precursors, to the Valley floor.

People with health issues might be particularly vulnerable to adverse air
conditions.

To check on the air, the district reminds people they can go to
www.valleyair.org/wildfires for information about current wildfires and whether
they are affecting the Valley. They can also subscribe to an automated reporting
system that will automatically send data; information can be found at
www.valleyair.org/RAAN.

___ (c)2014 The Record (Stockton, Calif.) Visit The Record (Stockton, Calif.) at
www.recordnet.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140606-SK-BRF-Smoke-from-wildfires
-will-likely-be-a-concern-for-Valley-residents-this-summer-0606-20140606

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SK


                           Copyright 2014 The Record


                              850 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            September 5, 2014 Friday

Congressman Garamendi, State & Federal Fire Authorities, Conservationists: Stop
Raiding Funds for Preventing Forest Fires

LENGTH: 1000  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the House of Representative John Garamendi, U.S Government has issued
the following news release:

With federal resources set aside for combating wildfires rapidly depleting, the
federal government will soon be forced to divert funds that are currently
reserved for wildfire prevention, like dry brush removal and controlled burns,
making future extreme wildfires more likely. Today, Congressman John Garamendi
(D-Fairfield, CA), the former Deputy Secretary of the U.S. Interior Department
under President Bill Clinton, was joined by federal and state agencies combating
wildfires and conservation groups at a press conference at a CAL FIRE facility
in Davis to sound the alarm and to urge immediate action to rectify this
dangerous situation.

The Vicious Cycle

Over the last 12 years, the U.S. Forest Service has had to transfer $3.2 billion
from other accounts to pay for active fire suppression. In 2013 alone, they had
to transfer $505 million, and critical projects were cancelled as a result.
Federal depletion of funds directly impacts state-managed lands, as wildfires
can quickly spread between jurisdictions.

This year, California has experienced 4,503 wildfires, burning nearly 700,000
acres of land. Today, there are eight active fires in California, including the
Saratoga Fire in Lake County, which is in the 3rd Congressional District. The
risk of wildfires is exacerbated by climate change and droughts, making the fire
season last 60 to 80 days longer than it did in the 1980s

"We find ourselves in a vicious cycle," Congressman Garamendi said. "When we run
out of money to fight wildfires, and that happens frequently, we dip into the
very funds that help prevent wildfires. We ultimately spend a lot more money
combating disasters than we would have if we prevented those disasters from ever
occurring. An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. There's bipartisan
support to end this foolishness. All we need is an opportunity for a vote."

"An emergency or reserve fund, similar to what California utilizes to address
the extraordinary costs of wildland firefighting, is important so that emergency
firefighting costs in federal responsibility areas do not impact the federal
funds budgeted for forest health, vegetation management and fire prevention
program activities," said Chief Ken Pimlott, CAL FIRE director.

The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act of 2014

In July, Congressman Garamendi and 195 Democratic Members of Congress signed
onto a discharge petition that would force consideration of H.R. 3992, the
bipartisan Wildfire Disaster Funding Act of 2014. If 218 voting Members of
Congress sign a discharge petition, the bill is automatically brought to the
House Floor for a vote.

H.R. 3992 has 60 Republican and 71 Democratic cosponsors and calls for a $2.7
billion fund each year for seven years to be set aside as a cash reserve that
the Forest Service and Interior Department could turn to once their own
firefighting allotments ran out. The bill also treats the worst one percent of
wildfires as natural disasters, like earthquakes or hurricanes, freeing up
emergency resources for suppression to help prevent the need to raid fire
prevention funds. This legislation has been stalled in committee, with the
Majority Leadership unwilling to bring it to a vote on the House floor.

The Administration's Solution

At the press conference, officials from the U.S. Forest Service and Bureau of
Land Management underscored the importance of the National Cohesive Wildland
Fire Management Strategy and the President's Fiscal Year 2015 budget proposal to
change how fire suppression costs are budgeted to treat extreme fire seasons the
way other emergency disasters are treated.

"We appreciate the opportunity to get together with our interagency cooperators
and the Congressman to talk about the critical issue of wildfire in California
and across the nation," said Jeanne Wade Evans, Deputy Regional Forester at the
U.S. Forest Service.

"We are confronting a new chapter in wildland fire management, requiring a
cooperative, integrated approach to restore and maintain healthy landscapes,
prepare communities for fire season, and better address the nation's wildland
fire threat," said Jim Kenna, Bureau of Land Management California State
Director.

Concerns of Conservationists

When wildfires are made more likely, homes and businesses are needlessly put at
risk, natural habitats are pointlessly destroyed, wildlife is needlessly killed
and displaced, air and water quality are harmed, and recreational opportunities
in the wild are ruined.

"We applaud Congressman Garamendi and his fellow congressional members on their
efforts to address one of the biggest, most dangerous problems facing the West,"
said David Bischel, President of the California Forestry Association. "We can no
longer continue to chase forest fires. It is not sustainable for our forests,
watersheds, air quality, and wildlife. Large Wildfires have put unnatural stress
on our ecosystems, but with proper funding future damage can be mitigated with
preventive treatments."

"Passing the bipartisan Wildfire Disaster Funding Act is one of the smartest
actions members of Congress can take this year to help our national parks and
federal public lands," said Neal Desai, Pacific Region Field Director of the
National Parks Conservation Association. "We thank Congressman Garamendi for his
commitment to solving real problems facing our nation's beloved national parks."

"Research shows forest management restores the forests that support our lives
and livelihoods. We need to invest in science-based restoration actions--
including selective thinning and controlled burning," said Ed Smith, Forest
Ecologist for The Nature Conservancy of California. "This proactive restoration
work is much safer and less costly than fighting fires reactively, and saves
lives and property and benefits nature."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              851 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Williams Lake Tribune Advisor

                              July 24, 2017 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Light winds a plus for Cariboo wildfires

BYLINE: Monica Lamb-Yorski

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 613 words


It is hoped light winds forecasted for the next few days will ease the wildfire
situation in the Williams Lake area, said Cariboo Fire Centre information
officer Melinda Paplawski Monday.

"We had winds yesterday morning, but we definitely did not see gusts up to 40
km/h here at the airport," she told the Tribune . "With light winds we are not
going to see a wind-driven fire. We certainly know that we have the fuel, and it
can move through the fuel, but without the wind it's not going to move quickly."

Because of the light winds, however, people can expect to see more smoke
sticking around, she added.

Wildwood Williams Lake Airport wildfire

Estimated to be 13,215 ha, the Wildwood Williams Lake Airport wildfire has 229
firefighters and 47 pieces of heavy equipment working on it today (Monday), with
air support, line locators and support staff assisting the firefighters.

"They are doing a lot of work on the north side and the east side and doing some
more cleanup on the west side," Paplawski said, noting they are also monitoring
it to see if there are any flare-ups, especially as the temperatures increase
during the week as forecasted. "They will be watching for anything to pop up in
areas that did not burn completely."

Spokin Lake Road wildfire - controlled burnoff planned for Monday

Structural protection continues at the Spokin Lake Road wildfire which is still
estimated to be about 2,650 ha.

There are also spot attacks on hot areas, as well as the ongoing construction of
a cat line and guard. There are 118 firefighters, 25 pieces of heavy equipment,
air support, line locators, DTA fallerss and support staff working on the fire.

There will be a controlled burnoff on the south east side of the Spokin Lake
fire Monday to create a clear and safe perimeter where ground crews can work,
said fire information officer Lindsay Marks.

"The controlled burn will cover about 300 hectares southeast of Spokin Lake and
will increase the amount of smoke in the area," Marks said. "The burnoff will be
supported by air craft, equipment and personnel during the operation."

White Lake wildfire

The White Lake wildfire is still burning an estimated seven kilometres north of
Williams Lake and is about 8,1070 ha.

There are 152 firefighters and 28 pieces of equipment, along with air support
and other support staff tackling the fire.

Chezacut wildfire

As of Monday, July 24 the 10,194.0 hectares (estimated) fire at Chezacut is now
40 per cent contained.

"Crews worked hard yesterday and made great advances on the southeast corner of
the fire. They were also hot spotting on the north east and reinforcing guard on
the north side," the BC Wildfire Service noted in its update Monday.

There were, however, no details on numbers of firefighters or equipment being
used.

Hanceville-Riske Creek wildfire

Estimated at 131,958 hectares the Hanceville-Riske Creek fire is 45 per cent
contained as of Monday.

Crews are concentrating on securing the southeast corner of the fire in
anticipation of west winds this week. Good progress was made Sunday with direct
attack on the southwest edge of the fire and establishing a contingency guard.

Crews are striving to protect the unburned meadows and grasslands around Bald
Mountain by tying guard into existing roads. There are 145 firefighters and 14
helicopters on the fire with heavy equipment support as well.

Kleena Kleene wildfire

As of Monday the Kleena Kleene fire, estimated to be 5,130 ha is 50 per cent
contained.

Crews made solid progress Sunday and work continues to build a dozer guard at
the head of the Colwell Lake fire, southwest of the Kleena Kleene fire, which is
30 per cent contained. There are no details on resources being used.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              852 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Muskogee Phoenix (Oklahoma)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            January 27, 2017 Friday

EDITORIAL: Be careful to prevent wildfires

BYLINE: Muskogee Phoenix, Okla.

SECTION: COMMENTARY

LENGTH: 235 words


Jan. 27--Take extra precautions to avoid loss of life or property because of
wildfires.

Officials are concerned the possibility of wildfires has increased because of a
dry weather pattern.

State officials issued a red-flag warning Tuesday.

"We are still in a major drought, and this time of year could be detrimental if
a wildfire occurs," said Muskogee County Emergency Management Director Jeff
Smith. "During the winter, when the foliage is dormant and lacks moisture, it
doesn't take much wind to whip up a fire."

Many wildfires could be prevented with additional care during times when
conditions are ripe.

Smith said trees and grass surrounding houses and outbuildings should be
trimmed, and all debris that could provide fuel for a fire removed. He said
motorists should be careful that no chains drag between a vehicle and trailer,
and welders should take extra precautions when working in remote locations.

"It's always good to have somebody watching if you are out welding fences or
pipe or anything like that," Smith said. "And we always recommend you have some
type of pressurized water system on hand just in case there is a need to put out
a fire."

Firefighters risk their lives to protect your life and property.

Help them by being more careful.

___ (c)2017 the Muskogee Phoenix (Muskogee, Okla.) Visit the Muskogee Phoenix
(Muskogee, Okla.) at muskogeephoenix.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency,
LLC.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20170127-XK-EDITORIAL-Be-careful-to-prevent-wildfires-0127-20170127

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: XK


                        Copyright 2017 Muskogee Phoenix


                              853 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      Chico Enterprise-Record (California)

                             May 25, 2016 Wednesday

Feds announce $10M for wildfire projects in 12 states

BYLINE: Keith Ridler; The Associated Press

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 175 words

ABSTRACT

Interior Secretary Sally Jewell on Tuesday toured a massive wildfire
rehabilitation effort in southwest Idaho that's part of the federal government's
new wildfire strategy and then announced $10 million for projects in 12 states
to reduce wildfire threats

FULL TEXT

MARSING, Idaho >> Interior Secretary Sally Jewell on Tuesday toured a massive
wildfire rehabilitation effort in southwest Idaho that's part of the federal
government's new wildfire strategy and then announced $10 million for projects
in 12 states to reduce wildfire threats.

The money is part of the Wildland Fire Resilient Landscapes Program intended to
restore public lands.

Recipients include:

o Southern Utah, which will receive $3.5 million to improve habitat for greater
sage grouse.

o About $1 million to protect habitat for Bi-State sage grouse on the
Nevada-California border.

o Another $1 million in Colorado and Utah to improve Gunnison sage grouse
habitat.

o The Santa Clara Pueblo area in New Mexico will receive $800,000 to protect
cliff dwellings and other cultural sites.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2016 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              854 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     Oroville Mercury Register (California)

                             May 25, 2016 Wednesday

Feds announce $10M for wildfire projects in 12 states

BYLINE: Keith Ridler; The Associated Press

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 175 words

ABSTRACT

Interior Secretary Sally Jewell on Tuesday toured a massive wildfire
rehabilitation effort in southwest Idaho that's part of the federal government's
new wildfire strategy and then announced $10 million for projects in 12 states
to reduce wildfire threats

FULL TEXT

MARSING, Idaho >> Interior Secretary Sally Jewell on Tuesday toured a massive
wildfire rehabilitation effort in southwest Idaho that's part of the federal
government's new wildfire strategy and then announced $10 million for projects
in 12 states to reduce wildfire threats.

The money is part of the Wildland Fire Resilient Landscapes Program intended to
restore public lands.

Recipients include:

o Southern Utah, which will receive $3.5 million to improve habitat for greater
sage grouse.

o About $1 million to protect habitat for Bi-State sage grouse on the
Nevada-California border.

o Another $1 million in Colorado and Utah to improve Gunnison sage grouse
habitat.

o The Santa Clara Pueblo area in New Mexico will receive $800,000 to protect
cliff dwellings and other cultural sites.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2016 Oroville Mercury Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                              855 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Watford Observer

                            October 7, 2014 Tuesday

Royal Naval Reserve Unit HMS Wildfire celebrates Belgian Coast battle honour

BYLINE: Frazer Ansell

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 395 words


The Royal Naval Reserve Unit HMS Wildfire has commemorated its elder sister, a
Nymphe Class Composite Sloop built in 1888, which won the Battle Honour "Belgian
Coast 1914" during the actions of the Dover Patrol in the autumn of 1914.

An "all ranks" dinner party held in the Northwood Officers' Mess also
commemorated the wider actions of the Royal Naval Division during the First
World War.

French, Belgian and German naval officers, all currently serving in the
multi-national Northwood Headquarters were special guests for the unique event
in HMS Wildfire's history.

The Battle Honour Belgian Coast 1914, although credited in the London Gazette in
1915 and widely assumed to have been held by HMS Wildfire for many years, had
not officially been awarded due to an administrative oversight.

The omission was discovered when Lieutenant Commander Stephen Smith RNR, one of
HMS Wildfire's ship's company and an Officer in the Information Operations
branch of the Royal Naval Reserve, was researching the Unit's First World War
history.

The Royal Navy Historical Branch Battle Honour Committee recognised and duly
corrected the oversight, formally authorising HMS Wildfire to display the Battle
Honour earlier this year.

The newly created wooden Battle Honour board was formally unveiled prior to the
dinner by Commander Jevan Morris RD RNR (Retired), a former Commanding Officer
of HMS Wildfire.

As guest speaker at the dinner, he also gave an account of the history
surrounding the formation and actions of the Royal Naval Division as well as the
Dover Patrol's actions off the Belgian Coast in which HMS Wildfire won her
honour while under the command of Rear-Admiral Hood in October 1914.

Commander Stephanie Shinner RD RNR, the current Commanding Officer, said: "It is
a great honour to finally display our Battle Honour one hundred years after it
was awarded.

"The evening has given us an opportunity to commemorate the brave actions of our
predecessors both in HMS Wildfire and the Royal Naval Division.

"Their legacy continues with vibrant, enthusiastic and dedicated Reservists
serving on operational tours as part of the Royal Navy.

"They maintain HMS Wildfire's proud fighting spirit grounded in an understanding
of the traditions and actions of our ancestors. We salute them and all others,
past and present, who have served their nation with commitment and compassion."

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2014 NewsQuest Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              856 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            July 23, 2014 Wednesday

Udall, Bennet Press for Additional Firefighting Resources

LENGTH: 385  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator Mark Udall, U.S Government has issued the following news
release:

Amid a record-setting wildfire season in the West, U.S. Senators Mark Udall and
Michael Bennet today called for swift passage of the president's emergency
supplemental funding request, which would allocate $615 million -- accessible
immediately -- to fight wildfires. The senators also called for a vote on the
Wildfire Disaster Funding Act, a bill that would fix the broken system of
stealing funds from prevention programs to fight wildfires that are already
burning.

With persistent droughts, dry forest conditions and new wildfires starting
daily, the West has experienced a particularly harsh wildfire season. At this
rate, it is expected to require more fire suppression funding than the amount
appropriated this fiscal year.

"We cannot afford to wait another year to fix this urgent problem," the senators
wrote. "We urge you to take up the President's emergency funding request to deal
with wildfire funding once and for all."

The emergency supplemental funding request would grant $615 million, which would
be immediately accessible for firefighting efforts in western states through the
end of the year.

The cost of fighting wildfires has regularly exceeded the amount appropriated by
Congress in past years. To cover this need for additional funds, money must be
redirected from mitigation and prevention efforts. The senators also pointed out
that key prevention programs, such as the hazardous fuel removal program, have
lost funding in the past two years.

To ensure that fires are treated like other natural disasters and ensure that
both firefighting and prevention efforts are adequately funded, the Senators
urged passage of the bipartisan Wildlife Disaster Funding Act.

"In the last two years, the U.S. Forest Service and the Department of Interior
have been forced to take money from other important programs to cover the cost
of fighting wildfires," the senators wrote in the letter. "We must act
immediately to pass emergency supplemental appropriations to ensure we do not
continue this vicious cycle of fire funding, and include legislation to
permanently fix the fire funding problem, such as the Wildfire Disaster Funding
Act of 2013."

For further information please visit: http://www.markudall.senate.gova

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              857 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            July 23, 2014 Wednesday

Udall, Bennet Press for Additional Firefighting Resources

LENGTH: 385  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator Mark Udall, U.S Government has issued the following news
release:

Amid a record-setting wildfire season in the West, U.S. Senators Mark Udall and
Michael Bennet today called for swift passage of the president's emergency
supplemental funding request, which would allocate $615 million -- accessible
immediately -- to fight wildfires. The senators also called for a vote on the
Wildfire Disaster Funding Act, a bill that would fix the broken system of
stealing funds from prevention programs to fight wildfires that are already
burning.

With persistent droughts, dry forest conditions and new wildfires starting
daily, the West has experienced a particularly harsh wildfire season. At this
rate, it is expected to require more fire suppression funding than the amount
appropriated this fiscal year.

"We cannot afford to wait another year to fix this urgent problem," the senators
wrote. "We urge you to take up the President's emergency funding request to deal
with wildfire funding once and for all."

The emergency supplemental funding request would grant $615 million, which would
be immediately accessible for firefighting efforts in western states through the
end of the year.

The cost of fighting wildfires has regularly exceeded the amount appropriated by
Congress in past years. To cover this need for additional funds, money must be
redirected from mitigation and prevention efforts. The senators also pointed out
that key prevention programs, such as the hazardous fuel removal program, have
lost funding in the past two years.

To ensure that fires are treated like other natural disasters and ensure that
both firefighting and prevention efforts are adequately funded, the Senators
urged passage of the bipartisan Wildlife Disaster Funding Act.

"In the last two years, the U.S. Forest Service and the Department of Interior
have been forced to take money from other important programs to cover the cost
of fighting wildfires," the senators wrote in the letter. "We must act
immediately to pass emergency supplemental appropriations to ensure we do not
continue this vicious cycle of fire funding, and include legislation to
permanently fix the fire funding problem, such as the Wildfire Disaster Funding
Act of 2013."

For further information please visit: http://www.markudall.senate.gova

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              858 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The News Herald (Panama City, Florida)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 19, 2012 Saturday

BRIEF: Firefighters battle 2 wildfires

BYLINE: The News Herald, Panama City, Fla.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 135 words


May 19--WAUSAU -- Florida Forest Service firefighters were battling two
wildfires Friday.

A wildfire near State 77 and Rolling Pines Road near Wausau in Washington County
may have damaged two mobile homes, according to Brian Goddin, wildfire
mitigation specialist. The homes may have been unoccupied, he said.

The second fire covered 35 acres on the Bay County-Calhoun County line near the
end of McGill Road, County Road 109 south of Scott's Ferry Road.  That wildfire
was discovered and reported around 10:30 a.m. by a Florida Forest Service tower
person from the Calhoun County tower. No homes appeared to be immediately
threatened by that fire, Goddin said.

___ (c)2012 The News Herald (Panama City, Fla.) Visit The News Herald (Panama
City, Fla.) at www.newsherald.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120519-PY-BRF-Firefighters-battle-2-wildfires-0519-20120519

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PY


                         Copyright 2012 The News Herald


                              859 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                 EKantipur.com

                             April 28, 2009 Tuesday

Wildfires reach unprecedented scale

LENGTH: 357  words

DATELINE: Kathmandu


Kathmandu, April 28 -- The country has witnessed a series of devastating
wildfires on an unprecedented scale spreading across the highly fire-prone pine
forests in high altitudes. National Aeronautic and Space Administration (NASA)
has listed Nepal as a most vulnerable country because of wildfires this year.

The wildfires that started last January have turned vast tracts of forests into
barren lands. Worse, meteorologists say there is no possibility of rainfall in
the immediate future. Sundar Sharma, coordinator of UNISDR-South Asia Wildland
Fire Network, said, "This year, many big crown fires have completely destroyed
our pristine Himalayan ecosystems,". According to him, about four hundred
thousand hectares of land, including in conserved and community forest areas in
43 districts were destroyed and 41 people have also died in the wildfires. This
year, due partly to the long dry spell, the practice of 'slash and burn'
agriculture method got out of control. This caused disastrous crown wildfires in
the mid-hills and high altitude regions. Fire had spread to at least four high
altitude protected areas, including Annapurna, Kanchanjunga, Langtang and Makalu
Barun national parks for an unusually long period, the Department of National
Parks and Wildlife Conservation stated. "The rising temperature due to global
warming was another factor," said Prem Kandel, an official at Forest Ministry.
Incidents of wildfire have increased three-fold this year. For instance, by
April 26 this year, wildfires were spotted in 422 different places while the
number was 155 in the same period in 2007. Experts stressed on launching massive
awareness programmes at the community level for proper management of 'slash and
burn' practice used in forest areas. Likewise, demarcation of fire lines and ban
on inflammable substances that kindle fires should be put in place at the
earliest. "There is no institutional mechanism to deal with wildfires in the
country. Central and district level coordination should be developed in order to
tackle the problem of wildfires," said Sharma.Published by HT Syndication with
permission from EKantipur.com.

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                 Copyright 2009 Kantipur Publications Pvt. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              860 of 987 DOCUMENTS


            The Fayetteville Observer (Fayetteville, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           September 1, 2007 Saturday

Last of Robeson wildfires put out

BYLINE: Venita Jenkins, The Fayetteville Observer, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 503 words


Sep. 1--LUMBERTON -- For the first time in over a month, all Robeson County
residents can breathe air that's smokefree.

Firefighters have extinguished the last of dozens of wildfires that have raged
for more than five weeks. The wildfires were the worst the county has ever seen.

The number of wildfires reached at least 151 until last week, when a
thunderstorm dumped nearly 4 inches of rain. The fires began July 24 and burned
nearly 2,915 acres.

More than 800 acres burned near the Orrum community off of U.S. 74 and N.C. 130.

The state Division of Forest Resources brought in 150 firefighters to battle the
fires. They were joined by 800 to 900 volunteer firefighters from Robeson
County.

The wildfires cost the state $920,090. The volunteer fire departments incurred
some expense for gas and wear on vehicles.

"I have been in the county all my life, and we have never had that many fires at
the same time," said Robeson County Fire Marshal Charles Britt. "No way (with)
the manpower we had would we have been able to contain that many fires."

The wildfires may not be the worst in the state's history, but it was the worst
for the month of August, said Michael Good, the District 6 supervisor for the
N.C. Division of Forest Resources.

"The way this happened was so out of the ordinary," Good said. "Had this been
March, which is typically when we have the worst fires, it wouldn't have been so
totally out of the ordinary. That is the time of the year we gear up for it."

Earlier this week, the Division of Forest Resources turned over the
responsibility of monitoring the wildfires to its Fayetteville office and county
rangers in Robeson County.

The six to eight inches of rain that fell in the county over the past week was
the break firefighters needed.

"We are no longer actively monitoring at this time," Good said.

Officials are still investigating the cause of the fires. They suspect a
majority of the blazes were intentionally set.

The investigators, with the Forest Resources law enforcement unit, are following
up leads, Good said.

The wildfires threatened 685 homes, but none were destroyed.

The fires forced the temporary evacuation of 40 homes on Alamac and Rice roads
last month. Last week, at least four homes were evacuated off of N.C. 130.

No serious injuries were reported. A few firefighters suffered from heat
exhaustion. One firefighter received minor injuries during a vehicle accident,
Good said.

"All things considered, pretty hard to complain about the overheating and the
one vehicle accident," Good said.

The statewide ban on open burning remains in effect, Britt said.

To see more of The Fayetteville Observer or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.fayettevillenc.com. Copyright (c) 2007, The Fayetteville Observer,
N.C. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20070901-FY-WILDFIRES-20070901

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FY


                    Copyright 2007 The Fayetteville Observer


                              861 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 30, 2015 Thursday

WASHINGTON: Wildfire Community Preparedness Day: Accomplish Something Great!

LENGTH: 206  words

DATELINE: Olympia


Department of Service with Humility, The state of Washington has issued the
following news release:

The 2nd Annual NationalWildfire Community Preparedness Day(Wildfire Preparedness
Day) is scheduled for Saturday, May 2, 2015. Commit a couple of hours or the
entire day to making your community more wildfire resilient with a Wildfire Prep
Day project.

Your efforts will help raise local wildfire awareness, encourage neighborhood
collaboration, and bring people together to work on projects. These projects can
help protect homes, neighborhoods and entire communities from future wildfire
risk even or lessen current post-fire impacts.

On May 2nd, residents of all ages are invited to participate in local projects
that reduce the risk of wildfire damage to their homes and increase preparedness
in their neighborhoods. Prep Day projects can range from a short time commitment
up to an entire day and can be undertaken by individuals, families or groups.
For alist of project ideas visit www.nfpa.org/wildfirepreparednessday.

Learn more about the 2015 National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day at
www.nfpa.org/wildfirepreparednessday.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:
editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              862 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 30, 2015 Thursday

WASHINGTON: Wildfire Community Preparedness Day: Accomplish Something Great!

LENGTH: 206  words

DATELINE: Olympia


Department of Service with Humility, The state of Washington has issued the
following news release:

The 2nd Annual NationalWildfire Community Preparedness Day(Wildfire Preparedness
Day) is scheduled for Saturday, May 2, 2015. Commit a couple of hours or the
entire day to making your community more wildfire resilient with a Wildfire Prep
Day project.

Your efforts will help raise local wildfire awareness, encourage neighborhood
collaboration, and bring people together to work on projects. These projects can
help protect homes, neighborhoods and entire communities from future wildfire
risk even or lessen current post-fire impacts.

On May 2nd, residents of all ages are invited to participate in local projects
that reduce the risk of wildfire damage to their homes and increase preparedness
in their neighborhoods. Prep Day projects can range from a short time commitment
up to an entire day and can be undertaken by individuals, families or groups.
For alist of project ideas visit www.nfpa.org/wildfirepreparednessday.

Learn more about the 2015 National Wildfire Community Preparedness Day at
www.nfpa.org/wildfirepreparednessday.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:
editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              863 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Himalayan Times

                              April 4, 2010 Sunday

Govt silent?

BYLINE: Himalayan News Service

LENGTH: 178  words


KATHMANDU: Despite the ever increasing incidents of wildfire, the government is
paying little attention to prevent the loss of natural resources. To make things
worse, the government lacks policies and programmes on preventive measures and
on disaster preparedness. The number of wildfire cases reached the highest in
March-April this year as compared to the same period last year. Sundar Prasad
Sharma, a wildfire expert said, "If wildfires continue in this rate, I am sure
they will rage through tens of thousands of hectares of forest land by
mid-April." The country had witnessed wildfire in 420 different areas on a
single day in April-May 2009. According to Sharma, who is also the convener of
South Asian Forum for Wildfire Control, wildfires in 142 areas raged through the
forest and human settlements on Saturday alone. "At least 30,000 hectares of
forest area have been destroyed in the country in the past three weeks," he
said. Madhav Acharya, Director General at the Department of Forest, said they
were using all-out efforts to prevent and fight wildfires.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2010 Himalayan Times, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              864 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       Political & Business Daily (India)

                            October 13, 2017 Friday

Way to reduce wildfire toll

LENGTH: 1021 words

DATELINE: New Delhi


New Delhi, Oct. 13 -- Deadly wildfires are raging in the wine country region of
northern California - the third straight month of infernos across the western
United States and Canada. By Thursday, the California fires had killed at least
23 people and destroyed 3,500 homes or businesses. Those numbers are likely to
increase once the fire is suppressed and officials can conduct more thorough
searches.

In August, fires raging in a remote region of British Columbia choked Vancouver
and Seattle with smoke. That month, more than a million acres in Montana burned,
forcing schoolchildren to stay inside. In September, terrifying images
circulated of fires smoldering in the background of everyday scenes like an
airport tarmac in Burbank, California and a golf course in Oregon.

The toll of these fires is the product of bad land use, especially
overdevelopment at the perimeter of forests, and subsequent fire suppression
efforts that protect those developments at the expense of a vital natural cycle.
If U.S. and Canadian authorities don't adopt the right policies, wildfires will
only become more deadly.

Following a wet and snowy winter in the West, many hoped this year would see
minimal wildfires.

But a hot, dry summer that set heat records even in normally-chilly San
Francisco destroyed that optimism.

This year is no fluke: large wildfires have become more common and damaging in
recent years. In 2015, Washington State saw its worst wildfire season on record,
including the largest fire in state history. In 2013, a rapidly escalating
wildfire in Arizona killed 19 members of an elite firefighting squad. Climate
scientists predict that global warming will make wildfires worse as less
mountain snowpack and hotter, drier summers conspire to create more
conflagrations.

The issue is most acute in the western areas of North America because the
region's rapidly growing population, proliferation of rural vacation homes, and
suburban sprawl means more and more people are building too close to forests.

From 1960 to the early 2000s, the U.S. population living in what's known as the
"wildland-urban interface," the locations where homes and businesses butt up
against a fire-prone natural environment - think of a subdivision in an Arizona
canyon or a cluster of mountain cabins in Colorado surrounded by thick forest -
has ballooned by 720 percent, from 25 to 140 million people. According to the
U.S. Forest Service, 60 percent of new home construction since 1990 is located
in this dangerous zone. As Montana Public Radio, reporting on the wildfire
season, described it, "There's an unquenchable demand for home construction in
and near wildfire-prone areas." While heavily-forested landscapes are precisely
the draw for constructing a cute cabin in the woods or relocating to a small
town in the shadow of a tree-lined ridge, they are also increasingly dangerous
places for people to live and towns to grow. When human lives and property are
under threat, state and local jurisdictions have an obligation to respond. That
costs a lot of money - this year has already proven to be the most expensive
wildfire season in Montana since 1999, adjusted for inflation - and risks the
lives of courageous firefighters.

Just like the need for stricter land-use regulations in the wake of coastal
flooding from this season's devastating hurricanes, it's time for state and
local governments to stop allowing people to live cheek-byjowl with wildfire
-prone vegetation and hold accountable those who take the risk. After all, when
local firefighting budgets are exhausted, as they quickly are in heavy fire
seasons, the U.S. Forest Service picks up the slack at a cost to all taxpayers.

Even worse, voters in some areas with a history of past fires have rejected
special assessments to pay for the extra fire prevention and response measures
that their lifestyle requires, forcing the cost onto their neighbors who don't
live in fire zones.

Currently, just two states - California and Oregon - have mandatory mitigation
measures that require structures in fire-prone zones to be built with
fire-resistant materials and homeowners to clear vegetation a certain radius
away from the building to prevent fire from engulfing a structure.

Stricter rules are a good first step, but the bigger problem is the people who
are living near wildlands in the first place. National Geographic reports that
the number of housing units within half a mile of a national forest grew from
484,000 in 1940 to 1.8 million in 2000.

Wildfires serve an important role in ecosystems, clearing underbrush and debris
and allowing healthy trees to flourish. When more people live in or near
forests, firefighters are ordered to suppress blazes near those houses,
disrupting the natural wildfire cycle and making future fires even worse by
building up the store of dry vegetation.

Low-density, sprawling development is the chief culprit.

Outward expansion happened around every major U.S. city, but the consequences
are the most severe in the fire-prone western United States. "In the last half
century, about one-fifth of the American people have moved into flame zones,
insufficiently aware of the perils awaiting them and inadvertently testing the
limits of nature's tolerance," writes former National Park Service director
Roger Kennedy in "Wildfire and Americans: How to Save Lives, Property, and Your
Tax Dollars." The West's historical draw may be as an escape valve from crowded
eastern cities, but it's time to retire that outdated narrative. Westerners who
aren't working the land need to live in dense housing in or near cities, not on
big lots out at the edge of a wild forest. There are risks even if that forested
hillside is close to the central city - like the Oakland hills, where
California's deadliest fire raged in 1991.

The forest should be for visiting and maybe staying overnight in a tent, not for
living in permanently.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from The Political &
Business Daily. For any query with respect to this article or any other content
requirement, please contact Editor at content.services@htlive.com

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                             Copyright 2017 pbd.in
                              All Rights Reserved


                              865 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           December 3, 2016 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

During first look at wildfire rubble, residents in a daze

BYLINE:  By ADAM BEAM and JONATHAN MATTISE Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 566 words


GATLINBURG, Tenn. - Residents and business owners in Gatlinburg got their first
look at the wildfire destruction on Friday, and many walked around the
once-bustling tourist city in a daze, sobbing.

They hugged each other and promised that they would stay in touch.

"We love it up here so much," said Gary Moore, his voice trembling. "We lost
everything. But we're alive, thank goodness. Our neighbors are alive, most of
them. And we're just so thankful for that."

A county mayor raised the death toll to 13 and said the number of damaged
buildings now approached 1,000.

After days of waiting to see their homes, some of the shock began to give way to
anger, and local authorities bristled when asked why they waited so long to
order the evacuation.

"The city sure could have done a better job of getting us out of here," said
Delbert Wallace, who lost his home. "When they got up that morning, when they
seen that fire, we should have been on alert right then."

Sevier County Mayor Larry Williams and other officials noted that the fire had
moved such a great distance so quickly that it gave officials little time to
react. Once they did, it was nearly too late.

Waters said it was not the time for "Monday morning quarterbacking" and promised
a full review later.

John Matthews of the Sevier County Emergency Management Agency said a text alert
telling people to evacuate went out about 9 p.m. Monday. But by that time,
wildfires were raging in the area.

Matthews said some people did not receive the message because of power outages
and loss of cellphone reception.

Local officials, bowing to pressure from frustrated property owners, allowed
people back into most parts of the city Friday.

"This is all that's left of our house," said Tammy Sherrod, standing with her
husband in front of the rubble. "We had five minutes to get off this mountain.
We got off with the clothes on our back. We got off with a few pictures."

She found a coaster in the rubble that her daughter, 27, had made as a child.
Half of it had bright colors and the other half was charred black. It still had
her name, Brianna, written on the bottom in black marker.

The dead included a Memphis couple who were separated from their three sons
during the wildfires. The sons - Jared, Wesley and Branson Summers - learned
that their parents had died as they were recovering in the hospital.

"The boys, swaddled in bandages with tubes hanging out and machines attached,
were allowed to break quarantine, and were together in the same room, briefly,
when I confirmed their parents' death," their uncle Jim Summers wrote on a
Facebook page set up for the family. Their injuries "pale in comparison with
their grief."

The Associated Press was allowed into the Great Smoky Mountains National Park -
the most visited national park in the country - on Thursday. Soot, ash and
blackened trees covered the forest floor, and the gorgeous vistas of tree-topped
mountain ranges were scarred by large areas of blackened soil and trees. Small
plumes of smoke smoldered from hot spots.

Deputy Park Superintendent Jordan Clayton said the initial fire started Nov. 23
near the end of a popular hiking trail. Authorities urged anyone who hiked the
trial to give them a call.

"Whether it was purposefully set or whether it was a careless act that was not
intended to cause a fire, that we don't know," Clayton said. "The origin of the
fire is under investigation."

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  The burnt remains of a home known to visitors as The Castle is seen
from downtown Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents were getting
their first look at what remains of their homes and businesses in Gatlinburg,
after a wildfire tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov. 28. (Michael
Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  A burnt home sits on a hillside in
Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents were getting their first look
at what remains of their homes and businesses in Gatlinburg, after a wildfire
tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov. 28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville
News Sentinel via AP)  Veronica Carney looks at the skyline from the remains of
the home she grew up in, Thursday, Dec. 1, 2016, in Gatlinburg, Tenn. Carney
flew in from Massachusetts to assist her parents, Richard T. Ramsey and Sue
Ramsey who safely evacuated as a wildfire approached Monday evening. (Andrew
Nelles/The Tennessean via AP)  This Dec. 1, 2016, satellite image using
near-infrared (NIR) provided by DigitalGlobe shows damage from the wildfire near
Ripley's Aquarium of the Smokies in Gatlinburg, Tenn. NIR imagery causes healthy
vegetation to appear red and the burn scar from the wildfire to be dark brown.
More than 14,000 residents and visitors in Gatlinburg were forced to evacuate,
and the typically bustling tourist city has been shuttered ever since. (Digital
Globe via AP)  Charred home and cars sit on a property, while a neighbor's home,
background, is undamaged Thursday, Dec. 1, 2016, in Gatlinburg, Tenn. A
devastating wildfire destroyed numerous homes and buildings on Monday. (Michael
Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  Police officers examine papers as
vehicles wait to enter Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents were
getting their first look at what remains of their homes and businesses in
Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov.
28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  The burnt remains of
Laurel Point Resort on Sky Mountain Rd. sits atop a hill in Gatlinburg, Tenn.,
Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents were getting their first look at what remains of
their homes and businesses in Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore through the
resort community on Monday, Nov. 28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel
via AP)  Trina Rial retrieves her father's Harley vest from their belongings in
a motal room at Travelers in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents
were getting their first look at what remains of their homes and businesses in
Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov.
28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  Utility workers install a
line in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents were getting their
first look at what remains of their homes and businesses in Gatlinburg, after a
wildfire tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov. 28. (Michael
Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  A burnt vehicle sits on a wildfire
damaged property in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016, after residents
were allowed back in following the devastating fires on Monday night, Nov. 28.
(Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  A burnt vehicle sits on a
wildfire damaged property in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016, after
residents were allowed back in following the devastating fires on Monday night,
Nov. 28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  The stone walls are
all that stands of the Roaring Fork Baptist Church in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday,
Dec. 2, 2016, following the devastating wildfires from Monday night, Nov. 28.
(Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  Tammy Sherrod views the
remains of her home in the Roaring Fork neighborhood of Gatlinburg, Tenn.,
Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents on Friday, were getting their first look at what
remains of their homes and businesses in Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore
through the resort community on Monday, Nov. 28. (AP Photo/Adam Beam)  Tammy
Sherrod views the remains of a coaster her 27-year-old daughter Brianna made
when she was a little girl as she views the remains of her home in the Roaring
Fork neighborhood of Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents on
Friday, were getting their first look at what remains of their homes and
businesses in Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore through the resort community on
Monday, Nov. 28. (AP Photo/Adam Beam)  Tammy Sherrod and her husband, Scott,
examine the remains of their home in the Roaring Fork neighborhood of
Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents on Friday, were getting their
first look at what remains of their homes and businesses in Gatlinburg, after a
wildfire tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov. 28. (AP Photo/Adam
Beam)  Charlotte Moore, right, and her neighbor, Morgan Wallace, look at what
remains of Moore's car in the Roaring Fork neighborhood of Gatlinburg, Tenn.,
Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents on Friday, were getting their first look at what
remains of their homes and businesses in Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore
through the resort community on Monday, Nov. 28. (AP Photo/Adam Beam)  Charlotte
Moore takes a picture of what remains of her car in the Roaring Fork
neighborhood of Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents on Friday,
were getting their first look at what remains of their homes and businesses in
Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov.
28. (AP Photo/Adam Beam)  Delbert Wallace sits beside his neighbor's destroyed
home in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents on Friday, were
getting their first look at what remains of their homes and businesses in
Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov.
28. (AP Photo/Adam Beam)  Damage and destroyed buildings are seen in Gatlinburg,
Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents on Friday, were getting their first look
at what remains of their homes and businesses in Gatlinburg, after a wildfire
tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov. 28. (Amy Smotherman
Burgess/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              866 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            January 3, 2008 Thursday
                                  EAST EDITION

MT. LEBANON YOUTH SOARS WITH EAGLES;
HE BECOMES 6TH IN FAMILY TO EARN RANK

BYLINE: Kate McCaffrey

SECTION: METRO; Pg. EZ-2

LENGTH: 569 words


Anne Wildfire is a typical mom. She's proud of her five sons and, if given the
chance, will recount their accomplishments with zeal.

Less typical are her sons' accomplishments. As of September, all five are Eagle
Scouts. Add the fact that their father, Chris Wildfire, is too, and the total is
six for this Mt. Lebanon family.

Eagle Scout is the highest rank a Boy Scout of America can achieve. Not many do.
According to Bob DeWitt, spokesman for the Boy Scouts of America, Greater
Pittsburgh Council, only five in 100 Boy Scouts earn the rank of Eagle.

To have six Eagle Scouts in one family "is not unheard of, but it's really
unusual. It's a tremendous achievement," Mr. DeWitt said.

The rank does not come easily. Before appearing before a board of review, a
Scout must first serve as a Life Scout for six months, earn a minimum of 21
merit badges, serve in a leadership position and perform a service project.

The Eagle Scout project requires a minimum of 100 service hours. Scouts can use
other volunteers to help.

Before becoming a Life Scout, boys must first rise through the ranks of
Tenderfoot, Second Class, First Class and Star.

The Wildfires' newest Eagle, Jacob, is a junior at Mt. Lebanon High School. A
member of Troop 22, sponsored by Southminster Presbyterian Church, he earned
Eagle rank Sept. 16.

"It's different to say 'I'm an Eagle Scout.' People react differently to it.
They don't think, 'Oh, he just played with fire and knives,' " he said.

Chris Wildfire, 51, began Cub Scouts in 1964, when he was a third-grader in St.
Marys, Pa. Anne Wildfire, 51, who also was raised in St. Marys, was a Girl
Scout. Their sons, Nate, 25, Joe, 24, Nolan, 21, Luke, 19 and Jacob, 16, each
began as Cubs in the second grade.

"Anyone can go camping if they want. But Chris was always saying that we should
give back to the community, so Scouts was it,'' Mrs. Wildfire said.

The family still gathers for "high adventure" outings, such as rafting trips in
the Adirondacks or on the New and Gauley Rivers in West Virginia.

The Wildfires all say that the road to Eagle Scout isn't paved with s'mores.
During one weekend canoe trip, Nolan's fellow scouts shaved his head. Or tried
to. They only got about halfway through, leaving Nolan to attend Mass one
Saturday night "looking like an animal," Mrs. Wildfire recalled.

Jacob recalls his first camping trip, at age 11, as "terrible."

"I hated it. I was cold and my pack was way too big,'' he said.

For Jacob, achieving Eagle Scout was predictable.

"It was expected of me. I'd be the black sheep of the family," Jacob said.

For his service project, Jacob helped with chores at Southminster Presbyterian
Church, scraping and painting a fence, installing a bench and doing landscaping.

"Normally when a Scout does an Eagle project, you might get 20-some people to
come. Jacob had 63," Mr. Wildfire said.

The project took just one day.

To celebrate their latest Eagle Scout, the Wildfires held a party for 120 people
at Mt. Lebanon's recreation center. Mrs. Wildfire made 25 pounds of roast beef,
300 meatballs and three varieties of salad.

"We work really hard and we play really hard," she said.

Al Frioni, Jacob's Scout Master, has known the family since Jacob was 4 years
old.

"There's not a word I can use [to describe the Wildfires] beyond 'tremendous.'
You have five young men there, they're all academically superior, polite and
well-mannered gentlemen. They're outstanding," he said.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Kate McCaffrey is a freelance writer.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: SIX EAGLES/From back to front: Chris Wildfire, the father,
Nathan, Joey, Nolan, Luke, and Jacob, the youngest in front with the sash.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.


                              867 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                               May 8, 2017 Monday

Governor Brown Issues Proclamation Declaring Wildfire Awareness Week

LENGTH: 450  words





Sacramento: Office of Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr., The State of California has
issued the following news release:
Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr. today issued a proclamation declaring May 7-13,
2017 as "Wildfire Awareness Week" in the State of California.


For more information on steps to protect lives, homes and families in the event
of a wildfire, visit www.ReadyForWildfire.org.
The text of the proclamation is below:
PROCLAMATION
Recently, California has experienced a drastic increase in the occurrence of
large, damaging wildfires. Half of the state's largest fires in recorded history
have occurred in just the last 10 years. The citizens of California must do
their part to help protect lives, property, and our state's precious natural
resources.
Despite recent rains, millions of dead and dying trees continue to increase the
risk of destructive wildfires across the state. In 2015, I declared a state of
emergency to address the state's unprecedented tree die-off epidemic. The Tree
Mortality Task Force - comprised of over 80 state and federal agencies, local
and tribal governments and utilities - has to date removed over 423,000 dead
trees in high-risk areas.
Wildfires are a natural, periodic occurrence in California. Many native species
depend on cyclical fires for survival. Unfortunately, this natural process often
conflicts with human land use, and careless or malicious human activity causes
many fires that would not have occurred naturally. In order to continue to enjoy
the economic and recreational benefits of our wilderness lands, we must strive
to achieve a balance between California's fire ecology and the need to protect
human life and property.
Firefighting alone cannot protect us, and every citizen, especially those living
in fire-prone areas, has an important role in preventing loss of life and
property from wildfire events. This week, we should all do our part to raise
public awareness of the fire season that is already upon us, and take steps to
protect lives, homes and families in the event of a wildfire.
In conjunction with Wildfire Awareness Week, CAL FIRE has launched a campaign to
educate homeowners on the steps they should take to prepare themselves for
wildfire. This potentially lifesaving information can be found at
www.ReadyForWildfire.org.
NOW THEREFORE I, EDMUND G. BROWN JR., Governor of the State of California, do
hereby proclaim May 7-13, 2017 as "Wildfire Awareness Week."
IN WITNESS WHEREOF I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Great Seal of the
State of California to be affixed this 5th day of May 2017.
In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              868 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       Vallejo Times-Herald (California)

                             May 25, 2016 Wednesday

Feds announce $10 million for wildfire projects in 12 states

BYLINE: Keith Ridler; The Associated Press

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 175 words

ABSTRACT

Interior Secretary Sally Jewell on Tuesday toured a massive wildfire
rehabilitation effort in southwest Idaho that's part of the federal government's
new wildfire strategy and then announced $10 million for projects in 12 states
to reduce wildfire threats

FULL TEXT

MARSING, Idaho >> Interior Secretary Sally Jewell on Tuesday toured a massive
wildfire rehabilitation effort in southwest Idaho that's part of the federal
government's new wildfire strategy and then announced $10 million for projects
in 12 states to reduce wildfire threats. The money is part of the Wildland Fire
Resilient Landscapes Program intended to restore public lands.

Recipients include:

o Southern Utah, which will receive $3.5 million to improve habitat for greater
sage grouse.

o About $1 million to protect habitat for Bi-State sage grouse on the
Nevada-California border.

o Another $1 million in Colorado and Utah to improve Gunnison sage grouse
habitat.

o The Santa Clara Pueblo area in New Mexico will receive $800,000 to protect
cliff dwellings and other cultural sites.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 The Times-Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              869 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 19, 2015 Wednesday

Colorado: 'Wildfire season' heats up as nearly 1,000 Guard members battle
Western fires

LENGTH: 835  words

DATELINE: Denver



  National Guard, The State of Colorado has issued the following news release:

 Close to 1,000 National Guard members are on duty across five Western states
assisting state and local officials with battling wildfires that to date have
burned close to 750,000 acres. Guard members in Washington, Oregon, California,
Idaho and Montana have been providing aviation support, working as hand crews
responsible for creating firebreaks and providing communications and other
logistical support requirements.

For Soldiers of the California Army Guard, that support also included engineer
assets from the 132nd Multi-role Bridge Company who erected a floating bridge
across the Cache Creek in Northern California so wildland firefighters could
reach the Rocky Fire, one of the Golden State's largest wildfires this year.

"The main thing is quickness," said Jeremy Salizzoni, a military liaison with
the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. "This bridge gives us
faster access to the fire. We can get our bulldozers, equipment and people up
there to fight it."

The California wildfires also marked the first call up this year of aircrews
from the Wyoming Air National Guard's 153rd Airlift Wing and the North Carolina
Air National Guard's 145th Airlift Wing. Both units fly C-130 Hercules aircraft
fitted with the Modular Airborne Firefighting System, which allows crews to dump
3,000 gallons of water or fire retardant over a quarter-mile area in seconds.

"We are able to provide surge capabilities that not only help the
almost-depleted civilian air tankers, but hopefully provide other crews some
reprieve," said Air Force Col. Scott Sanders, commander of the MAFFS Air
Expeditionary Group.

Both units have been operating out of McClellan Air Tanker Base, California, and
have been flying fire suppression missions throughout the region dropping
roughly 31,000 gallons of water or retardant on the fires, according to
officials with the National Guard Bureau. MAFFS aircrews, including those from
other MAFFS units, have dropped a total of close to 400,000 gallons so far this
season.

California Army National Guard units flying UH-60 Black Hawk and CH-47 Chinook
helicopters have also been providing aerial fire suppression support, bringing
the total amount of water and fire retardant dropped in California to nearly
800,000 gallons, according to the National Guard Command Center in Arlington,
Virginia. Meanwhile, Oregon Air and Army Guard aircrews have dropped more than
250,000 gallons of water and fire retardant on wildfires burning in central and
eastern Oregon.

Guard members in other states were called out earlier this year to fight
wildfires as well, giving an early start to "wildfire season."

In early May, Massachusetts Army Guard aircrews assisted local fire officials in
fighting a wildfire in Clarksburg State Forest, Massachusetts, and New York Army
Guard aircrews used Black Hawk helicopters to help douse a wildfire in New
York's Shawangunk Ridge State Forest. That fire burned more than 2,200 acres,
said New York National Guard officials, adding that aircrews dropped nearly
40,000 gallons of water on the flames.

"I've been deployed twice and for me, this (mission) is definitely the better of
the two," said Chief Warrant Officer 2 Louis Malizia, from the New York Army
Guard's 3rd Battalion, 142nd Aviation Regiment, who responded to the wildfire.
"Our federal mission is important for the country, but this here makes a real
difference in people's lives right at home."

The month of June saw aircrews from the Alaska Army National Guard's 1st
Battalion, 207th Aviation Regiment assist with battling the Sockeye Fire near
Willow, Alaska. Aircrews used Black Hawk helicopters to drop more than 66,000
gallons of water on the fire, which burned close to 8,000 acres, destroying
multiple structures and buildings, said Alaska National Guard officials.

Earlier this month aircrews from the Puerto Rico Army National Guard assisted
the territory's fire department and emergency management agency in snuffing out
wildfires that burned more than 1,000 acres over three days, including both
rural and neighborhood areas. The wildfires in Puerto Rico came at time when the
territory was struck by severe drought conditions.

Guard members continue to train and stand ready if needed to assist with other
wildfires, including those from the Washington National Guard, who battled
numerous wildfires last year in what was one of the worst wildfire seasons in
that state.

"We've been expecting another devastating wildfire season and have had our
personnel and equipment ready so we can get them out the door the moment we're
asked for help," said Army Maj. Gen. Bret Daugherty, the adjutant general of the
Washington National Guard. "We've trained extensively for these types of
missions and will continue to provide support for as long as needed and
requested."



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              870 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                           November 3, 2016 Thursday
                                 Early Edition

Drones useful in fight against wildfires, but how to deploy them up for debate

BYLINE: Juris Graney, Edmonton Journal

SECTION: CITY; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 571 words


The use of drones in battling wildfires in Alberta could save millions of
dollars and reduce the risk to front line pilots flying dangerous sorties over
blazes like the one that devastated Fort McMurray in May.

But just how unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) can be best utilized in the heat of
a raging inferno is still up for debate.

Their role in wildfire management was one of the topics at a three-day
conference and trade show in Edmonton dedicated to the burgeoning technology.

"Is there a place for unmanned systems in fighting fires? Yes, there is,"
Patrick McIlwaine, a provincial aviation specialist with the Alberta
government's Wildfire Management Branch, said during a panel presentation
Wednesday.

"Airspace in a wildfire is a very complex and dynamic environment and it's often
crowded with multiple aircraft operating all within a very small space," said
Jim Thomasson, a drone researcher with FP Innovations.

"The only time when we are seeing UAVs in an active fire situation is when a
hobbyist or media shuts down the whole operation."

That is especially true in Alberta and B.C. During May's destructive Fort
McMurray inferno, fire authorities issued stern warnings after a report of an
unauthorized drone flight near the airport. In B.C., an unauthorized drone
flying near Oliver in 2015 grounded eight helicopters and five planes for more
than three hours, severely hampering fire efforts.

On Tuesday, the NDP government brought in new rules in Alberta that ban drones
that may interfere with firefighting.

This year, Alberta spent millions of dollars as firefighters battled 1,329
wildfires.

The province's five-year average for aircraft costs in wildfire management is
roughly $128 million, so it is important to fire officials to look at all types
of technologies that could save money and lives, McIlwaine said.

"We spend a lot of money on aircraft," McIlwaine said. "And we are responsible
to the taxpayers."

Drones equipped with infrared imaging could be used in tracking fire fronts and
large-incident fire mapping, as well as post-blaze fire investigation. And they
could also be used to complement the province's fire detection program, which
currently relies on 126 lookouts around the province. B.C. has tested the use of
drones over the past two fire seasons and announced in August it is adding them
to the province's firefighting arsenal.

Used mainly at night when most helicopters and planes are grounded, drones will
be used to track fire fronts and identify hot spots that "increases the level of
safety" for firefighters on the ground.

B.C. Wildfire Service's Shawn Lund told the audience the province expects to
have a system in place by January on how best to contract operators.

Lund said the province had successfully integrated drones into their current
firefighting systems and have had "nothing but success."

Thomasson said there is plenty of room for drone companies in wildfire
management. "The trick for the industry is to find the niche in existing
operations and see where they can fit," he said.

jgraney@postmedia.com twitter.com/jurisgraney

BY THE NUMBERS

1,329 Wildfires in Alberta this year

834 Wildfires started by humans

30,998 Firefighting flying hours clocked this year

9M Litres of fire retardant pumped in 2016 (it's usually around seven million)

$128,561,466 The fiveyear average for aircraft costs in Alberta wildfire
management !@COPYRIGHT=© 2016 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Shaughn Butts; Exhibitors talk shop at the Unmanned Systems Conference
and Trade Show at the Westin Hotel on Tuesday.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Edmonton Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              871 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 24, 2017 Tuesday

Washington: Feinstein: Emergency Bill Provides Relief to California Wildfire
Victims

LENGTH: 345 words



Washington: Office of the Senator Dianne Feinstein has issued the following news
release:
Senator Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) today issued the following statement after
the Senate approved $36.5 billion in emergency funding for wildfire and
hurricane relief:


"As California begins to rebuild after the most destructive wildfires in state
history, these emergency funds are a good start to help communities recover.
More importantly, this aid package represents the best of America, our ability
to come together and help each other in times of need.
"At the height of this month's wildfires, 21 separate fires were burning in
California. The fires killed 42 people, scorched more than 245,000 acres and
destroyed more than 8,400 homes and buildings. The stories of families losing
everything are heartbreaking.
"The bill includes $18.7 billion for FEMA's disaster relief program, which
provides individual assistance for wildfire and hurricane victims, and $576
million to support federal wildfire prevention programs. The bill also includes
$16 billion for hurricane flood insurance claims and $1.3 billion specifically
for food aid to Puerto Rico.
"This disaster relief package will provide a down payment on California's
wildfire recovery efforts, but we still don't know the full cost of the fires.
As damage assessments are completed, California will need additional funding in
the next disaster relief package. I'll continue to work with my colleagues to
make sure full funding is included for all Californians recovering from these
disasters.
 "The recent fires also made it clear we desperately need to fix the federal
government's approach to wildfire funding. That's why I'm working with Senator
Wyden to pass the bipartisan Wildfire Disaster Funding Act, which would allow
the federal government to better prepare for and fight catastrophic wildfires.

"With temperatures soaring into the triple digits and dry winds continuing to
blow, this fire season is far from over. We must take action now to help those
who need it and to prepare for the future."

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              872 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                   Iran Daily

                           February 28, 2017 Tuesday

Humans to blame for 84 percent of wildfires, longer wildfire season

LENGTH: 443  words


Wildfires are getting bigger, more frequent and occurring during a larger
portion of the calendar year. And new research suggested humans are largely to
blame.

Researchers looked at records for every wildfire that required firefighting
between 1992 and 2012. Of the 1.5 million blazes, humans were responsible for
sparking 84 percent, according to UPI.

Humans were also to blame for nearly half, 44 percent, of the acreage burned
over the 20 years.

Lightning was still responsible for more than half of the acreage burned, but
researchers said humans are expanding the 'fire niche' into places where
lightning isn't capable of starting wildfires.

"Humans are expanding fires into more locations and environmental conditions
than lightning is able to reach," researchers wrote in their new paper on the
subject, published in the journal PNAS.

"Human ignitions have expanded the fire niche into areas with historically low
lightning strike density."

Researchers say wildfire mitigation efforts would be well-served to focus on
limiting the human-led expansion of the fire niche.

Such a task will be increasingly difficult as more people move to the Sun Belt
and the suburbs continue to expand.

The growth of the wildland-urban interface -- the percentage of homes and people
living in and on the edge of wild lands -- is a major challenge for forest
managers and those tasked with fighting wildfires. The interface is predicted to
double from nine to 18 percent by 2030.

Bethany Bradley, a researcher at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, said,
"It's generally pretty well known that people start a lot of fires; everything
from campfires to burning yard waste to accidental fires in homes and other
structures.

"But in the past, I used to think of 'wildfire' as a process that was primarily
natural and driven by lightning. This analysis made me realize that human
ignitions have an extraordinary impact on national fire regimes."

Natural wildfires sparked by lightning are largely relegated to the summer
season, when conditions are most likely to be hot and dry.

Manmade fires have extended the fire season into the fall and spring.

Researchers say global warming is likely to increase the risk of wildfire in
many parts of the American West, magnifying the detrimental effects of humans on
national fire regimes.

Bradley said, "We saw significant increases in the numbers of large,
human-started fires over time, especially in the spring.

"I think that's interesting, and scary, because it suggests that as spring
seasons get warmer and earlier due to climate change, human ignitions are
putting us at increasing risk of some of the largest, most damaging wildfires."

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1056


                 Copyright 2017 Iran Cultural & Press Institute
                Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.(Syndigate.info)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              873 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     Nanaimo Daily News (British Columbia)

                           October 7, 2015 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire Service says fire season cost $278K, burned 306 hectares

BYLINE: Jeff Nagel, Black Press

SECTION: B.C.; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 250 words


This year's wildfire season was the third worst in the past decade.

More than 306,000 hectares burned, according to new statistics from the B.C.
Wildfire Service.

That was not as high as the 337,000 hectares burned in 2010 or the 369,000 in
2014.

Nor was it as expensive as some recent years. Fighting the more than 1,800
wildfires

this year cost nearly $278,000, compared to more than $370,000 in both 2003 and
2009.

Provincial officials said good initial attack by firefighting crews succeeded in
keeping many of the fires small and contained despite aggressive wildfire
activity.

About 31 per cent of this year's wildfires were human-caused and therefore
preventable.

Those fires burned more than 57,000 hectares.

Premier Christy Clark thanked firefighters for their efforts Tuesday.

The premier also posthumously honoured John Phare, a Roberts Creek tree faller
who died this summer fighting a fire near Sechelt, with B.C.'s first Medal of
Good Citizenship.

The family of the 60-year-old father of three was at the Legislature Tuesday to
receive the medal. "John Phare died protecting the lives of his friends,
neighbours and family," Clark said.

"We can't ease the pain of everyone who loves and misses him, but we can
recognize his courage and sacrifice.

I can't think of a more deserving recipient of the first Medal of Good
Citizenship." The medal honours those who have made outstanding contributions to
the well-being of their communities. Nominations closed Oct. 2 and more
recipients are to be named.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 Nanaimo Daily News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              874 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                            August 4, 2010 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Hundreds of wildfires raging across B.C.; More areas burned so far this year
than in 2009 fire season

BYLINE: Sam Cooper, Postmedia News; with files from the Calgary Herald

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 300  words

DATELINE: VANCOUVER


A fter a week of surging wildfires across B.C., more hectares of provincial
forest have been burned to date in 2010 than in 2009's fire season.

There are now 398 active forest fires raging in B.C. A whopping 500 fires
started since last Tuesday, according to B.C. fire information officer Gwen
Eamer.

Most blazes are concentrated in the Kamloops, Cariboo and northwest areas of
B.C.

It is estimated that 77,407 hectares have burned across the province this year
since April, compared to about 70,400 hectares destroyed by fire at the start of
August 2009, officials say.

The fires have been started mostly by continued "dry lightning" strikes in the
province's hottest areas, Eamer said.

While temperatures have cooled slightly in the Kamloops and Cariboo fire areas,
officials are still on edge, with "no confidence in any sustained
precipitation," she said.

"The risk of wildfire is still very high, so the campfire ban is still in effect
and just as important as a week ago."

The campfire ban applies to most regions. If anyone is found to be breaking the
campfire ban, a fine of $345 will be levied. And that's not just for the person
who lit the match; every person at the fire will be fined.

Geoffrey Driscoll, a wildfire information officer with Alberta Sustainable
Resource Development, said the province plans to send an additional 85
firefighters to help B.C., raising Alberta's contribution to 193.

The firefighters, who are expected to spend two weeks in B.C., will be called
back to Alberta if the wildfire outlook worsens here, Driscoll said.

On Tuesday, the wildfire risk was rated as low to moderate across Alberta.
However, the province has experienced more wildfires than usual this year.

So far, 1,575 fires have been recorded, about 300 more than the five-year
average for this time of year.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Herald Archive, Postmedia News; The wildfires  have burned 77,407
hectares across B.C. since April. "The risk of  wildfire is still very high,"
says B.C. fire official Gwen Eamer.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2010 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              875 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Abbotsford News

                           September 5, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Largest wildfire in provinceÃ¢â[#x201a]¬â[#x201e]¢s history continues to grow

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 353 words


Not much has changed since the BC Wildfire Service last provided an update on
current wildfire conditions around the province.

They're still desperately waiting for rainfall in the southeast portion of the
province where many of the fires continue to burn, and in the Cariboo Fire
Centre where the largest fire in B.C. history shows no signs of calming down.

The Plateau Fire burning near Williams Lake and Quesnel is now 520,000 hectares
in size. It was first discovered nearly two months ago on July 7. With little
precipitation in the forecast, it's expected to continue growing.

Better success has been had fighting both the Hanceville/Riske Creek fire
burning west of Williams Lake. That blaze is now 50 per cent contained, but
still 238,000 hectares in size and crews on the ground are receiving assistance
from the Canadian Armed Forces.

RELATED: Hot and dry long weekend concerns wildfire crews

Another large fire that is now 50 per cent contained is the Elephant Hill fire
north of Cache Creek, near Ashcroft. It is 192,000 hectares in size and has also
been burning for the past two months. A cause for this fire has yet to be
determined, but RCMP today said they've ruled out the potential scenario of a
train in the area starting the blaze.

There are 162 wildfires burning today in the province and four of those started
yesterday.

Other relatively new fires that have recently broken out include the Finlay
Creek wildfire near Peachland. It is now 1,000 hectares in size and has caused
evacuation alerts in two separate regional districts. This area of the province
has not seen rain since June 15.

The Linklater Creek fire - formerly the Mount Robinson fire - crossed over the
Canadian border near Cranbrook on Aug. 22 and is now 833 hectares in size. The
entire blaze, incluidng south of the border, is 8,200 hectares in total.

So far since April 1, the 2017 wildfire season has cost the BC Wildfire Service
$464.6 million. The 1,207 fires have burned 1,148,928 hectares mostly in the
Cariboo, Kamloops and Southeast Fire Centres.

The most up-to-date information can be found at BC Wildfire .

BC wildfire tweet map

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              876 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Aberdeen Press and Journal

                            April 15, 2015 Wednesday

Wildfire warning after another Moray blaze

BYLINE: Ben Hendry

SECTION: NEWS; OTHER; Others; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 260 words


A Moray hillside was left blackened and charred yesterday after a wildfire swept
across the area overnight.

Six engines were called to the blaze alongside the old railway line by
Cummingston on Monday evening, and firefighters battled for three hours to bring
the flames under control. A patch of countryside roughly the size of two
football pitches was reduced to a burned wasteland after the incident.

Crews were called to the scene at 8.55pm on Monday, and engines from Rothes,
Fochabers, Elgin, Lossiemouth and two from Forres were involved in tackling the
blaze.

A water carrier from Buckie, an incident command unit from Altens, a welfare pod
from Huntly and a forestry pod from Elgin were also dispatched.

The fire was brought under control just after midnight.

The Scottish fire and rescue service and the Scottish Wildfire Forum are warning
the public of the increased risk of wildfire at the moment following the recent
spell of warm, dry weather.

The groups are urging people not to leave materials such as used disposable
barbecues where they could cause a blaze, and are advising against setting
campfires.

And locals are being advised to call 999 if they see what they believe to be a
wildfire.

The Scottish Wildfire Forum's Andy Coueslant said: "We want people to join
Scotland's fight against fire and we are urging communities, tourists and
visitors to be aware of the heightened risk of wildfire at this time of year. We
want people to act responsibly in a countryside environment."

A wildfire broke out at Ben Rinnes, by Keith, two days running last week.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The gorse bush fire, next to the old railway line

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PJ


                      Copyright 2015 Aberdeen Journals Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              877 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Capital (Annapolis, MD)

                           November 19, 2011 Saturday

DNR Digest

SECTION: HOMETOWNANNAPOLIS.CO; Environment; Pg. B9

LENGTH: 542  words


What is the Wildland-Urban Interface and why is it a concern in Maryland?

The Wildland-Urban Interface is a zone where houses and other structures are
built near wooded areas causing them to be more susceptible to wildfires. This
zone has been rapidly expanding in Maryland in recent years, as more and more
people are building in or near forests.

In an average year, there are more than 600 wildfires in Maryland, which burn
over 4,000 acres. This makes wildfire a very real threat.

Since humans cause 98 percent of the fires, the risk associated with wildfire
ignitions in the interface zone inevitably increases. So far this year, 29
structures have been destroyed by wildfires, 15 were damaged and 141 more were
threatened by fire.

For this reason, the Firewise Maryland Program of the Department of Natural
Resources promotes fire awareness and prevention through community outreach.

This includes educating homeowners on how to protect themselves from wildfire
and how to landscape and maintain their yards to minimize risk. The program also
prepares community wildfire protection plans for at-risk Wildland-Urban
Interface communities.

For more information, call 301-791-4010 or visit
dnr.maryland.gov/forests/wfm.asp.

Answered by: David Robbins, wildfire mitigation specialist, Maryland Forest
Service

CREATURE FEATURE

Northern Green Frog Lithobates clamitans melanota

The northern green frog, which is green or bronze to olive-brown in color, is an
abundant species that lives throughout most of Eastern North America.<0x00A0>It
inhabits diverse aquatic environments in Maryland, including freshwater marshes,
shallow ponds and small streams.

Ranging from 2<0x00BC> to 4<0x00BC> inches in length, a northern green frog will
eat any living thing it can capture and swallow. It devours insects, spiders,
fish, crayfish, shrimp, other frogs, tadpoles, small snakes, birds and snails.

The green frog has often been confused with a bullfrog; however, bullfrogs are
much larger and lack dorsolateral ridges (a pair of parallel folds extending
two-thirds of the way down the green frog's back).

The male defends its territory at the edges of streams and ponds, and may
vocally or physically attack intruders. Its mating call is rather explosive and
sounds like the twang of a loose banjo string, gungk.

Because many animals eat tadpoles and frogs, females lay up to 3,000 eggs at a
time. The eggs are connected in a thin gelatinous film that floats on the
water's surface. Embryos take about a month to hatch and transform into
tadpoles.<0x00A0>

Metamorphosis from tadpoles to adult body can take up to one year, depending on
water temperature and food availability.

DID YOU KNOW?

Tree loss in the Baltimore-Washington region since 1973 has resulted in a 19
percent increase in stormwater runoff at a cost of $1.08 billion.

Visit trees.maryland.gov to plant and register a tree, and save money with a $25
off coupon that can be used at more than 80 nurseries.

TIP OF THE WEEK

When planning your Thanksgiving feast, reduce your environmental impact by
shopping close to home and buying locally produced foods.<0x00A0>Buying local
reduces pollution created by transporting food from out of state to your table.
Visit mda.state.md.us/mdproducts/md to find Maryland turkey farms.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2011 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              878 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                            February 23, 2018 Friday

Fitch: CA Wildfires Could Threaten IOU Credit Quality

LENGTH: 746 words



New York: Potential credit risks to investor-owned electric utilities (IOUs) in
California are growing given increased incidence of large wildfires coupled with
the application of inverse condemnation to IOUs without a clear path to timely
or assured recovery of related costs, according to Fitch Ratings.  In what may
be the "new normal" for the state, Fitch notes that the large dollar amount
involved in recent fires, the time to resolution and the recent decision in a 10
year-old San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E) case further adds to uncertainty. In
late November, the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) denied SDG&E's
application to recover $379 million of 2007 wildfire-related costs and legal
fees incurred by SDG&E to settle third-party claims brought under inverse
condemnation laws.



 The CPUC decision in the SDG&E proceeding essentially adopted the
administrative law judge's August 2017 proposed decision, finding that SDG&E did
not reasonably manage and operate its facilities prior to the fires. The ruling
rendered moot a second phase of the proceeding that would have considered the
reasonableness of SDG&E's actions in settling legal claims and costs related to
the wildfires.

 Total costs associated with the 2007 wildfires were $2.4 billion. SDG&E booked
a third-quarter 2017 pretax charge of $351 million ($208 million after tax)
following the administrative law judge's proposed decision issued in August 2017
denying recovery of the regulatory asset over six years as proposed by the
company. SDG&E has indicated that it would apply at the CPUC for rehearing if
the commission adopted the ALJ's proposed decision and, if necessary, seek
judicial review.

 The SDG&E case is especially pertinent given the wildfires currently raging
across parts of Southern California Edison's (SCE) service territory and recent
devastating fires in PG&E's service territory. The 2017 Southern California
wildfires, according to media reports, have burned more than 200,000 acres
driven by dry conditions and Santa Ana winds. The Northern California wildfires,
among the largest on record in the state, burned 245,000 acres, destroyed 8,900
structures and resulted in 43 deaths.

 By way of comparison, Cal Fire's report on its investigation into the September
2015 Butte fire, also in PG&E's service territory, indicates the fire burned
70,868 acres, destroyed 921 structures (549 homes, 368 outbuildings and four
commercial structures) and resulted in two fatalities. PG&E estimates the low
end of its potential exposure to the Butte fire at $1.1 billion. Fitch expects
PG&E's potential liabilities from the Northern California wildfires to be a
multiple of the Butte fire and expects the utility to oppose the application of
inverse condemnation.

 The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (Cal Fire) is
investigating the causes of the catastrophic Northern California wildfires,
including the possible role of power lines and other PG&E facilities and will
also investigate the recent Southern California fires as well. Fitch believes
potential liability and funding requirements associated with the Northern
California and 2015 Butte wildfires could result in future credit rating
downgrades for PG&E and its corporate parent, PG&E Corp., should the utility be
found to have caused the fires and inverse condemnation is adopted by the
courts.

 The potential impact to PG&E's creditworthiness will be driven by the magnitude
of the utility's financial liability (post-insurance and third-party recoveries)
and regulatory treatment and funding of fire-related liabilities. Determination
of these liabilities and recoveries are expected to develop over several years.
California courts have typically applied inverse condemnation in previous fires
including the aforementioned SDG&E and Butte wildfires. Timing of completion and
release of Cal Fire's investigation and report in the Northern California
wildfires is uncertain but seems likely to take longer than the seven months
that elapsed to complete and release the Butte fire investigation and report.

 If PG&E and SCE are deemed to have caused the wildfires and inverse
condemnation is invoked, Fitch would expect the utilities to seek recovery of
net costs incurred by the utilities under inverse condemnation from customers.
Authorization to recover such costs from customers by the CPUC, however, is not
assured, could take many years and is a key source of uncertainty, in Fitch's
opinion.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              879 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 9, 2017 Tuesday

Washington: Udall Secures $407 Million for Emergency Wildfire Suppression in
Bipartisan Budget Agreement

LENGTH: 576  words





Washington: Office of the Senator Tom Udall has issued the following news
release:

Today, U.S. Senator Tom Udall, lead Democrat on the subcommittee overseeing
funding for the Department of Interior and Forest Service, announced that an
additional $407 million for emergency wildfire suppression will be included as
part of a bipartisan budget agreement to fund the government through September.
The funding bill -- also known as an omnibus appropriations bill -- passed the
U.S. House of Representatives by a vote of 309-118 on Wednesday, and is expected
to pass the Senate before the end of the week.


The emergency funding will enable the U.S. Forest Service to pay for the most
severe fires while maintaining its funding for programs designed to prevent
future wildfires. In the last several years, the combination of tight budgets,
unrealistic funding constraints, and a growing number of severe wildfires have
forced the Forest Service to dip into funds for forest health and watershed
protection to pay for emergency wildfire fighting -- taking money from programs
that work on preventative measures to limit future wildfires. Udall has long
advocated for Congress to treat the most severe fires like other natural
disasters, such as hurricanes, floods and tornadoes, and pay for them through
the federal emergency fund. Today, wildfire suppression is funded as part of the
Forest Service and Interior Department budgets.
"From Whitewater-Baldy to Las Conchas to Little Bear, New Mexicans know too well
the increasingly frequent and severe damage that wildfires can inflict on our
state," Udall said. "For too many years we have been underfunding emergency
firefighting, fueling a destructive cycle in which the Forest Service has to tap
funding for programs to prevent wildfires tomorrow, in order to fight severe
fires today. We need to end this cycle of 'fire borrowing' -- for the sake of
our communities' safety and our forests' health and the protection of the
watersheds that sustain our communities. That's why I worked hard, to secure an
additional $407 million for emergency firefighting needs in the omnibus
appropriations bill this week. I am committed to continuing to do everything I
can to equip the Forest Service with the resources it needs to help protect our
communities, our watersheds and our forests. This additional funding will get us
through this fire season. But we need a permanent solution -- it's high time we
treated wildfires in the West like we do natural disasters in other parts of the
country -- without shortchanging communities by taking funds from other
important programs at the Forest Service or Interior Department."
The bill provides a total of $4.2 billion for wildland fire management
activities at the Forest Service and Interior Department. This includes $2.05
billion for wildfire suppression for the agencies to respond to forest fires,
which with carryover balances fully funds estimated firefighting needs. A total
of $407 million is provided on an emergency basis in order to prevent the
agencies from resorting to borrowing from non-fire accounts and having to put
ongoing restoration, construction, and acquisition projects in jeopardy of
permanently losing funding and momentum. The bill also provides an increase to
hazardous fuels reduction programs, including $390 million for the Forest
Service and $180 million for the Interior Department, which is a total of $25
million above the enacted level.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              880 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            BBC Monitoring Kiev Unit
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                             August 6, 2010 Friday

Ukrainian TV highlights 5 Aug 10

LENGTH: 832 words


The spread of wildfires in Ukraine and the discussion of the situation at a
meeting of the National Security and Defence Council chaired by President Viktor
Yanukovych in Crimea were among the top stories on Ukrainian TV channels'
evening news bulletins on 5 August. The channels also covered the police
announcement that they have broken up of a gang involved in illegal organ
transplantation in Kiev. The following are summaries of the news bulletins
broadcast by the Inter, Ukrayina, ICTV, 5 Kanal, and UT1 TV channels on 5 August
2010:

Inter TV 1700 gmt (privately-owned)

1. The police say they have broken up a gang engaged in illegal transplantation
of human organs. Surgeons in Kiev deny wrongdoing.

2. Wildfires raged in Dnipropetrovsk Region today. The fires have been put out.

3. President Viktor Yanukovych urges action to ensure fire safety.

4. Prayer services are held in Poltava for the heat wave to subside and rain to
fall.

5. Ukrainian firefighters help Russian colleagues to put out wildfires.

6. Smog has covered Moscow. Video report about heat wave in Moscow.

7. Russia bans grain export.

8. Two Ukrainian seaman return from captivity in Somalia.

9. Local news.

10. Descendants of Nazi soldiers hold an action of reconciliation in Kiev at the
site of mass murders of Jews.

11. Foreign news.

Ukrayina TV 1600 gmt (privately-owned)

1. Headlines.

2. Wildfires near Pavlohrad in Dnipropetrovsk Region lead to the evacuation of
village residents. Emergencies Ministry personnel are fighting fires at a
training range near Novomoskovsk, Dnipropetrovsk Region.

3. Regional governors and cabinet ministers attend an emergency meeting of the
national security council devoted to the fire situation.

4. Ukrainian firefighters leave for Russia to help fight wildfires in Moscow
Region. A resident of Moscow is shown accusing the authorities of inaction.
Residents of Russia's regions are shown complaining that they have difficulty
getting financial assistance promised by the authorities.

5. Foreign: wildfires in Georgia; a new protest rally in Kyrgyzstan.

6. Education Minister Dmytro Tabachnyk summarizes the enrolment campaign at
universities. School leavers are shown complaining about long lines at enrolment
commissions.

7. A Kiev Region official says a few small forest fires have been extinguished
near Kiev.

8. President Yanukovych calls for stepping up fire-prevention measures.
Foresters in Crimea are shown commenting. No fires have been registered in
Crimean forests so far.

9. Video of a fire near Sevastopol uploaded to the Internet is shown.

10. The police bust a group of surgeons involved in illegal organ
transplantation.

11. A giant piranha was caught in Kherson Region.

12. A World Press Photo exhibition opens in Kiev.

13. A resident of Donetsk carves Yanukovych's portrait on a watermelon.

14. Italian "pilotless" cars arrive in Ukraine en route to China.

ICTV TV 1545 gmt (privately-owned)

1. President Yanukovych chairs meeting of the National Security and Defence
Council. Wildfires destroy 200 ha of forest in Dnipropetrovsk.

2. Some 48 ha of forest are ablaze near Pavlohrad, Dnipropetrovsk Region.

3. Wildfires rage in Russia. President Medvedev sack some army officers.

4. Many people in Kiev are injured when sunbathing and swimming.

5. The Education Ministry will change rules for enrolment to universities.

6. Shortage of kindergartens is reported in Kiev.

7. Local news.

8. Culture.

9. Descendants of Nazi soldiers hold an action of reconciliation in Kiev at the
site of mass murders of Jews.

5 Kanal TV 1500 gmt (privately-owned, news-based)

1. Wildfires are raging in Dniopropetrovsk Region, Crimea.

2. President Viktor Yanukovych returns from leave, urges action to deal with
wildfires and close access to the woods.

3. Wildfires rage in Russia.

4. Wildfires are reported in Georgia too.

5. Surgeons engaged in illegal transplants are arrested in Kiev. A police
spokesman says that some 200,000 dollars were confiscated from a surgeon
involved.

6. Kyrgyz opposition stage protests in Bishkek.

7. Greece receives another tranche of IMF loan.

8. Descendants of German WWII soldiers hold a reconciliation action in Kiev.

9. Culture.

UT1 TV 1800 gmt (state-owned)

1. President Yanukovych holds an extraordinary meeting of the National Security
and Defence Council to discuss the wildfire situation. Video of wildfires in
Dnipropetrovsk Region. Yanukovych says that action is needed to prevent fires.

2. Heat wave continues in Ukraine. Railway passengers are affected.

3. Report about wildfires in Russia.

4. Police says its has broken up a gang of surgeons engaged in illegal
transplants in Kiev. The Kiev Shalimov transplant centre denies involvement,
says that no surgeon was arrested.

5. Entrance campaign to Ukrainian universities ends.

6. Descendants of Nazi soldiers hold an action of reconciliation in Kiev at the
site of mass murders of Jews.

7. An Italian-made car that moves without petrol or a driver arrives in Kiev.

8. Culture.

Source: as listed, in Ukrainian and Russian 5 Aug 10

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2010 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              881 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            October 24, 2017 Tuesday

Easy ways to help victims of the Wine Country fires

BYLINE: The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1052 words


Oct. 24--As the smoke starts to settle, the damage left by the North Bay
wildfires is painfully clear. Thousands of structures were destroyed, there are
billions of dollars in damages and 42 people confirmed dead. The threat of the
fires may have ended, but the long road to recovery is just beginning.

Here are some easy ways you can help those affected by the wildfires.

The Press Democrat, Sen. Mike McGuire and the Redwood Credit Union have teamed
up to create the North Bay Fire Relief fund to assist fire victims and aid
relief efforts. 100 percent of donations will go directly to support those
affected. More information: North Bay Fire Relief Fund

Sub-Zero Nitrogen Ice Cream is selling "Nor-Cal Strong" t-shirts at $20 a piece
with 100 percent of the proceeds going to the Redwood Credit Union North Bay
Fire Relief Fund. So treat yourself to a cup of organic, liquid nitrogen, ice
cream and help wildfire victims in the process. More information: Sub-Zero
Nitrogen Ice Cream, Sebastopol

The Sonoma County Resilience Fund is an organization dedicated to raising
donations to address the mid to long term needs of Sonoma County residents and
businesses impacted by the wildfires. More information:
www.sonomacf.org/sonoma-county-resilience-fund

Rotary of Sonoma Valley has assembled an impressive donation page for victims,
evacuees and first responders of the wildfires. Their motto is "service over
self" and they are pledging 100 percent of the donations to continue to provide
support for all affected by the wildfires. More information:
www.youcaring.com/victimsevacueesandfirstrespondersforsonomafires-977708

Sonoma County Grape Growers Foundation is accepting donations that will go
directly to agricultural workers and their families hit hard by the wildfires
impact on Sonoma's famous wine industry. More information: www.scggf.org

The Napa and Sonoma County Fire Relief campaign is collecting money that will go
directly to those who deserve it most, the brave men and women fighting the
fires. The funds will be spread out to organizations such as: Sonoma Valley and
Fire Rescue Authority, Napa County Fire Department and Lake County Fire and
Rescue. More information: www.gofundme.com/napa-sonoma-fires

The California Fire Relief homepage on gofundme is an excellent source of
campaigns for those affected by the wildfires. You can help Safari West
employees, an autism school or a 10-year-old amputee. Whatever you decide to
donate to, it's going to be a good choice. More information:
www.gofundme.com/raise-funds/CAfirerelief

In addition to the devastation suffered by the wine industry, the cannabis
industry was hit hard by the destruction of the wildfires. YouCaring has set up
a CalGrowers wildfire recovery fund to assist legal cannabis growers with
recovery. More information here:
www.youcaring.com/growersincaliforniawhohavebeenimpactedbywildfires-977705

Those associated with Santa Rosa Junior College is another group hit hard by the
wildfires. More than a hundred students, staff and faculty members lost their
homes to the fires and thousands more have been displaced. SRJC has set up a
fire relief fund with all proceeds going directly to the school population
affected. More information: santarosajc.ejoinme.org/firerelief

An estimated 28,000 undocumented immigrants live and work in Sonoma County. Due
to their immigration status they are not eligible for FEMA assistance.
Undocufund makes it possible for one of Sonoma County's largest and most
important populations to receive the aid they desperately need. More
information: undocufund.org

The Graton Day Labor Center has also established a fund accepting donations for
undocumented peoples affected by the wildfires. You can also join them on 10/28
for their annual event "love and Justice" that will directly benefit the
center's reconstruction work program and Undocufund Fire Relief. More
information: www.gratondaylabor.org

Wine Country Animal Lovers has a page that accepts donations which go directly
to all animals in need following the wildfires. More information:
www.winecountryanimallovers.org/donate

On Oct. 28 from 12 p.m. until 4 p.m., a one-day Charity Pop Up Art Show
benefiting the victims of the North Bay Fires will be held at Santa Rosa's Agent
Ink Gallery. There will be very limited exclusive #SITCM tees available with all
proceeds going to wildfire victims. More information: agentinkgallery.com

Craft breweries across Sonoma County have joined together to create an exclusive
"Sonoma Pride" beer with all proceeds going directly to wildfire victims. More
information: www.sonomapride.com

Sonoma County artists and designers have lent their talents to creating unique
handcrafted goods with all proceeds going to benefit those affected. More
information:
www.sonomamag.com/wine-country-fires-artists-and-designers-create-artwork-decals
-prints-for-fire-relief/

Buying wine directly from Sonoma County wineries is one way to help victims of
the wildfires. Here's a list of seven wines you can buy right now to help those
affected. More information:
www.sonomamag.com/wine-country-fires-sonoma-wines-buy-right-now-support-fire-rel
ief/

Need a spa day? Elements On the Plaza in Healdsburg is donating 15 percent of
all proceeds from spa treatments directly to the Redwood Credit Union Fire
Relief fund. More information: www.elementsskincarestudio.com

On Oct. 28, Molsberry Market will host a BBQ to raise money for wildfire victims
from 11 a.m. until 5 p.m. Enjoy hot dogs, hamburgers and refreshments. 100
percent of the proceeds will be donated to fire relief. More information:
facebook.com/Molsberry-Market-168497076504159

All Oliver's Markets in Sonoma County will be matching any donation made to the
North Bay Fire Relief Fund. More information: www.oliversmarket.com

Need a haircut? Great Clips Santa Rosa is donating $1 of every haircut to
victims of the wildfires. More information: www.greatclips.com/salons/5272

Sushi anyone? Boathouse Sushi in Santa Rosa will be donating a portion of sales
to wildfire relief funds. More information: www.boathousesushi.com

Do you know of anything we missed? Please email the details to
info@pressdemocrat.com

___ (c)2017 The Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, Calif.) Visit The Press Democrat
(Santa Rosa, Calif.) at www.pressdemocrat.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20171024-UR-Easy-ways-to-help-victims-of-the-Wine-Country-fires-1024-20171024

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UR


                       Copyright 2017 The Press Democrat


                              882 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            October 24, 2017 Tuesday

Easy ways to help victims of the Wine Country fires

BYLINE: The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1052 words


Oct. 24--As the smoke starts to settle, the damage left by the North Bay
wildfires is painfully clear. Thousands of structures were destroyed, there are
billions of dollars in damages and 42 people confirmed dead. The threat of the
fires may have ended, but the long road to recovery is just beginning.

Here are some easy ways you can help those affected by the wildfires.

The Press Democrat, Sen. Mike McGuire and the Redwood Credit Union have teamed
up to create the North Bay Fire Relief fund to assist fire victims and aid
relief efforts. 100 percent of donations will go directly to support those
affected. More information: North Bay Fire Relief Fund

Sub-Zero Nitrogen Ice Cream is selling "Nor-Cal Strong" t-shirts at $20 a piece
with 100 percent of the proceeds going to the Redwood Credit Union North Bay
Fire Relief Fund. So treat yourself to a cup of organic, liquid nitrogen, ice
cream and help wildfire victims in the process. More information: Sub-Zero
Nitrogen Ice Cream, Sebastopol

The Sonoma County Resilience Fund is an organization dedicated to raising
donations to address the mid to long term needs of Sonoma County residents and
businesses impacted by the wildfires. More information:
www.sonomacf.org/sonoma-county-resilience-fund

Rotary of Sonoma Valley has assembled an impressive donation page for victims,
evacuees and first responders of the wildfires. Their motto is "service over
self" and they are pledging 100 percent of the donations to continue to provide
support for all affected by the wildfires. More information:
www.youcaring.com/victimsevacueesandfirstrespondersforsonomafires-977708

Sonoma County Grape Growers Foundation is accepting donations that will go
directly to agricultural workers and their families hit hard by the wildfires
impact on Sonoma's famous wine industry. More information: www.scggf.org

The Napa and Sonoma County Fire Relief campaign is collecting money that will go
directly to those who deserve it most, the brave men and women fighting the
fires. The funds will be spread out to organizations such as: Sonoma Valley and
Fire Rescue Authority, Napa County Fire Department and Lake County Fire and
Rescue. More information: www.gofundme.com/napa-sonoma-fires

The California Fire Relief homepage on gofundme is an excellent source of
campaigns for those affected by the wildfires. You can help Safari West
employees, an autism school or a 10-year-old amputee. Whatever you decide to
donate to, it's going to be a good choice. More information:
www.gofundme.com/raise-funds/CAfirerelief

In addition to the devastation suffered by the wine industry, the cannabis
industry was hit hard by the destruction of the wildfires. YouCaring has set up
a CalGrowers wildfire recovery fund to assist legal cannabis growers with
recovery. More information here:
www.youcaring.com/growersincaliforniawhohavebeenimpactedbywildfires-977705

Those associated with Santa Rosa Junior College is another group hit hard by the
wildfires. More than a hundred students, staff and faculty members lost their
homes to the fires and thousands more have been displaced. SRJC has set up a
fire relief fund with all proceeds going directly to the school population
affected. More information: santarosajc.ejoinme.org/firerelief

An estimated 28,000 undocumented immigrants live and work in Sonoma County. Due
to their immigration status they are not eligible for FEMA assistance.
Undocufund makes it possible for one of Sonoma County's largest and most
important populations to receive the aid they desperately need. More
information: undocufund.org

The Graton Day Labor Center has also established a fund accepting donations for
undocumented peoples affected by the wildfires. You can also join them on 10/28
for their annual event "love and Justice" that will directly benefit the
center's reconstruction work program and Undocufund Fire Relief. More
information: www.gratondaylabor.org

Wine Country Animal Lovers has a page that accepts donations which go directly
to all animals in need following the wildfires. More information:
www.winecountryanimallovers.org/donate

On Oct. 28 from 12 p.m. until 4 p.m., a one-day Charity Pop Up Art Show
benefiting the victims of the North Bay Fires will be held at Santa Rosa's Agent
Ink Gallery. There will be very limited exclusive #SITCM tees available with all
proceeds going to wildfire victims. More information: agentinkgallery.com

Craft breweries across Sonoma County have joined together to create an exclusive
"Sonoma Pride" beer with all proceeds going directly to wildfire victims. More
information: www.sonomapride.com

Sonoma County artists and designers have lent their talents to creating unique
handcrafted goods with all proceeds going to benefit those affected. More
information:
www.sonomamag.com/wine-country-fires-artists-and-designers-create-artwork-decals
-prints-for-fire-relief/

Buying wine directly from Sonoma County wineries is one way to help victims of
the wildfires. Here's a list of seven wines you can buy right now to help those
affected. More information:
www.sonomamag.com/wine-country-fires-sonoma-wines-buy-right-now-support-fire-rel
ief/

Need a spa day? Elements On the Plaza in Healdsburg is donating 15 percent of
all proceeds from spa treatments directly to the Redwood Credit Union Fire
Relief fund. More information: www.elementsskincarestudio.com

On Oct. 28, Molsberry Market will host a BBQ to raise money for wildfire victims
from 11 a.m. until 5 p.m. Enjoy hot dogs, hamburgers and refreshments. 100
percent of the proceeds will be donated to fire relief. More information:
facebook.com/Molsberry-Market-168497076504159

All Oliver's Markets in Sonoma County will be matching any donation made to the
North Bay Fire Relief Fund. More information: www.oliversmarket.com

Need a haircut? Great Clips Santa Rosa is donating $1 of every haircut to
victims of the wildfires. More information: www.greatclips.com/salons/5272

Sushi anyone? Boathouse Sushi in Santa Rosa will be donating a portion of sales
to wildfire relief funds. More information: www.boathousesushi.com

Do you know of anything we missed? Please email the details to
info@pressdemocrat.com

___ (c)2017 The Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, Calif.) Visit The Press Democrat
(Santa Rosa, Calif.) at www.pressdemocrat.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20171024-UR-Easy-ways-to-help-victims-of-the-Wine-Country-fires-1024-20171024

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UR


                       Copyright 2017 The Press Democrat


                              883 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    The Record (Kitchener-Waterloo, Ontario)

                           December 6, 2006 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

MINOR SPORTS SCOREBOARD

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 4535  words


Team representatives are reminded that the names of goal scorers from both teams
are required in the results of games played between teams from within Waterloo
Region and the Record's coverage area.

SKATING

Results for the KW Skating Club from

various events.

WESTERN CHALLENGE

PRE-NOVICE MEN

18th: Alexander Sheldrick.

PRE-NOVICE DANCE

1st: Michaela Botsford and Scott Botsford.

3rd: Olga Lioudvinevitch and Benjamin Mulder.

6th: Rebecca Nelles and Dylan Simpson.

NOVICE MEN

1st: Brandon Armstrong.

Novice Dance

6th: Kelsey Valentine and Tyler Morris.

8th: Emily Stoll and Allan Stoll.

9th: Lindsey von Bloedau and Stefan Schneider.

JUNIOR DANCE

2nd: Anna Stanislavska and Michael Whitehead.

3rd: Brooklyn Vienneau and Jonathan Cluett.

EASTERN CHALLENGE

PRE-NOVICE PAIR

7th: Marissa MacLellan and Kurtis Gaskell.

RINGETTE

NOVICE SINGLE-C

Elora Fergus 6 Waterloo Wildfire C2 1

Elora Fegus: Rachel Alden 2, Kelsey Hamilton, Emily Young, Alexis Schuett,
Mackenzie Wass. Assists: Shaylee Tait, Taylor Thorpe.

Waterloo: Cassandra Plouffe.

Owen Sound 5 Waterloo Wildfire C2 2

Waterloo: Sierra Dowling, Antonia Anagnastopolous. Assists: Samantha Panchaud,
Dowling.

PETITE SINGLE-B

Owen Sound 5 Waterloo Wildfire 2

Waterloo: Felicia Corrado, Larissa Dufresne. Assists: Chloe Norris, Alicia
Bettridge.

Kitchener 4 Waterloo Wildfire B1 1

Kitchener: Jesse McDonald, Kimber Anderson, Kristen Lawrence, Nicole Howey.
Assists: Allison Ropp, Lauren Thomas, Kimber Anderson, Jesse McDonald.

Waterloo Wildfire: Nicole Kupferschmidt, Katie Sieling

Waterloo Wildfire B1 7 Kitchener 0

Waterloo Wildfire: Amanda Murray 2, Jessica Pett, Jodie-Lynn Drover, Michelle
Crane, Riley Howitt, Kupferschmidt.

Assists: Emily Pyatt, Murray, Michelle Crane, Jade Antaya, Cassia Deering,
Brianna Ducharme-Felts, Alison Reichard, Tracey Scanling, Sieling. Shutout:
Kayla Widish.

BELLE SINGLE-A

Results for the Cambridge Turbos at the National Ringette League Canada Cup at
York University.

Jordon 5 Cambridge Turbos 1

Cambridge: Stephanie Rideout. Assists: Michelle Bedard.

Cambridge Turbos 5 Gloucester 5

Cambridge: Shannon Corbett 2, Brittaney Becker, Meaghan Smith. Assists: Sydney
Leung 2, Rideout, Meaghan Koehler, Michelle Bedard, Nicole Costa.

Whitby 13 Cambridge Turbos 2

Cambridge: Koehler, Leung. Assists: Smith 2.

Cambridge Turbos 4 Sault Ste. Marie 2

Cambridge: Smith 2, Koeler, Kaitlyn Butler. Assists: Corbett 2, Bedard, Smith.

Meaghan Smith of the Camridge Turbos placed second overall in the skills
competition.

JUNIOR SINGLE-B

Mitchell 8 Waterloo Wildfire 3

Waterloo: Lilly Wettlaufer 2, Julia Ennis. Assists: Shannon Christian, Lyndsay
Houghtling, Melanie Steinberg.

Paris 4 Waterloo Wildfire 0

Tillsonburg 8 Waterloo Wildfire 2

Waterloo: Julia Ennis 2. Assists: Shannon Christian 2.

OPEN DOUBLE-A

Waterloo Wildfire 9 Richmond Hill Lightning 5

Waterloo: Katie Allen 2, Shelly Kraemer 2, Lindsey Vivian 2, Lisa Pinciuc, Tara
Gross, Amanda Somerville. Assists: Gross 2, Somerville, Pinciuc, Erin Voss,
Brittany Rieck, Kelly Rodgers, Ainslay Kerr.

Waterloo Wildfire 6 Goucester Devils 5

Waterloo: Shelly Kraemer 2, Katie Allen, Lindsey Vivian, Tara Gross, Amanda
Somerville. Assists: Allen 2, Kraemer, Vivian, Somerville, Pinciuc, Rodgers,
Jenn Walker, Kerr.

Cambridge Turbos 7 Waterloo Wildfire 2

Cambridge: Brittany Walden 3, Jen Gaudet 2, Sharolyn Wouters, Christina
Mascherin. Assists: Wouters 2, Jen Gaudet 2, Jackie Gaudet 2, Vanessa Cowlen 2,
Nicki Madsen, Courtney Schell.

Waterloo: Vivian, Rodgers. Assists: Vivian, Pinciuc.

BUNNY

Results for Kitchener at the Dorchester Tournament.

Kitchener 7 Tillsonburg 1

Kitchener: Marlee Allen 4, Danielle Roussin, Reed Cormier Jessie Burke. Assists:
Sauve 2, Cormier 2, Burke, Allen.

Kitchener 13 Dorchester 3

Kitchener: Marlee Allen 2, Reed Cormier 2, Jessie Burke 2, Lauren George 2,
Danielle Roussin, Nicole Sauve, Lexie Zadorozniak, Jessica Leclerc, Shayna
Dramnitzke. Assists: Roussin 2, Allen, George, Leclerc, Burke.

Gold Medal Game

Kitchener 12 Dorchester 1

Kitchener: Danielle Roussin 2, Reed Cormier 2, Jessie Burke 2, Shayna
Dramnitzke, Nicole Sauve, Lauren George, Isobel Payne, Lauren George. Assists:
Lexie Zadorozniak, Roussin 2, Payne, Dramnitzke,

NOVICE SINGLE-C

Kitchener 5 Guelph 3

Kitchener: Jordan Smith 2, Abigail Vanderkloet, Erika Carmichael, Samantha
Bannister. Assists: Jordan Smith

Guelph Goals: Ijeoma Staunton 3. Assist: Emily Sturgeon.

Results from the Mitchell Tournament.

Kitchener 11 Mitchell Team Two 0

Kitchener: Jordan Smith 3, Mikaila Beach 2, Lauren Sharpe 2, Laura Hodder 2, Sam
Basely, Anna Lawrence.

Assists: Lauren Sharpe 2, Ryan Dennison, Sam Bazely, Erika Carmichael, Sam
Bannister. Shut Out: Abigail Vanderkloet.

Kitchener 9 Exeter 8

Kitchener Goals: Laura Hodder 5, Mikaila Beach 3, Jordan Smith. Assists: Mikaila
Beach, Laura Hodder, Danica McVeigh.

Kitchener 7 Mitchell Team One 5

Kitchener Goals: Anna Lawrence 5, Jordan Smith, Mikaila Beach. Assists: Samantha
Bannister, Erika Carmichael.

Gold Medal Game

Kitchener 4 Hanover 3

Kitchener: Anna Lawrence 2, Mikaila Beach 2. Assists: Jordan Smith, Erika
Carmichael, Danica MeVeigh, Lauren Sharpe, Laura Hodder.

NOVICE B

Elora-Fergus 8 Kitchener 5

Kitchener: Mikala Baker 3, Meghan Lanteigne 2. Assists: Molly Riediger, Amy
Burke 2, Jessica Quinn, Tara Burke, Madison Cormier.

Elora Fergus: Erica Johnston 3, Hayley Chase 3, Leah Shantz, Jessica Sealey.
Assists: Kiera Kaminski, Rose Williams, Lindsay Hutchins, Sealey, Sara
Abercrouhie 2, Mariah Coverdale 3, Hayley Chase 2, Raychel McIntosh, Tegan
McManus 2.

Results from the Dorchester Tournament.

Kitchener 6 London 3

Kitchener: Meghan Lanteigne 3, Jessica Quinn, Madison Cormier, Danielle
Devorski. Assists: Lanteigne 2, Taylor Matthews 2, Quinn.

Kitchener 8 Exeter 3

Kitchener Goals: Meghan Lanteigne 3, Madison Cormier 3, Mikala Baker, Abigayle
Black. Assists: Amy Burke, Danielle Devorski, Tara Burke 2, Cormier.

Kitchener 13 Dorchester 2

Kitchener: Meghan Lanteigne 2, Madison Cormier 2, Amy Schultz 2, Jessica Quinn,
Mikala Baker 4, Amy Burke. Assists: Cormier 5, Tara Burke 3, Mikala Baker 2,
Lanteigne 2, Taylor Matthews 2, Danielle Devorski, Quinn, Molly Riediger, Burke
2.

Gold Medal Game

Kitchener 4 London 2.

Kitchener: Amy Burke, Molly Riediger, Abigayle Black, Meghan Lanteign. Assists:
Amy Schultz 2, Lanteigne, Riediger.

TWEEN

HANOVER 9 KITCHENER 2

Kitchener Goals: Amanda Bateman, Jess Lawrence. Assists: Caitlin Carmount.

JUNIOR

Kitchener 4 Woolwich 2

Kitchener: Samantha Lanteigne, Kaitlyn Halk, Sydney Schultz, Kaitlyn Halk.
Assists: Maxine Beck, Lanteigne, Emily McDonald, Rebecca Snyder.

Kitchener 5 Guelph 4

Kitchener: Stephanie Dowsett 2, Sydney Schultz, Samantha Lanteigne, Rebecca
Snyder. Assists: Lanteigne 2, Kate Heeley, Maxine Beck.

Guelph: Bennett 2, Sweeney 2. Assists: Woolnaugh 2, Button, Pezzano, Young,
Walker.

MAJOR BUNNY

Cambridge 12 Waterloo 2

Cambridge: Brileigh Taylor 4, Madeline Baker 3, Julia Ratz 2, Sydney Lane,
Briana Norlock, Hannah Taylor. Assists: Brileigh Taylor 2, Baker 2, Hannah
Taylor 2, Mikayla Tonner.

Waterloo: Madeline MacLean 2. Assists: Julia Panagapka, Kristyn Crocker.

HOCKEY

GIRLS

NOVICE SINGLE-A

Waterloo 8 Kitchener 5

Waterloo: Alyssa Chiarello 4, Megan Dalley 4. Assists: Misha McCaughan, Chelsey
Lucyk, Alicia Fisher, Jaclyn Strauss, Emma Cheeseman.

Waterloo: Megan Fergusson 2, Abby Renon 2, Siobhan McAdam. Assists: Taylor
Lockwood, Siobhan McAdam, Claudia Ill.

Waterloo 6 Burlington 4

Waterloo: Emily Buttinger 2, Megan Dalley 2, Alyssa Chiarello 2. Assists: Nicole
Mills, Misha McCaughan, Dalley, Katarina Klassen.

Waterloo 3 Burlington 3

Waterloo: Megan Dalley 3.

ATOM SINGLE-B

Buffalo 4 Kitchener 1

Kitchener: Briley Gregory. Assists: Shyanne Langer, Emily Stickle.

BOYS

NOVICE MD TIER 1

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 2

Waterloo Ice Wolves 1

Kitchener: Lucas Dybowski, Owen Lane. Assists: Spencer Bean, Owen Lane, Caleb
Hallman, Shawn Marson.

Waterloo: Samuel Cherry. Assist: Troy Moffitt.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 4

Stratford Hishons 4

Kitchener: Lucas Dybowski 2, Spencer Bean, Hallman. Assists: Bean, Braydan
Knowles, Dybowski, Matthieu LaRochelle, Bean, Logan George, Nathan Topham.

Brantford 99ers 5 Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 4

Kitchener: Will Shaver 2, Jordan McConnell, Nolan Kelly. Assists: Chase Campbell
2, Ben Ross-Black.

MINOR ATOM TRIPLE-A

Waterloo Wolves 5

Sun County 3

Waterloo: Kurtis Woodland, Cody Handke, Gary Mantz 2, Daniel Preston

Assists: Adam Ciuman, Jamie Collins, Tyler Douse, Cody Handke 3, Kyle Soper,
Gary Mantz.

Waterloo Wolves 2 Windsor 0

Waterloo: Jordan Hoekstra 2. Assists: Soper 2, Nick Bissonnettte.

Results for the Waterloo Wolves at the Kitchener Blue Line Tournament.

Waterloo Wolves 7 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1

Waterloo: Ciuman 2, Matthew Harron, Jordan Hoekstra, Collins, Mantz, Soper.
Assists: Collins 2, Noah Kienapple 2, Daniel Preston, Mantz, Blaine Speck,
Soper, Graham Baker.

Kitchener: Tyler Harrison. Assists: Jeremy Kuehn.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 4 Waterloo Wolves 1

Kitchener: Harrison 2, Kuehn, John Nay. Assists: Harrison 2, Keuhn.

Waterloo: Soper. Assists: Hoekstra.

Elgin Middlesex 3 Waterloo Wolves 2

Waterloo: Ciuman, Soper. Assists: Baker.

Waterloo Wolves 4 Markham 1

Waterloo: Ciuman, Cody Handke, Mantz, Kurtis Woodland. Assists: Baker, Woodland,
Mantz, Nick Bissonnette, Preston, Jamie Colins, Noah Kienapple.

Waterloo Wolves 7 Windsor 1

Waterloo: Soper 2, Hoekstra 2, Collins, Woodland, Mantz. Assists: Woodland,
Soper 2, Ciuman 2, Handke, Hoekstra, Preston, Mantz.

Kitchener 3 Windsor 1

Kitchener: John Nay, Tyler Harrison, Jeremy Kuehn. Assists: Nay 2, Stephen
Gibson, Tyler Harrison.

MINOR ATOM DOUBLE-A

Waterloo 5 Sarnia 0

Waterloo: Zack Bellefeuille 3, Blake Martin, Nick Goran. Assists: Brody Haramis
4, Martin 2, Bellefeuille, Kurtis Gray, Tanner Matthews. Shutout: Bobby Soosaar.

Waterloo 6 Cambridge 0

Waterloo: Goran 2, Chris Jaworsky 2, Bellefeuille, Brody Haramis. Assists: Goran
2, Haramis, Martin, Lukas Mihas,

Lucas Ariss, Matthews, Jackson Keller, Ben Playfair, Chris Jaworsky, Sam
McQuiggan. Shutout: Bailey Degasperis.

MINOR ATOM SINGLE-A

London Gold 7

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 2

Kitchener: Josh Bretz, Nathan Laird. Assists: Braxton Carter, Jacob Cascagnette,
Max Clift, Zarley Cina.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 6 Brantford 1

Kitchener: Bretz 2, Cascagnette, Carter, Laird, Clift. Assists: Bretz 3.

London Gold 3

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 2

Kitchener: Laird, Bretz. Assists: Bretz, Cascagnette, Laird.

Cambridge 3 Kitchener 2

Scorers unknown.

MINOR ATOM SELECT

Kitchener 1 Cambridge 0

Kitchener: Zack Kaal. Assists: Ryan Hetherington. Shutout: Andrew MacNeil, Wil
Thibault.

MINOR ATOM MD

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 2

Cambridge Hawks 0

Kitchener: Ryan Matchett, Zach Swirski. Assists: Darren Givlin. Shutout:
Nicholas McEwan, Riley Barfoot.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 3

Stoney Creek 2

Kitchener: Swirski, Andrew Mitchell, Damianakis. Assists: Damianakis, Isaac
Coates, Swirski.

Results for the Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue at the Barrie Tournament.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 0 Ajax 0

Kitchener Shutout: Eric Wilson, William Rawski.

Caledon 3

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 1

Kitchener: Robert Davies. Assists: Maxwell McDonald.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 3

Waterloo Icewolves 1

Kitchener: McDonald, Cory Swan, Gavin Apperson. Assists: Davis, Ryan Scherbey,
Andrew Ingalls.

Waterloo: Nathanial Edwards. Assists: Cameron MacDonald.

Georgetown 3

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 1

Kitchener: Ingalls. Assists: Zachary Snider, Timothoy Valeriote.

MINOR PEEWEE AA/A

Kitchener 4 Woodstock 1

Kitchener: Keaton Jones 2, Riley Flanagan, Billy Zister. Assists: Matt Willcox
3, Flanagan 2, Jones 1, Chay Taylor.

Kitchener 5 Stratford 4

Kitchener: Jones 2, Willcox, Austin George, Flanagan. Assists: Jones, Anthony
Osterling, Paul Inglis, George.

London 1 Kitchener 0

MINOR PEEWEE A/AA

London Jr. Knights 3 Waterloo Wolves 1

Waterlool: Zack Hedley. Assists: Ganesha Ashoka, Nick Hirst.

Waterloo Wolves 3 Stratford Warriors 2

Waterloo: Josh Bester, Gavin MacIntyre, Ethan Sparkes. Assists: Sparkes, Matthew
Small, Liam Roth.

MINOR PEEWEE SELECT

Waterloo 7 Brantford 2

Waterloo: Connor Montag 2, Steven Parker 2, Grant Litt, Heera Chagar, Mark
Montag. Assists: Ryan Holmes 3, Litt 2, Conner Sprout 2, Ben Kingsley 2, Chagar,
Drew Dietrich, Mark Montag, Austin Frey, Jake Groulx.

Kitchener 4

Brantford 99ers 0

Kitchener: Helle, Brown, Burchett, Cain. Assists: Voisin, Pomery, Dougan,
Asselin.

MINOR PEEWEE MD

Results for the Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue at the Jack Kitchen Memorial
tournament in Sarnia.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 6

North London Nationals 3

Kitchener: Andrew Cox, Oliver Sangster, Tommy Kudoba, Connor McLeod, Ben
Flanagan, Alex McKay. Assists: Flanagan, Lucas D'Arsie, Kudoba, Sangster, McKay,
Eric Wagenknecht.

Kitchener Jr Rangers Blue 5

Oakridge Aeros 1

Kitchener: Wagenknecht 3, Kudoba, Graham Mustard. Assists: McKay 2, Jared
Borosch, McLeod 2 , Kudoba, Dylan MacKinnon 2.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 2

Sarnia Jr. Sting 2

Kitchener: McKay, Cox. Assists: Sangster, James West, Flanagan, MacKinnon.

SEMIFINALS

Brantford Church Saints 3

Kitchener Jr Rangers Blue 2

Kitchener: Cox, McLeod. Assists: D'Arsie, Flanagan, Sam Boucher-Hatt, Borosch.

MINOR PEEWEE MD

Results for the Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red at the Sarnia Tournament.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 2

Brampton 1

Kitchener: Daniel Schmidt, Zach Zettel. Assists: Mark Stevens.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 6

SSE London 2

Kitchener: Stevens 2, Matt LeBlanc 2, Andrew Boer, Ryan Chambers. Assists:
Stevens 3, Leblanc, Ethan Tabong, Ryan Wood.

Brantford 6

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 0

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 4

London Thunder 1

Kitchener: Andrew Twyford, Chambers, Stevens, Zach Zettel. Assists: Zettel,
Daniel Schmidt, Leblanc, Chambers.

Semifinal

Sarnia Sting 3

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 2

Kitchener: Twyford, Leblanc. Assists: Stevens, Tabong, Wood.

MINOR PEEWEE HOUSELEAGUE

IHT North Flames 2 Gladiators 0

IHT North Flames: Connor Sprout, Mathew Kleist. Assists: Alex Beitz, Jonathan
Grebinski, Sprout, Ralph Barac. Shutout: Alexander Mance.

MINOR BANTAM SINGLE-A

Stratford 3 Kitchener 1

Kitchener: Will Blahut. Assists: Cam Pentsa, Mike Harland.

London 6 Kitchener 3

Kitchener: Tyler Ziegler, Brad Rowley, Garrett Piltman. Assists: Brandon
Verasamy, Mike Jacobs, Piltman, Ziegler, Rowley.

Kitchener 4 St. Thomas 1

Kitchener: Billings, Pomery, Garrett Piltman, Will Blahut.

Results for the Kitchener Jr. Rangers at the Barrie Tournament.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 6 Duffield 0

Kitchener: Kevin Billings 2, Brandon Verasamy, Cam Pentsa, Garrett Piltman,
Derek Pomery. Assists: Tyler Ziegler 3, Pomery 2, Donny Runstedler 2, Nate
Hause, Brandon Thwaites, Brad Rowley. Shutout: Zac Whelan.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 6 Toronto Eagles 0

Kitchener: Billings 3, Rowley, Garrett Piltman, Will Blahut.

Assists: Pomery 2, Mike Harland 2, Ziegler, Rundstedler, Verasamy, Stan McElroy,
Nate Hause, Thwaites. Shutout: Colin Coughlin.

Orillia 3 Kitchener 2

Kitchener: Cam Pentsa, Derek Pomery. Assists: Tyler Ziegler, Kevin Billings,
Brad Rowley, Brandon Verasamy.

Kitchener 8 Barrie 5

Kitchener: Derek Pomery 3, Brad Rowley 2, Brett Heaman 2, Tyler Ziegler, Kevin
Billings. Assists: Ziegler 2, Stan McElroy 2, Verasamy 2, Runstedler, Mike
Jacobs, Mike Harland.

Championship game

Kitchener 3 Toronto 1

Kitchener: Verasamy 2, Garrett Piltman. Assists: Brad Rowley 2, Mike Harland,
Will Blahut, Mike Jacobs, Nate Hause

Game MVP: Zac Whelan.

MINOR BANTAM MD

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 5

Cambridge 3

Red: Thomas Lund, Michael Miller, Matthew Winsor, Ian Gordon, Phil Stalder.
Assists: Lund 2, Jake Patchett 2, Matthew Hergott, Winsor, Jordan McIntyre,
Gordon, Miller.

Cambridge: Oscar Carson, Graeme Gardiner, Thomas Barrett. Assists: Thomas Clark,
Brett Barber.

Waterloo Icewolves 2 Oakville 2

Waterloo: Braeden Newman, Andrew McWhinnie. Assists: Thomas Ruetz, Mark
Jamieson, Drew Smith, Newman.

MINOR BANTAM HOUSELEAGUE

Waterloo On-Site Group Wolves 3

Piller's Wild 1

Wolves: Willy Giannakopoulos 3. Assists: Kyle Weber 2, Brendan Diamond 2,
Mitchell Steep.

Wild: Bradley Weiler. Assists: Brett Harringtopn, Jack Beers.

Results for the Waterloo On-Site Group Wolves at the Jayden Elmore Memorial
Tournament.

Waterloo On-Site Group Wolves 3

West London 1

Wolves: Giannakopoulos 2, Steep. Assists: Ben Kadwell 2, Simon Haney.

SSE London 4

Waterloo On-Site Group Wolves 1

Wolves: Simon Haney.

Waterloo On-Site Group Wolves 2

Burlington Caes Blades 1

Wolves: Diamond, Giannakopoulos. Assists: Kadwell 2, Diamond.

Kitchener Vipers 4 Kitchener Rock 3

Vipers: Ben Gelineau 2, Andrew DeAragon, Peter Lind. Assists: Josh Jones 2,
Mitchell Joiner, Robbie Fergin, Ben Gelineau, Andrew DeAragon.

Rock: Zach Tikl 2, Connor Ross. Assists: Brett Witmer, Scott Verner, Cody
Becker.

Kitchener Roadrunner 4 Kitchener Vipers 2

Roadrunners: Joran Upton 3, Devon Teeple. Assists: Bryce Dagenais 2, Mat
Thompson.

Vipers: Simon Kienapple, Tyler Bowman. Assists: Sean McNair, John Lutgendorff,
Gelineau.

MINOR MIDGET TRIPLE-A

Waterloo Wolves 13 Brantford 99ers 0

Waterloo: Tye McGinn 2, John McIntyre 2, Joe Anstett 2, Eric Lekun 2, Matt
Horst, Craig England, Greg Chevreau, Jordan Gartner. Assists: McGinn 5, Lekun 3,
Chevreau 2, Matt Volpini 2, Anstett, Jordan Wolfe, Brock West, Matt Horst,
MacKenzie Bauman, Brock Harper. Shutout: Colin Breen.

Waterloo 6

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1

Waterloo: Lekun, Shawn Bechtloff, Phil Teri, Todd Scarrow, Mike Dunn, Gartner.

Assists: Gartner 2, England 2, Horst 2, West, McGinn, Bechtloff, Harper, Lekun.

Kitchener: Evan Hebebrand.

MINOR MIDGET A/AA

Waterloo 6 Woodstock 0

Waterloo: Corey Way 2, Scott McNamara, Brendan Scales, Mark Woelfle, Simon
Gordner. Assists: Mike D'Aloisio 2, Bryce Reed, McNamara, Woelfle. Shutout:
Brendan Roach.

Minor Midget Houseleague

Kitchener Combines 5 Kitchener Cavaliers 3

Combines: Troy Peters 2, Jeremy Joworski 2, Lucas Joseph. Assists: Andrew
Schnarr, Nathan Morin 2, Scott Burton, Steven Cook, Brendon Smith, Peters,
Jordan Garton, Ryan Despres.

Cavaliers: Brandon Santos, Josh Jardao, James Greb. Assists: Luke King, Dan
Levair, Maxwell Blanke, Jardao, Jeff Witmer.

IHT North 3 Pillers 1

IHT North: Kent Bowra, Andy Hutton, Brennan Young. Assists: Alex Rak, Brett
Ford, Jake Davidson, Zach Schnarr, Chris Charlesworth, Hutton.

Pillers: Lucas Born. Assist: Jacob Anstett.

Cruisers 3 Cavaliers 2

Cruisers: Devin Bliefert, Brian Sage, Wesley Ross. Assists: Mathew Basler 2,
Phillip Voll, Michael Gatcherie.

Cavaliers: Josh Jordao 2. Assists: Brandon Santos, Cam Stewart, Luke King, Max
Blanke.

MAJOR ATOM TRIPLE-A

Results for the Kitchener Jr. Rangers at the Hamilton Bulldogs Tournament.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 2 Ajax 2

Kitchener: Austin Ross, Evan Flanagan. Assists: Luke Gazzola, Ryan Maksymyk.

Markham Majors 8 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 3

Kitchener: Brendan Valko, Adam Kawalec, Connor Cole. Assists: Kawalec, Valko,
Colin Schuringa.

Whitby Wildcats 8 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 3

Kitchener: Cole, Logan Schmidt, Valko. Assists: Valko, Austin Ross, Kawalec,
Joey Young.

Results for Waterloo at the Guelph Power Play Tournament.

Round-Robin

Waterloo 4 Welland 2

Waterloo: Steven Lorentz 2, Brandon Lindberg 2. Assists: Lindberg, Matthew
Lantz, Kyle Wood.

Waterloo 1

Central Ontario 1

Waterloo: Lantz. Assists: Nicholas Ciulei.

Waterloo 3

Sault St. Marie 3

Goals: Lorentz 2, Lantz. Assists: Connor Kaminski 2, Connor Gorrie.

Semifinal

Mississauga Rebels 4 Waterloo 1

Waterloo: Lorentz. Assists: Lindberg.

League Play

Waterloo 6 Brantford 3

Goals: Lindberg 2, Lorentz 2, Kyle Harrington, Lantz. Assists: Lindberg 2, Hehl
2 Harrington, Lorentz, Gorrie, Kaminski.

Waterloo 5 Windsor 4

Waterloo: Lorentz 2, Wood, Sam Teidemann, Nick Seftel. Assists: Lorentz,
Lindberg, Harrington, Seftel.

MAJOR ATOM SINGLE-A

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 6 Burlington Bulldogs 4

Kitchener: Bradley Lloyd 2, Connor Bean, Jimmy Voll, Paul Richard, Kevin
Nogueira. Assists: Connor Nusselder 2, Ben MacMillan 2, Voll, Jesse Stilling,
Brayden Lane, Jason Royle, Tommy Hergott, Jacob Norcott.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 4 St. Thomas Stars 1

Kitchener: Richard 2, Nogueira, Bean. Assists: MacMillan 3, Ryan Luft 2, Voll,
Lloyd, Sam Kreze.

MAJOR ATOM SELECT

Kitchener 2 Port Colborne 0

Kitchener: Zach Zehr, Dalton Clifford. Assists: Mitchell Stumpf. Shutout:
Michael Harrison, Taylor Vosburgh.

MAJOR ATOM MD

Waterloo Ice Wolves 4 Brantford Church 1

Waterloo: Riley Alvarez 2, Scott Habel, Thomas Garvin. Assists: Berek Grinyer 2,
Ian Buck, Scott Habel, Billy McLaren.

Waterloo Ice Wolves 3 Brantford 99ers 3

Waterloo: Ryan Taylor 2, Scott Habel. Assists: Miles Purvis, Joshua MacKinlay,
Ian Buck.

Waterloo Timberwolves 4 Waterloo Ice Wolves 2

Timberwolves: Campbell, Weppler, Hurl-Loat, Meyer. Assists: Meyer 2, Weppler,
Hurl-Loat.

Ice Wolves: Buck 2. Assists: Habel 2, MacKinlay.

MAJOR PEEWEE TRIPLE-A

Cambridge 3 Waterloo 2

Cambridge: Drake Murphy Schneider, Steven Hiff, Nicholas Fedak. Assists: Brodie
Smith, Jordan Pettitt, Fedak, Colton Madge, Andrew Coupland, Spencer Chase.

Waterloo: Trevor Sauder, Anthony VanLooyen. Assists: Patrick Quinn 2, Rhys
Davies, Sauder.

Brantford 4 Waterloo 3

Waterloo: Ryan Doucette 2, Ryan Douse. Assists: Jacob Lublin, Matthew Martin,
Justin Auger, Keegan Calder, Davies.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1 Huron Perth Lakers 0

Kitchener: Philip Moser. Assists: Adam Bignell, Jessie Diebold. Shutout: Mario
Duscio.

Results for the Kitchener Jr. Rangers at the Chatham Kent Tournament.

Lambton Jr. Sting 7 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 3

Kitchener: Tom Haley 2, Brad Smith. Assists: John Divo, Adam Bignell.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 3 Port 3

Kitchener: Tyler Keller, Hayden Cox, Divo. Assists: John Wilson, Matt Gerber,
Steve Jakiela, Brock Campbell, Bignell.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 6 Windsor Jr. Spitfires 1

Kitchener: Jakiela 3, Wilson 2, Philip Moser. Assists: Smith 2, Matt Dychuck,
Justin Plant, Wilson, Gerber, Cox

Toronto Jr. Canadiens 3 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 2

Kitchener: Jakiela, Haley. Assists: Jakiela.

MAJOR PEEWEE SINGLE-A

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 6 Brantford 99ers 1

Kitchener: Bezruki 2, Rzymkowski 2, Brooks, McKelvie. Assists: Collins 2, Vo 2,
Atkins 2, Rzymkowski.

London Knights Gold 6 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 1

Kitchener: McKelvie.

London Knights Green 4 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 3

Kitchener: Fleischer 2, Collins. Assists: Brooks 2, Pike, Cormier.

Brantford 99ers 3 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 2

Kitchener: Rzymkowski, Good. Assists: Fleischer, McKelvie, Pike.

Results for the Kitchener Jr. Rangers at the Waterloo Memorial Double-A
Tournament.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 7 Sudbury Sharks 0

Kitchener: Vo 2, Good 2, Lynagh, Bezruki, Fleischer. Assists: Fleischer 2,
Cormier 2, Vo, Parsons, Atkins, Good, Chambers, Pike. Shutout: Donald Davis

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 8 Toronto Colts 0

Kitchener: Bezruki 2, Pike, Collins, Fleischer, Brooks, Atkins, Vo. Assists:
Atkins 3, McKelvie 2, Rzymkowski 3, Cormier Bezruki 2, Vo, Collins, Pike.
Shutout: Bobby Brown

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 2 Waterloo Wolves -0

Kitchener: Cormier, Vo. Assists: Fleischer, Atkins, Rzymkowski. Shutout: Donald
Davis.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers 3 Ajax 3

Kitchener: Vo 3. Assists: Cormier, Atkins, Lynagh.

Semifinal

Woodstock Navy Vets 1 Kitchener Jr. Rangers 0

Kitchener Jr. Rangers finish with a bronze medal.

MAJOR PEEWEE MD

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 3

Brantford 99ers 0

Kitchener: Jesse Langdon 2, Joel O Reilly. Assists: Tyler Sprung, Brett Kudoba.
Shut Out: Nick Grominski.

MAJOR PEEWEE MD

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 2

Waterloo Ice Wolves 1

Kitchener: Rueben Scott, Jordy Schneider. Assists: Connor Stickle, Syd Saunders.

Waterloo: Mike McIntee.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 1

Cambridge Hawks 1

Kitchener: Cristian Wyman. Assists: Elgin Fraser, Mac Dirstein.

Cambridge: Hayden Jaworski. Assists: Adam Leonard.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Blue 3

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 3

Scorers unavailable.

Kitchener Jr. Rangers Red 1

Waterloo Icewolves 0

Kitchener: Ben Finlayson. Assists: Chris Wirth. Shutout: Nick Grominski.

MAJOR PEEWEE HOUSELEAGUE

Gladiators 6 Rebels 3

Gladiators: Daryle Fletcher Jr. 3, Ryan McQuiggin, Brandon Grenci, Bryton Keyes.
Assists: Zack Thibodeau 2, James Newman, Bryton Keyes, A.J. Masson.

Rebels: David Kilgour, Tyler Gauthier, Josh McCracken. Assists: Kilgour, Aaron
Stagg, Zack Machel, John Grousopoulos.

STANDINGS

K-W Central Hockey League

Team W L T P

Brick Brewery 8 0 2 18

Casey's 8 1 1 17

Phantoms 5 4 1 11

Whale & Ale 5 5 0 10

Jiks 1 9 0 2

Outlaws 1 9 0 2

Last week's results

Brick Brewery 10 Jiks 2

Casey's 4 Phantoms 0

Whale & Ale 6 Outlaws 5

KW TOUCH FOOTBALL LEAGUE

DIVISION SINGLE-A

Jackasses 12 The Zone 11

Jackasses win Division A championship.

Vipers 19 Spread Eagles 7

Vipers win Division A Consolation game.

DOUBLE-B

Saints 18 Rockets 13

Saints win double-B division championship.

SINGLE-B

Fighting Amish 14

Naked Bootleggers 12

The Fighting Amish win single-B semifinal and advance to single-B final Dec. 9.

Grumpy Old Men 1

Ale-Ing Whales 0

Grumpy Old Men advance to B final vs. The Fighting Amish.

Ale-Ing Whales meet the Naked Bootleggers in B consolation on Dec. 9th.

Results for the KW Matmen Olympic Wrestling Club at the Western Invitational
Wrestling Tournament.

MALE OPEN

41 KG

3rd: Wesley Thomson.

67.5 KG

3rd: Jake Jagas.

FEMALE OPEN

51 kg

3rd: Jenn Hale.

61 kg

3rd Karoline Madsen.

JUDO

Results for the The Asahi Judo Club at the Ajax Budokan Annual Judo Tournament,
held Dec. 2.

JUNIOR BOYS

Under-20 kg: 1st: Jake Mincovitch.

Under-30 kg (green belt) 2nd: Cammy Burgess.

Under-40 kg (green belt): 1st: Hamlet-John Munoz.

Under-40 kg (green, blue and brown belts): 2nd: Yanick Tremblay.

Over-45 kg (green belt) 1st: Keenan Mackenzie.

Over-45 kg (white, yellow and orange belts): 3rd: Dante Beleno.

Under-55 kg (white, yellow and orange belts): 3rd: Martin Rygielski.

JUVENILE BOYS

under-60 kg (green, blue and brown belts): 5th: Mark Rygielski.

JUNIOR GIRLS

Under-24 kg (open belt): 1st: Jordan Schroecker, 2nd: Natalie Rygielski.

Under-45 kg (white, yellow and orange belt): 1st: Kathy Heffernan.

JUVENILE GIRLS

Under-48 kg (green, blue and brown belts) : 2nd: Monika Burgess.

Results for the Kaizan Judo Club at the Ajax Budokan annual Judo Tournament Dec.
2.

BOYS

Masters

(under 81 kg)

1st: James Smith, brown belt.

Juvenile 16-18

(under 81 kg)

1st: Zach Marshall, brown belt.

Juvenile 13-15

(under 60 kg)

2nd: Jacob Smith, blue belt.

Juvenile 13-15

(under 52 kg)

2nd: Xiomara Romero, green belt.

Juvenile 13-15

(under 51 kg)

1st: Simon Roedding, blue belt.

Juvenile 13-15

(under 81 kg)

1st: Zach Marshall, brown belt.

Junior 11-12

(under 55 kg)

1st: Philip Leeman, blue belt.

Junior 11-12

(under 50 kg)

3rd: Simon Roedding, blue belt.

Junior 8, 9, 10

(under 45 kg)

2nd: Riley Densmore, orange belt.

Juvenile 13-15

(under 42 kg)

3rd: Johnny Nagy, blue belt.

Junior 11-12

(under 40 kg)

1st: Johnny Nagy, blue belt.

3rd: Liam Hendrikse, orange belt.

Junior 8, 9, 10

(under 35 kg)

1st: Russell Weigel, orange belt.

2nd: Ian Buck, orange belt.

Junior 8, 9, 10

(under 30 kg)

1st: Kaleb Smith, blue belt.

2nd: Connor Stevenson, orange belt.

3rd: Noah Smith, orange belt.

GIRLS

Juvenile 13-15

(under 57 kg)

1st: Megan Nagy, blue belt.

2nd: Megen Lowe, green belt.

Juvenile 13-15

(under 39 kg)

2nd: Morgan Williams, blue belt.

Junior 8, 9, 10

(under 35 kg)

3rd: Nikola Lalatovic, orange belt.

Junior 7 and under

(over 27 kg)

1st: Olivia Leeman, yellow belt.

OTHER COMPETITORS

Hugh O'Brien, Green Juvenile 13-15. under 60 kg

Dillon Le Lievre, Blue, Juvenile 13-15, under 60 kg

Claudia Craiovan, Orange, Junior 8,9 &10, under 31 kg

Brittany Poschner, Orange, Junior 8,9 &10, under 31 kg

Nathan Hedrikse, Orange, Junior 8,9 &10, under 35 kg

KW SHUFFLEBOARD

Team W L P

Rural Route .08 38 11 38

Allstars 33 16 33

Brenda's Devils 32 10 32

Hardrocks 31 11 31

Zammies 31 18 31

Speedy's 30 12 30

Outbacks 22 27 22

Who Cares 22 27 22

Wannabees 14 35 14

Br 50 Rockers 14 28 14

Hackers 12 37 12

ANAF 8 34 8

412 Pucksters 7 28 7

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: NEWS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              884 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The Columbian (Vancouver, Washington)

                             June 30, 2015 Tuesday

Wildfire, wind strike Wenatchee

BYLINE: NICHOLAS GERANIOS ?and DONNA BLANKINSHIP Associated Press

SECTION: REGIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 717 words



HIGHLIGHT: Don Seabrook/The Wenatchee World

A Douglas County firefighter sprays the back of a home Sunday as embers fly off
a neighboring house in Wenatchee. A wildfire fueled by high temperatures and
strong winds roared into Central Washington.

Don Seabrook/The Wenatchee World

A Chelan County Sheriff's deputy races to check that all residents have left
their homes Sunday as flames approach houses in Wenatchee.


Two dozen homes destroyed; hundreds of people forced to flee
WENATCHEE - From just across the Wenatchee River, Dominick Bonny watched a
whole neighborhood in his Central Washington town burn as a wildfire destroyed
two dozen homes and forced hundreds to flee.

"With the wind blowing away from us, it was like we were watching a natural
disaster within arm's reach," he said.
The wildfires hit parts of Central and Eastern Washington over the weekend as
the state is struggling with a severe drought. Mountain snowpack is at
extremely low levels, and about one-fifth of the state's rivers and streams are
at record low levels.
Eastern Washington has been experiencing temperatures into the 100s, and last
week Washington
Gov. Jay Inslee
issued an emergency proclamation that allows state resources to quickly be
brought in to respond to wildfires.
Washington's struggles with wildfires come as Alaska, its fellow Pacific
Northwest state, is facing more and harsher wildfires this year.
In Wenatchee, the wildfire fueled by high temperatures and strong winds roared
into town Sunday afternoon. The blaze ignited in brush just outside Wenatchee,
quickly burning out of control about 120 miles east of Seattle.
Rainfall on Monday provided relief, but hot, dry conditions and wind could
challenge crews trying to get a handle on the flames that burned more than an
estimated 4 square miles, officials said. Three firefighters suffered minor
injuries, but no injuries to residents were reported.
Fire crews were concentrating on preventing any more homes from being burned
Monday, State Patrol Trooper Brian Moore said. Crews were working to put out
hot spots in already burned areas, while keeping an eye on winds that were
expected to reach 15 to 20 mph Monday evening and could fan flames again.
Tom Bryant surveyed the smoldering ruins of his home in the hills above
Wenatchee and said he and his wife had to race out of the house at the last
minute as the fire advanced Sunday night.
On Monday, he pointed to a Mustang sports car that was a burned wreck and to
his BMW motorcycle that was destroyed in the garage.
"It's going to be tough to replace," Bryant said. "It hurts, but it's just
stuff. It's painful."
He was unable to save photographs and important documents, Bryant said. "That's
where all our stuff is," he said, pointing to a burned file cabinet.
Evacuations were mainly in the north end of town and included a Wal-Mart store,
the Chelan County Emergency Management office said.
The store did not burn, but several commercial buildings were near the blaze,
Washington State Patrol Trooper Darren Wright said.
Emergency management officials late Monday morning also briefly issued a
shelter-in-place order after ammonia started leaking from a fruit warehouse.
They later said it had dissipated and was no longer a threat.
The Blue Bird warehouse, which uses ammonia for cold storage, was among a few
commercial buildings to burn.
Bonny, who lives just outside Wenatchee, called the speed of the blaze "just
mind-blowing."
Phil Bentz, who lives on the same side of the river as the fire, said his home
hadn't been evacuated. "We were waiting for someone to knock on the door, but
they didn't come. So far, so good," Bentz said.
About noon Monday, fire trucks poured water on a burning warehouse in downtown
Wenatchee, sending big black clouds into the air over the city. Farther north
of town, scorched hillsides showed where the flames were stopped just short of
irrigated apple orchards and residential subdivisions.
Officials know the fire started in brush on the edge of town, but they are
still trying to determine what sparked it.
Sweltering heat above 100 degrees, tinder-dry brush and strong winds helped
fuel it.
Last month, Inslee declared a statewide drought emergency.
The railroad helped battle the blaze by spraying water from tank cars and
transferring water to firefighting trucks, he said.
Hilda Emerson, 37, was among the people who fled the flames Sunday.
"I went and grabbed what I could - my computers, irreplaceable stuff, toys for
my daughter - and I left," she said. "I never had to do this before."
She and her 4-year-old daughter, Nissa, spent the night on cots set up by the
Red Cross in the gymnasium of Eastmont High School in East Wenatchee. She
planned to check on her home later in the day.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2015 The Columbian Publishing Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              885 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       Grand Forks Herald (North Dakota)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             April 17, 2015 Friday

Fire officials: Keep citizen-operated unmanned aircraft away from wildfires

BYLINE: Brandi Jewett, Grand Forks Herald

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 565 words


April 17--As wildfires rage across the region, Minnesota state officials are
asking unmanned aircraft operators to keep their devices away from the flames.

Should one stray into a zone where aerial firefighting is underway, Department
of Natural Resources personnel will ground their airplanes or wait to respond to
a call until the unmanned aircraft is confirmed gone.

"If we have something like this happen, we're going to have to pull our air
resources off the fire because we can't be running into (a device) with a
helicopter rotor or something on an airplane," said Ron Stoffel, wildfire
suppression supervisor for the DNR.

Wildfires also continue burning in North Dakota, but the state does not have an
official policy against flying unmanned aircraft, according to Cooperative Fire
Protection Manager Anthony Schultz.

"Right now, the North Dakota Forest Service does not have a policy on citizens
using unmanned aerial vehicles to monitor fire or anything of that nature," he
said.

Safety concern

Taking planes and helicopters away from firefighting efforts isn't optimal, but
unmanned aircraft could pose safety threats to the DNR pilots and equipment.
Both firefighting aircraft and unmanned aircraft operate in similar airspace,
usually below 500 feet.

"Conditions for our pilots are tough enough," said Bill Schuster, DNR wildfire
aviation supervisor, in a department news release. "We don't want to worry about
when and where a drone could pop up into their flight path."

In the release, Schuster added there had been one incident this year of an
unmanned aircraft observed close to a wildfire near Ostego, Minn., located
northwest of the Twin Cities.

While most unmanned devices are made of plastic, the battery packs they contain
have the potential to be damaging in a midair collision with an airplane.

Stoffel said the department doesn't know how much damage could be caused if two
aircraft were to collide until an incident happens.

"I don't want to find out." Stoffel said.

Stay away

Schuster asks unmanned aircraft operators to stay at least 5 miles away from
wildfires -- a distance he said allows firefighters to do their jobs safely.

Aircraft and crew are poised to respond quickly to wildfires because of
strategic locations around Minnesota, according to the DNR. The department may
dispatch aircraft within minutes of a fire igniting -- though response may
depend upon what the flames are threatening.

Fire department personnel that see or suspect an unmanned aircraft is operating
near a wildfire are asked to contact the DNR and report the incident so the
department can potentially remove its aircraft from the area.

Unmanned aircraft have been used by government agencies to monitor fires, but
they're used in areas firefighting aircraft are not flying, Stoffel said.

As of April 13, Minnesota had recorded 685 fires that had burned 11,971 acres.
On Friday, much of northwest Minnesota was under an extreme fire warning -- the
highest level on the department's danger scale.

In North Dakota, the state's northeastern corner remained under a red flag
warning for wildfires much of Friday, according to the National Weather Service.
High winds and low humidity put the region in critical fire weather condition.

___ (c)2015 the Grand Forks Herald (Grand Forks, N.D.) Visit the Grand Forks
Herald (Grand Forks, N.D.) at www.grandforksherald.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20150417-GF-Fire-officials-Keep-citizen-operated-unmanned-aircraft-away-from-
wildfires-0417-20150417

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GF


                       Copyright 2015 Grand Forks Herald


                              886 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Brunswick News (Georgia)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            November 1, 2010 Monday

Official: Wildfires may rage this winter

BYLINE: Shanessa Fakour, The Brunswick News, Ga.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 515 words


Nov. 01--Wildfires could become more common in Georgia because of a dry and warm
winter ahead, an official with the Georgia Forestry Commission says.

Drought conditions extending across parts of the state, coupled with a La
NiÃ[#x192]±a winter climate pattern, which means a warmer and drier winter on
the coast, will contribute to the spread of more wildfires, said Alan Dozier,
chief of protection for the Georgia Forestry Commission.

"It depends on how the weather actually plays out, but we haven't forgotten the
big wildfire season of 2007," Dozier said.

During that year, in which Gov. Sonny Perdue declared a state of emergency
during Georgia's worst drought in recent years, more than 9,500 wildfires burned
about 500 percent more acres than normal.

"We hope that doesn't happen this year," Dozier said. "The (weather) conditions
are beginning to resemble those (2007) conditions a little bit. We're expecting
and ready for more wildfires."

A common cause of wildfires is individuals burning debris in a backyard that
gets out of control, Dozier said.

The Glynn County office of the Georgia Forestry Commission is paying close
attention to how many burn permits it issues, said Mark McClellan, chief ranger
and forester with the Georgia Forestry Commission.

"We're looking at permits each day to see whether to cut them off or keep them
on for debris burning," McClellan said. "If it's really high wind and low
humidity, we'll cut permits off for that day."

He said as the coast's shortage of rain reaches 12 inches and the drought index
continues to rise, people need to take precautions when burning outdoors under
such dry conditions.

"If people are doing any outdoor burning, they need to call us to get a permit.

"We're in the top 10 counties in Georgia for issuing burn permits. We were close
to 17,000 last year, which is average for Glynn County."

The peak times for wildfires to occur in Georgia are from February to April,
Dozier said.

"In the springtime we have about half of our fires for the year.

"The fall is also a secondary fire season when the dry weather comes and the
leaves fall and more people want to get out to burn leaves and do a lot of fire
activity for this time of year."

Be safe

The Georgia Forestry Commission recommends the following the safety tips for
burning debris:

--Never leave a fire unattended.

--Have tools nearby, including rakes, shovels and a water hose, that can be used
to extinguish a fire.

--Burning of debris should be about 50 feet away from a structure.

--The fire should be out half an hour before dark for smoke management.

To register for a burn permit, call 877-652-2876 or apply online at
www.gatrees.org.

To see more of The Brunswick News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.thebrunswicknews.com/. Copyright (c) 2010, The Brunswick News, Ga.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or
call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20101101-GE-Official-Wildfires-may-rage-this-winter-1101-20101101

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GE


                       Copyright 2010 The Brunswick News


                              887 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Santa Cruz Sentinel (California)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             May 11, 2017 Thursday

Santa Cruz County's drying timber increases threat of 2017 wildfires

BYLINE: Michael Todd, Santa Cruz Sentinel, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 569 words


May 11--SANTA CRUZ -- From the Central Coast to the Sierra Nevada foothills,
spring winds have dried timber and brush after a historically wet winter that
isn't expected to relieve the 2017 wildfire threat, a Cal Fire San Mateo-Santa
Cruz Unit official said.

Gov. Jerry Brown on Monday proclaimed Wildfire Awareness Week, citing a rise in
dangerous wildfires in recent years. Wildfires are getting hotter, bigger and
more destructive. Half of the state's largest wildfires, which have burned more
than million acres, have been during the last decade, according to Cal Fire.

"Despite recent rains, millions of dead and dying trees continue to increase the
risk of destructive wildfires across the state," Brown said.

Last year's hot summer and fall spurred the 4,474-acre Loma Fire, which
displaced hundreds of residents near the Loma Prieta ridge in the Santa Cruz
Mountains and destroyed 12 homes in roughly a week.

The rising threat of wildfires led the state to assemble early-season fuels
crews tasked with reducing flammable grasses and brush in the foothills.
Locally, eight firefighters now are assigned to fire prevention in the Cal Fire
San Mateo-Santa Cruz Unit, Deputy Chief Jake Hess said.

There is no precise forecast for the wet winter's impact on wildfires in 2017,
state fire officials said. But some predict that wet winters will delay and
intensify peak wildfire season.

"We're not looking at this like a reprieve," Hess said. "The million-dollar
question is how the rain is going to affect our fire season this summer."

In the last three years, those prevention crews have assembled locally in May,
conducting controlled burns, clearing strips of land to reduce fuels and burning
brush that's been cut, piled and dried, Hess said. Those crews have been working
in the Santa Cruz Mountains, including Ice Cream Grade and Empire Grade. Crews
also have been clearing and burning fuels in Henry Cowell State Park and Soquel
Demonstration Forest.

A state initiative bolstered early-year fire-prevention projects, Hess said.

At peak staffing during summer, the San Mateo-Santa Cruz unit will have 100
firefighters. There are eight firefighters on the fuels crew and the unit is
bulking up its staff throughout May, Hess said.

"During the month of May, we anticipate staffing five additional engines," Hess
said. At peak staffing, the unit will have 12 state-funded engines.

Hess and numerous fire officials throughout California have dubbed winter's
record rainfall a "double-edged sword." The moisture temporarily benefits large
fuel, such as timber. However, drought strain and bark-beetle infestation have
killed millions of trees in the Sierra Nevada. In addition, the rain fueled
above-normal growth of grasses and brush that soon will dry out, Hess said.

"The grass crop through the Sacramento Valley and the foothills is off the
charts," Hess said. "That's starting to brown and dry out and become more
receptive for fires."

The central Sierra has become a "sea of brown" that is spreading north, Hess
said. The San Mateo-Santa Cruz unit will assist crews who must respond to
wildfires in those regions.

"The rain was great for our reservoirs, but we are not out of the woods in terms
of fuels receptive for fire," Hess said.

___ (c)2017 the Santa Cruz Sentinel (Scotts Valley, Calif.) Visit the Santa Cruz
Sentinel (Scotts Valley, Calif.) at www.santacruzsentinel.com Distributed by
Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20170511-QC-Santa-Cruz-County-s-drying-timber-increases-threat-of-2017-
wildfires-0511-20170511

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QC


                       Copyright 2017 Santa Cruz Sentinel


                              888 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 30, 2017 Thursday

Florida Wildfires Burn Two-and-a-Half Times More Acreage Than Same Time Last
Year

LENGTH: 372  words




 Tallahassee:  Department of Agricuture And Consumer Service, The State of
Florida has issued the following news release:



  Florida Commissioner of Agriculture Adam H. Putnam today announced that
Florida wildfires have burned 250 percent more acreage during the first three
months of 2017 than last year during the same time period. More than 1,000
wildfires have burned more than 46,000 acres, which is an increase from
approximately 700 wildfires that burned 12,900 acres during the first three
months of 2016. Commissioner Putnam and the Florida Forest Service urge the
public to use extreme caution when handling outdoor fires and heat sources as
dry conditions are forecast to continue throughout the next few months.





 "I applaud our wildland firefighters for their unwavering dedication to
safeguarding our citizens, property and wildlife," said Commissioner of
Agriculture Adam H. Putnam. "Floridians can do their part by taking the
appropriate precautions to prevent human-caused wildfires."



 This past week, the Florida Forest Service responded to 133 new wildfires that
impacted several Florida communities and burned nearly 10,500 acres. Recent
fires in Orange and Miami-Dade counties significantly impacted the area and
destroyed one home. To see the locations of all active wildfires in Florida,
download the "FLBurnTools" app in Apple's App Store or on Google Play.



 "When exercising caution, our residents and visitors play a critical role in
protecting not only Florida's wildlife and natural habitats, but the lives of
our wildland firefighters and first responders," said Jim Karels, Florida State
Forester.



 The Florida Forest Service urges residents to remember the following:



     Develop and implement a family wildfire action plan;

     Call 911 or a local Florida Forest Service field unit office immediately in
the event of a wildfire;

     Obey Florida's outdoor burning laws;

     Never burn on windy days;

     Always keep a water source and suppression tools on hand when burning yard
debris;

     Never leave an outdoor fire or hot grill unattended; and

     Avoid parking vehicles on dry grass.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              889 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 27, 2016 Friday

Washington: Yakima training session adds boots to Washington's wildfire defense

LENGTH: 302  words





 Olympia: Department of Natural Resources, The State of Washington has issued
the following news release:



   To help be best prepared for the upcoming summer wildfire season, DNR trained
more than 250 new firefighters from the Washington National Guard and local fire
districts last week.





 The six-day training session at the U.S. Army's Yakima Training Center taught
new recruits lessons in wildfire behavior, proper use of wildfire equipment,
post-fire environmental restoration and working in the wildland urban interface
during the six-day training session.



 "These guys really gave us their all this week. Training together out here this
week will really make it easier to work together if we need to this summer,"
said Bob Marshall of DNR, who oversaw the training session.

 An experienced DNR firefighting commander helps train a soldier from the
Washington National Guard as part of this week's joint wildfire training session
outside Yakima.

 An experienced DNR firefighting commander helps train a soldier from the
Washington National Guard as part of this week's joint wildfire training session
outside Yakima.



 DNR wildfire commanders provided National Guard troops field lessons in
operating chainsaws, digging effective fire lines and using hoses. DNR provided
training for more than 250 members of the National Guard at Joint Base
Lewis-McChord May 6.



 After consecutive years of record wildfire seasons, Gov. Jay Inslee directed
the Washington National Guard to train 250 citizen soldiers with DNR to be ready
for the upcoming summer wildfire season.



 DNR will be training additional firefighters at Deer Park High School from June
18 to 26 and at Rainier High School from June 20 to 30.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              890 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Aberdeen Press and Journal

                             April 9, 2015 Thursday

Warning on high risk of wildfires

BYLINE: David Kerr

SECTION: NEWS; OTHER; Others; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 329 words


The north is under serious risk of wildfires over the next few days, according
to emergency services.

Warm and dry weather has left many areas with perfect conditions for fires to
break out, leading to the Scottish Wildlife Forum issuing a warning to the
public.

The warning came as firefighters tackled two small blazes yesterday in the
Highlands.

An area of grass and woodland went up in smoke off Speybank Walk in Kincraig
just after 2pm, with firefighters from Grantown and Newtonmore being called out.

Later in the afternoon a Nairn fire crew were called to extinguish an area of
gorse bushes on fire near the Lochloy Caravan Park at Nairn.

Neither of yesterday's incidents proved especially serious, but the fire service
issued a warning that the conditions are currently ideal for further wildfires,
and urged the public to be "extra careful" in rural areas over the next few
days.

Breezy, sunlit days, have dried out dead vegetation leaving some parts tinder
dry.

Many areas, including parts of the Highlands, Moray and the north-east are
deemed to be at a moderate to high risk of wildfires, with warnings in place
until Monday.

It is estimated that wildfires cause around £40million worth of damage to land
and property across Scotland each year.

It can stretch emergency services - and the Scottish Wildfire Forum are
reminding the public to be careful, including disposing of barbecues and
cigarettes carefully.

Forum chairman and deputy assistant chief officer for the north Andy Coueslant,
said: "We are now well within what has traditionally been known as wildfire
season and we are looking to raise awareness and reduce the number of wildfire
incidents across the country."

Michael Bruce, of Glen Tanar Estate and vice-chairman of the Scottish Wildfire
Forum, said: "We are in early spring and there are still large areas of
semi-natural vegetation with large quantities of last year's dead vegetation.

"Other fuels such as heather have not started growing yet and are dry."

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PJ


                      Copyright 2015 Aberdeen Journals Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              891 of 987 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                             July 30, 2016 Saturday
                                 Early Edition

Oilpatch books, GDP burned by Fort McMurray wildfire

BYLINE: Reid Southwick, Edmonton Journal

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; Pg. NP6

LENGTH: 681 words


Wildfires that devastated Fort Mc-Murray may be under control, but they
continued to rage in the books of oil and gas companies this week as Canada
posted the steepest GDP slide since 2009.

The disaster was the single largest factor that caused the national economy to
shrink by 0.6 per cent in May, Statistics Canada reported Friday.

The wildfires caused mass evacuations and forced the oilpatch to shut down
production of more than a million barrels per day in May.

According to Statistics Canada, oil output that month was at its lowest levels
in five years.

In what may prove to be cold comfort, economist Avery Shenfeld said he had
expected the fire's impact to be worse.

Shenfeld, managing director at CIBC Capital Markets, said GDP in June should
rise to reflect the first stage of oilsands companies returning to full
operations, but noted the sector continues to be dogged by low commodity prices.

"The real issue for the Alberta economy is what's not coming back, which is
capital spending in the oil and gas sector," he said.

"We're going to need a much sharper recovery in oil prices to see a return to
anywhere near where things stood in 2014."

Calgary-based Imperial Oil highlighted the wildfire carnage, posting a
$181-million loss in the second quarter, in sharp contrast to $120 million in
net income recorded a year earlier.

The wildfires cut Imperial's production by 60,000 barrels a day during the
quarter.

If it weren't for the wildfires - which forced the Syncrude project to shut down
for the first time in its 40-year history - Imperial would have increased
production by 45,000 barrels per day, or 13 per cent.

"Although our facilities were not damaged by the wildfires, operationally both
Kearl and Syncrude were significantly impacted," Rich Kruger, Imperial's chief
chairman and chief executive, said in a statement.

The non-conventional oil extraction industry posted a 22-percent drop in output
in May, which dragged the national economy into posting its biggest monthly
decline in GDP since March 2009, according to Statistics Canada.

Stripping out the impact of the wildfires on the national economy, GDP shrank by
0.1 per cent in May, fuelled in part by manufacturing declines.

"Fires raged in Alberta, but the rest of Canada's economy wasn't so hot in May,"
Shenfeld said in a note.

Enbridge Inc. said in its earnings report Friday oilsands production had been
curtailed longer than expected, cutting its volumes by an average of 255,000
barrels per day in May and June, a 10-per-cent drop from volumes before the
wildfires hit Fort McMurray. The Calgary pipeline company said its
second-quarter earnings slid to $301 million compared to $577 million recorded
in the same period last year. It said the decline was due in part to the expense
of returning its pipelines and facilities back to service after the fires, which
cost $12 million after taxes.

Among other factors, Enbridge's earnings also took a hit from a big drop in
demand at its rail-to-barge facility in the Philadelphia area as a result of
lower crude prices.

"We believe that market expectations were low going into the quarter with
concerns about the impact of the Fort McMurray wildfires and a potential
reduction in (forecast earnings)," Robert Kwan, analyst at RBC Dominion
Securities, said in a note.

Despite the wildfire's impact, Enbridge said it's on track to reach its forecast
of $4.4 billion to $4.8 billion in earnings before interest and tax for all of
2016.

Oilsands giant Suncor Energy reported earlier in the week the wildfires forced
it to cut production by 20 million barrels per day at its northern Alberta
projects. The setback translated into a $735-million loss for the Calgary-based
producer.

ATCO Inc. said it suffered about $10 million in uninsured losses after its
wires, poles, towers and small natural gas pipelines were damaged by the fire.
The Calgary company said it will seek to recover the losses through rate
increases, though it believes the impact on consumer bills will be negligible.
rsouthwick@postmedia.com !@COPYRIGHT=© 2016 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ian Kucerak; Oilpatch companies are feeling the economic pain brought
on by the wildfire that devastated Fort McMurray neighbourhoods.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2016 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              892 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         The Mercury News (California)

                            October 30, 2017 Monday

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

BYLINE: East Bay Times editorial board

LENGTH: 516 words



HIGHLIGHT: PG&E wants to make it easier for the company to charge ratepayers --
rather than shareholders -- when its power lines and other electrical equipment
cause wildfires.


PG&E never learns.

The Wine Country wildfires have yet to be fully contained, but the utility
already knows who it believes should accept responsibility for the estimated $1
billion in damages: ratepayers. Even if CalFire investigators determine it was
PG&Es negligence that caused the blazes that killed 42 people and destroyed
8,700 homes and buildings.

What did you expect?

The Bay Area News Groups Paul Rogers reported Sunday that top PG&E executives
met as recently as last week to lobby officials at the California Public
Utilities Commission to make it easier for the company to charge ratepayers
rather than shareholders  when its power lines and other electrical equipment
cause wildfires.

CalFire investigators have not determined what caused the wildfires. But the
notion that ratepayers should bear the burden for any PG&E incompetence is
unconscionable. If current law isnt clear enough on that issue  and there is
plenty of evidence to suggest it isnt  the Legislature should step in.

A key factor is PG&Es acknowledgment that it has only $800 million in insurance
to cover any damages from the wildfires.

It wasnt ratepayers who decided that issue. Nor was it ratepayers who decided
where and how their money should be spent on maintaining the utilitys power
equipment.

No one wants to see PG&E go bankrupt. The utility also has a fiduciary
responsibility to protect shareholders. But just as shareholders benefit from
the annual $1 billion in profits PG&E rakes in, they should also absorb primary
responsibility for PG&Es shortcomings as the risk they take when they invest in
the utility. If PG&E can just turn to ratepayers to foot the bill, there is less
incentive to buy the necessary insurance or do the necessary maintenance.

Under California law, PG&Es shareholders were given a guaranteed 11.35 percent
profit on any investment in system upgrades. The PUC gave PG&E the highest rate
of return in the nation following the utilitys bankruptcy in 2001 as an
inducement for investors to buy shares in PG&E.

At the same time, PG&E ratepayers pay some of the highest rates in the nation to
maintain what is in concept a high quality system. But the Bay Area News Group
reported last week that PG&E had failed in thousands of instances from 2010-2015
to conduct timely inspections and work orders required by the PUC in Sonoma and
Napa counties, where the Wine Country fires burned.

The latest PG&E outrage is business as usual. The utility has repeatedly tried
to force ratepayers to bear the brunt of its $1.6 billion fine resulting from
its criminal conviction for causing the 2010 San Bruno gas pipeline tragedy. It
has done this despite having taken $150 million of ratepayer money that was
intended for gas pipeline repairs and instead spent it on an executive salaries
and bonuses.

You cant put a corporation in jail. The only way to force accountability is to
penalize shareholders. Theyll demand change when their return on investment
drops.

And if that doesnt work, its time to look at dismantling the utility and
starting over with a plan to provide power to Northern California.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              893 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             Thunder Bay Chronicle

                            September 1, 2017 Friday

[Wildfires-BC code:2 Update:Will be updated INDEX: Environment, National,
Disaster HL:B.C. wildfi]

SECTION: LOCAL LIVING

LENGTH: 207  words


Wildfires-BC

code:2

Update:Will be updated

INDEX: Environment, National, Disaster

HL:B.C. wildfires could leave bears hungry as berries and grasses charred:
expert

THE CANADIAN PRESS

KAMLOOPS, B.C. - Wildlife experts are warning British Columbia's severe
wildfires could make bears even more troublesome as they fatten up before
hibernation.

Wildsafe B.C. provincial co-ordinator Frank Ritcey says there is always
increased conflict between bears and humans in autumn, as the bruins search for
food.

He predicts this fall will be particularly challenging because huge swaths of
the province have been charred by wildfires, killing the berries and grasses
bears rely on.

Residents with gardens and fruit trees are advised to harvest early and often,
while garbage cans should be kept secured and indoors until just before pickup.

The warning comes as BC Wildfire Service spokesman Kevin Skrepnek predicts the
province's wildfire season could stretch into the fall because continued hot,
dry weather is forecast over southern B.C.

He says the province has spent $404 million fighting fires that have scorched
10,600 square kilometres of timber, bush and grassland since April 1, the
greatest area the province has lost to wildfires in a single season. (CHNL)

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 Thunder Bay Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved


                              894 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             August 5, 2014 Tuesday
                                Regional Edition

70 carefully lit candles for Smokey

BYLINE: Moira McLaughlin

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C08

LENGTH: 534 words


Real black bears don't live to be 70 years old. But a pretend black bear named
Smokey Bear, who was born out of a desire to help save U.S. forests, turns 70 on
Saturday.

One of the most recognized characters in the United States, Smokey has been a
spokesman (or spokesbear?) for the U.S. Forest Service since 1944. The Forest
Service is the part of the government that manages national forests, where
people go to camp and hike.

Wildfires in those forests can burn millions of acres of land a year, so the
Forest Service created Smokey to help spread the word on how to prevent fires.
That means no playing with matches and always making sure your campfire is out
when you're done with it.

At first Smokey's slogan, or what he always said, was, "Care will prevent 9 out
of 10 fires." But in 1947, Smokey's slogan changed to, "Remember, only you can
prevent forest fires." That's the slogan that your mom and dad probably know. In
2001, his words changed slightly, and "forest fires" became "wildfires." His
look, which includes an easy-to-recognize ranger hat, has not changed much over
the years.

Forests are important

Preventing wildfires is important because trees are a natural resource. We need
them in order to make such things as paper for math quizzes and science books.
It's also important to preserve forests so that everyone can enjoy them. And a
big wildfire can put people's lives at risk, especially firefighters. But maybe
the most important reason to prevent wildfires is simply because people need
trees to live. You'll remember from science class that trees produce the oxygen
that we breathe.

Although some wildfires are started naturally, such as when lightning hits a
tree, most wildfires are started by people. That's why even today, Smokey's
message is important. And it seems to be working. Since Smokey started his work,
wildfires have decreased by nearly one-third, Forest Service reports.

"As these children develop into . . . adults, it's in their best interest to
know the cost of . . . wildfires," said Fred Hernandez, who works for the Forest
Service.

A real Smokey

In a city such as Washington, you may feel like you're far away from the big
wildfires Smokey is talking about. And you are. Most of them are in the hot, dry
and windy forests in states such as California and Oregon. But Virginia loses
8,000 to 10,000 acres of forest and grassland each year to wildfires, according
to the Virginia Department of Forestry. And Maryland officials say fires destroy
about 4,000 acres a year in that state.

Washington also has a connection to Smokey. In 1950, a young bear cub was
trapped in a New Mexico fire. He climbed a tree to escape the flames but
suffered burns on his back legs and paws. Firefighters saved him and named him
Smokey. He came to live at the National Zoo until his death in 1976.

Kids have been writing to Smokey Bear, the character, for years. The big, cuddly
bear even has his own Zip code. That's how important people think he is. You can
see his posters around the city today. Be on the lookout. He'll be there,
looking down at you in a bus stop with his gentle face, reminding you, "Only you
can prevent wildfires."

- Moira McLaughlin

kidspost@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                              895 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                Abbotsford News

                              July 10, 2017 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Canadian Forces remain Ã¢â[#x201a]¬Ëoelast resortÃ¢â[#x201a]¬â[#x201e]¢ for B.C.
wildfire response: province

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 659 words


UPDATE: July 10

The Canadian Forces are confirming they are moving the three Griffin helicopters
from Kelowna to a base in Kamloops to help fight the wildfires raging across
B.C.

Several fixed aircrafts and rotary aircrafts will be based out of Comox and also
assisting Wildfire Management in attacking the more than 200 blazes.

-----

The Canadian Forces are en route to Kelowna to help fight the estimated 230
wildfires burning across B.C.

However, the BC Wildfire Service said Sunday that the military isn't likely to
help with direct, on-the-ground firefighting. Instead, the personnel will
provide logistical support.

"We have Canadian Forces assets that are leaning forward and pre-position to
help with supporting provincial efforts," said chief fire information officer
Kevin Skrepnek. "There should be three Griffin helicopters into Kelowna today
and there should be some larger fixed-wing aircraft in the next few days."

Skrepnek said that the province will look to firefighting support from Alberta
and Ontario, as well as from other provinces, before asking the Canadian Forces
to help with firefighting operations.

"What we're bringing in are trained wildfire crews from other provinces; both
on-the-ground fire crews and specialist positions," said Skrepnek. "We are also
reaching out to leverage the contract firefighting community here in B.C -
basically forest industry companies that have their own trained crews."

twitter.com

In the meantime, more than 1,000 firefighters are currently battling the
wildfires that have prompted the evacuation of 7,000 British Columbians in the
Interior. The 2017 season has cost the province $46 million as of July 7,
although Skrepnek said that is expected to grow. Annually, the province sets
aside $63 million for wildfire response but often pulls from a contingency fund
to supplement its response. In 2016, B.C. spent $122.9 million.

"[There are] 1,800 evacuees registered in Williams Lake that are being directed
to Prince George and about 1,200 people registered at 100 Mile House," said
Emergency Management BC executive director Chris Duffy. "But those numbers are
very fluid."

Wildfires of note are burning in 100 Mile House , Williams Lake , Ashcroft ,
Princeton , Quesnel and Little Fort . Officials say that no one is unaccounted
for at this time.

WATCH: B.C. Wildfires by the numbers

While efforts are underway to save livestock in affected areas, Skrepnek said
that there are no plans to help wildlife escape the fire.

Wildfire service officials estimate just under 24,000 hecatres has already
burned across the province. Wildfire Services said it's trying to manage fatigue
for their fire crews in what could be a "pretty protracted season."

Skrepnek noted that while this isn't a particularly early start to the fire
season, two to three weeks of hot and dry conditions have contributed to the
"incredibly aggressive fire behaviour" seen around the province this weekend.

RELATED: Wildlife may survive these wildfires, if they're fast

"Friday was really the tipping point when we had a fairly significant weather
system move through... that brought a fairly significant amount of dry
lightening," said Skrepnek. "That is certainly what touched off the vast
majority of new fires that we are getting."

He said that while windy conditions will help clear heavy smoke in B.C.'s
interior, they will also contribute to the spread of fires.

"The smoke was a bit of a double-edged sword," he said. "It does cause a lot of
visibility issues but it also has a bit of a calming effect. If it settles in
and around the fires, it traps moisture closer to the ground... which tends to
minimize fire behaviour."

A "province-wide rain event" is the best case scenario, but Skrepnek said it is
"certainly not looking optimistic."

twitter.com

The provincial government announced $100 million in funding to the Canadian Red
Cross Sunday to help cities rebuild.

RELATED: How to help those devastated by B.C. wildfires

www.twitter.com

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              896 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Ashcroft Cache Creek Journal

                              July 10, 2017 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Canadian Forces remain Ã¢â[#x201a]¬Ëoelast resortÃ¢â[#x201a]¬â[#x201e]¢ for B.C.
wildfire response: province

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 659 words


UPDATE: July 10

The Canadian Forces are confirming they are moving the three Griffin helicopters
from Kelowna to a base in Kamloops to help fight the wildfires raging across
B.C.

Several fixed aircrafts and rotary aircrafts will be based out of Comox and also
assisting Wildfire Management in attacking the more than 200 blazes.

----

The Canadian Forces are en route to Kelowna to help fight the estimated 230
wildfires burning across B.C.

However, the BC Wildfire Service said Sunday that the military isn't likely to
help with direct, on-the-ground firefighting. Instead, the personnel will
provide logistical support.

"We have Canadian Forces assets that are leaning forward and pre-position to
help with supporting provincial efforts," said chief fire information officer
Kevin Skrepnek. "There should be three Griffin helicopters into Kelowna today
and there should be some larger fixed-wing aircraft in the next few days."

Skrepnek said that the province will look to firefighting support from Alberta
and Ontario, as well as from other provinces, before asking the Canadian Forces
to help with firefighting operations.

"What we're bringing in are trained wildfire crews from other provinces; both
on-the-ground fire crews and specialist positions," said Skrepnek. "We are also
reaching out to leverage the contract firefighting community here in B.C -
basically forest industry companies that have their own trained crews."

twitter.com

In the meantime, more than 1,000 firefighters are currently battling the
wildfires that have prompted the evacuation of 7,000 British Columbians in the
Interior. The 2017 season has cost the province $46 million as of July 7,
although Skrepnek said that is expected to grow. Annually, the province sets
aside $63 million for wildfire response but often pulls from a contingency fund
to supplement its response. In 2016, B.C. spent $122.9 million.

"[There are] 18,00 evacuees registered in Williams Lake that are being directed
to Prince George and about 1,200 people registered at 100 Mile House," said
Emergency Management BC executive director Chris Duffy. "But those numbers are
very fluid."

Wildfires of note are burning in 100 Mile House , Williams Lake , Ashcroft ,
Princeton , Quesnel and Little Fort . Officials say that no one is unaccounted
for at this time.

WATCH: B.C. Wildfires by the numbers

While efforts are underway to save livestock in affected areas, Skrepnek said
that there are no plans to help wildlife escape the fire.

Wildfire service officials estimate just under 24,000 hecatres has already
burned across the province. Wildfire Services said it's trying to manage fatigue
for their fire crews in what could be a "pretty protracted season."

Skrepnek noted that while this isn't a particularly early start to the fire
season, two to three weeks of hot and dry conditions have contributed to the
"incredibly aggressive fire behaviour" seen around the province this weekend.

RELATED: Wildlife may survive these wildfires, if they're fast

"Friday was really the tipping point when we had a fairly significant weather
system move through... that brought a fairly significant amount of dry
lightening," said Skrepnek. "That is certainly what touched off the vast
majority of new fires that we are getting."

He said that while windy conditions will help clear heavy smoke in B.C.'s
interior, they will also contribute to the spread of fires.

"The smoke was a bit of a double-edged sword," he said. "It does cause a lot of
visibility issues but it also has a bit of a calming effect. If it settles in
and around the fires, it traps moisture closer to the ground... which tends to
minimize fire behaviour."

A "province-wide rain event" is the best case scenario, but Skrepnek said it is
"certainly not looking optimistic."

twitter.com

The provincial government announced $100 million in funding to the Canadian Red
Cross Sunday to help cities rebuild.

RELATED: How to help those devastated by B.C. wildfires

www.twitter.com

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              897 of 987 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                             July 30, 2016 Saturday
                                 Early Edition

Fires cut oil production, hike costs for Imperial Oil

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 262 words

DATELINE: CALGARY


Imperial Oil had a $181-million loss in its second quarter, mostly due to the
wildfires that raged through northern Alberta in May, sparking a massive
evacuation and curtailing oilsands production.

The Calgary-based company says the wildfires accounted for $170 million of the
reduction in its net income from last year's second quarter, when the company
was profitable.

It says the wildfires reduced its production by 60,000 barrels per day.
Excluding the wildfires, it estimates production would have increased by 45,000
barrels per day or 13 per cent.

Imperial's loss amounted to 21 cents per share and compared with a year-earlier
profit of 14 cents per share or $120 million.

Total revenue also declined, falling by 14.4 per cent or nearly a billion
dollars to $6.25 billion. In addition to the wildfires, Imperial's operations
felt the impact of planned maintenance at its Kearl and Syncrude oilsands
operations, and its Strathcona refinery east of Edmonton and Nanticoke refinery
on the shore of Lake Erie in Ontario.

"Although our facilities were not damaged by the wildfires, operationally both
Kearl and Syncrude were significantly impacted," Rich Kruger, Imperial's
chairman, president and CEO, said in a statement.

"Syncrude operations were halted in early May, the first complete shutdown in
the site's nearly 40-year history, with a staged restart of operations in
mid-June."

Syncrude is one of the world's oldest oilsands operations - owned by a
partnership that includes Suncor Energy and Imperial Oil. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2016
Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Brent Lewin, Bloomberg, Files; Although the northern Alberta wildfires
did not damage Imperial Oil's oilsands facilities, they did force a costly
shutdown of the company's Kearl and Syncrude operations.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2016 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              898 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        The East Bay Times (California)

                            October 30, 2017 Monday

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

BYLINE: Mercury News Editorial Board

LENGTH: 522 words



HIGHLIGHT: PG&E wants to make it easier for the company to charge ratepayers --
rather than shareholders -- when its power lines and other electrical equipment
cause wildfires.


PG&E never learns.

The Wine Country wildfires have yet to be fully contained, but the utility
already knows who it believes should accept responsibility for the estimated $1
billion in damages: ratepayers. Even if CalFire investigators determine it was
PG&Es negligence that caused the blazes that killed 42 people and destroyed
8,700 homes and buildings.

Gwar frontman found dead      What did you expect?

The Bay Area News Groups Paul Rogers reported Sunday that top PG&E executives
met as recently as last week to lobby officials at the California Public
Utilities Commission to make it easier for the company to charge ratepayers
rather than shareholders  when its power lines and other electrical equipment
cause wildfires.

CalFire investigators have not determined what caused the wildfires. But the
notion that ratepayers should bear the burden for any PG&E incompetence is
unconscionable. If current law isnt clear enough on that issue  and there is
plenty of evidence to suggest it isnt  the Legislature should step in.

A key factor is PG&Es acknowledgment that it has only $800 million in insurance
to cover any damages from the wildfires.

It wasnt ratepayers who decided that issue. Nor was it ratepayers who decided
where and how their money should be spent on maintaining the utilitys power
equipment.

No one wants to see PG&E go bankrupt. The utility also has a fiduciary
responsibility to protect shareholders. But just as shareholders benefit from
the annual $1 billion in profits PG&E rakes in, they should also absorb primary
responsibility for PG&Es shortcomings as the risk they take when they invest in
the utility. If PG&E can just turn to ratepayers to foot the bill, there is less
incentive to buy the necessary insurance or do the necessary maintenance.

Under California law, PG&Es shareholders were given a guaranteed 11.35 percent
profit on any investment in system upgrades. The PUC gave PG&E the highest rate
of return in the nation following the utilitys bankruptcy in 2001 as an
inducement for investors to buy shares in PG&E.

At the same time, PG&E ratepayers pay some of the highest rates in the nation to
maintain what is in concept a high quality system. But the Bay Area News Group
reported last week that PG&E had failed in thousands of instances from 2010-2015
to conduct timely inspections and work orders required by the PUC in Sonoma and
Napa counties, where the Wine Country fires burned.

The latest PG&E outrage is business as usual. The utility has repeatedly tried
to force ratepayers to bear the brunt of its $1.6 billion fine resulting from
its criminal conviction for causing the 2010 San Bruno gas pipeline tragedy. It
has done this despite having taken $150 million of ratepayer money that was
intended for gas pipeline repairs and instead spent it on an executive salaries
and bonuses.

You cant put a corporation in jail. The only way to force accountability is to
penalize shareholders. Theyll demand change when their return on investment
drops.

And if that doesnt work, its time to look at dismantling the utility and
starting over with a plan to provide power to Northern California.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              899 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       The Daily Gleaner (New Brunswick)

                             July 21, 2015 Tuesday

Wildfire strategy discussion sparks interest in New Brunswick

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 644 words


New Brunswick wants to be a part of discussions surrounding a national wildfire
strategy, but the province's head of forest fire management says it's too early
to commit to anything.

Last week, premiers from Saskatchewan and British Columbia called on the federal
government to draft a plan that will help provinces be more prepared for future
large wildfires, arguing that large-scale blazes, which have sent thousands of
people fleeing from their homes, are going to become the norm.

Len Mosher, manager of forest fire management with the provincial Department of
Natural Resources, said New Brunswick needs to know exactly what such a strategy
would entail before signing onto it.

But after watching the situation in Western Canada this summer, Mosher said the
province would be interested in tracking down additional resources that could
help fight major wildfires in the future.

"With the amount of fire activity in the West this year, and in 2014 to a lesser
extent, there were not enough resources available and firefighters were brought
in from several other provinces and countries," Mosher said in an emailed
statement.

Most of the firefighters the Department of Natural Resources sent to help battle
the wildfires returned home last week and during the weekend. The province is
considering sending more people if it can find the resources.

"Whether those staff are mobilized will depend upon the current needs of the
agencies with fires," Mosher said.

Ashley Fraser spent more than two weeks in the hot zone in central Saskatchewan,
working 14-hour days co-ordinating three crews of firefighters on the front
lines. The conditions were hot and dry.

"Seeing their fires and seeing how big they get, we see a lot of fire behaviour
we would never see in our province," he said.

Fraser, who is an assistant district ranger based out of Hampton, has travelled
to Quebec and Alberta to fight wildfires in past years. He said the department
never has trouble finding crews willing to fight wildfires in other parts of
Canada. In order to make the trip, firefighters have to pass a rigorous fitness
test.

While New Brunswick has never seen the kind of wildfires that ravaged Western
Canada this summer, Fraser believes it's important for New Brunswick
firefighters to get a taste of the action so they're prepared if the situation
ever arises here.

"It's great for us to go out there because we're always training, but you have
to be able to use what you learn," he said.

David Martell, a wildfire expert from the University of Toronto, said it's hard
to pinpoint one exact cause for this year's wildfires, but hot and dry
conditions are likely the culprit.

When you mix the two, you often see lightning fires. Add in high winds and
there's a mixture for trouble.

Martell also pointed to the sea surface temperatures in the Pacific Ocean, which
are affecting the jet stream and weather patterns across Canada. There's
widespread belief that these things seem to be happening more often, likely due
to climate change, he said.

"Can we expect to see more of this? I would say yes. Are we going to see it
every year? My guess would be probably not every year."

He said New Brunswick should keep sending firefighters to hot zones on the west
coast in order to be prepared if the province does have a big wildfire.

"They're going to be better equipped to deal with fires in New Brunswick when
they do occur," Martell said.

The New Brunswick chapter of the Canadian Red Cross still has four volunteers
helping evacuees in Saskatchewan, while two people have already returned home
from tours.

"We have been providing emergency aid like shelter, food, clothing and other
support to evacuees on behalf of the Saskatchewan government under a formal
disaster assistance agreement between the province and the Canadian Red Cross,"
Bedell said. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2015 The Daily Gleaner (Fredericton)

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 The Daily Gleaner
                              All Rights Reserved


                              900 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 23, 2014 Tuesday

Climate change expected to raise U.S. wildfire costs by $10-60 billion per year
in just four decades

LENGTH: 829  words




Environmental Defense Fund has issued the following news release:

Groups issue report of first-ever cost estimates for climate change-magnified
wildfires, and urge inclusion in national "social cost of carbon" estimates of
the economic impacts of carbon pollution

Climate change could take a serious toll on the U.S. economy by expanding the
area that wildfires burn 50 percent--and raising projected damages by tens of
billions of dollars a year by 2050, according to a new economic study released
today.

The study, "Flammable Planet: Wildfires and the Social Cost of Carbon"--by the
Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), the Institute for Policy Integrity at NYU
School of Law (Policy Integrity), and the Natural Resources Defense Council
(NRDC)--provides the first estimate of the future economic costs of wildfires
that will be magnified by climate change.

The study shows that wildfires already cost the U.S. between $20 billion and
$125 billion a year. With climate change that number could climb drastically,
adding an additional $10 billion to $60 billion per year to the cost of
wildfires within just four decades. In today's economy, that's about $80 to $500
per household.

"Climate change is here now and its toll on our health and economy is rising
every day," said Laurie Johnson, chief economist at NRDC. "Wildfires that
already destroy millions of acres of forests and thousands of homes will cause
much more damage if we don't take strong steps to reduce the carbon pollution
driving climate change. We're losing time but not solutions to this grave
threat, and we must act now."

President Obama has taken steps to do just that, using his authority under the
Clean Air Act to propose carbon pollution limits on power plants built in the
future and the first-ever limits on carbon pollution from plants operating now.

The standards, set to be in place by 2015, will address nearly 40 percent of the
nation's carbon pollution.

This pollution imposes economic costs by damaging public health and driving
destructive climate change. Working together, the White House and key federal
agencies have put a dollar value on those damages, a figure known as the "social
cost of carbon." The administration's best estimate is $40 per ton of carbon
pollution.

The social cost of carbon incorporates economic costs of factors such as climate
impacts on health and agriculture, but omits many extreme weather events
including wildfires. Today's new report shows that wildfires should be
incorporated as well.

Given the future outlook for wildfires, that makes sense. Scientists predict
that climate change will intensify, and with it wildfires will become more
frequent and intense, and fire seasons will get longer. Acres burned could surge
by 50 to 100 percent in four decades, some studies suggest, with the heaviest
damage in America's Western states.

"It's clear that climate change-driven wildfires pose a serious economic risk,
and should eventually be part of the administration's assessment of the cost of
carbon pollution. Wildfire risks are yet one more reason we must address climate
change now, as we're putting future generations in jeopardy the longer we
delay," said Richard Revesz, director of the Institute for Policy Integrity.

The social cost of carbon is a powerful tool that has guided development of the
carbon pollution standards for new and existing power plants, and for standards
to improve vehicle fuel efficiency. Recently, the Government Accountability
Office, the independent investigative arm of Congress, endorsed the
administration's methodology in a report that also noted some experts contend
that the dollar figure may be low because it leaves out the cost of damages from
factors such as certain catastrophic events.

"Increasing bills for wildfire damage are just one example of how much climate
inaction will cost us," said Gernot Wagner, Lead Senior Economist at EDF. "The
public has to pick up the tab after the weather disasters that we'll see more
frequently because of climate change. We need to fully assess climate risks so
we can make good public policy decisions."

Earlier this year, NRDC, EDF and Policy Integrity launched the Cost of Carbon
Pollution project to focus on the social cost of carbon and how it is used to
develop federal standards. Their first report addressed costs missing from the
administration's current calculation: "Omitted Damages: What's Missing from the
Social Cost of Carbon."

The new report, authored by Peter Howard, an economics fellow at Policy
Integrity, analyzed the types of damage from wildfires such as loss of timber,
health effects, loss of ecological services, and costs for fire prevention,
suppression and rehabilitation, both in the U.S. and globally. The report is the
first of a series planned to put dollar figures on damages partially and fully
left out of the social cost of carbon.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              901 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           September 7, 2017 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Wildfire-weary Western US coughs through late-season surge

BYLINE:  By STEVEN DUBOIS Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 572 words


The smoke, the flames, the aching lungs, the evacuations. They're summertime
facts of life in the U.S. West, where every wildfire season competes with
memories of previous destruction.

This year was supposed to be mild after an extremely wet winter and spring but
has ended up one of the worst in U.S. history in the acreage of land burned. A
look at the fires:

OREGON

Thousands of residents have evacuated as firefighters battle blazes statewide,
including one devastating hiking trails and waterfalls in the scenic Columbia
River Gorge.

Officials expect a fire near Brookings to burn for at least another month. The
weather is a wild card in a region accustomed to rain and fog. If it's hot and
dry, it will be a scary September.

MONTANA

Darinda Yoder wishes she had not waited so long to evacuate her home near
Montana's border with Canada.

If she had left earlier, she would not have the terrifying memory of flames
rushing down a mountain toward the state's oldest Amish community this weekend.

"The fire came down so fast they almost didn't get us out," Yoder told the
Missoulian newspaper. "I don't think it would have affected me the way it is now
if I'd not seen the fire."

It has burned 10 homes and 30 other buildings and threatened a town on the
western shore of Lake Koocanusa on Wednesday.

WASHINGTON

Local recreationists and tourists mourned damage to popular hiking trails and
campsites from a wildfire near Mount Rainier National Park.

It more than doubled in size to 68 square miles and closed all backcountry
trails on the east side of the iconic park.

Smoke swathed areas from Seattle to Spokane, where the air Wednesday was rated
as hazardous.

IDAHO

Catholic nuns living at the Monastery of St. Gertrude can normally see across an
entire prairie to the Bitterroot Mountains.

But they were hard-pressed Wednesday to see the road leading to the monastery in
the city of Cottonwood amid heavy smoke.

"Everything is just a big haze," Sister Placida Wemhoff said. "Our eyes smart
and sting."

Cottonwood had the unwanted distinction of having the worst air quality in the
nation for much of Wednesday, the Environmental Protection Agency said.

Idaho's largest wildfire is being allowed to burn in a rugged wilderness area.

UTAH

Nearly 200 homes in a high-end neighborhood nestled in the foothills near a
northern Utah canyon were evacuated Wednesday as crews battled a blaze that had
burned three houses.

Calmer winds allowed firefighters to stop the 1-square-mile fire from spreading
toward more homes in the city of Ogden, said Rachelle Handley of the U.S. Forest
Service.

CALIFORNIA

Twenty large blazes burned across the state, including one outside Yosemite
National Park that moved through ancient sequoia trees and another that burned
five homes in Los Angeles.

A big Labor Day weekend wildfire in the L.A. suburb of Burbank was reduced to a
black scar but remained dangerous. It had burned near 1,400 homes.

In northern California, centers with air purifiers have opened and some schools
have suspended classes as smoke from several wildfires fills the air.

In neighboring Trinity County, a fire on both sides of a river was expanding
north toward another fire after destroying 72 homes and forcing about 2,000
people to evacuate.

Outside Yosemite, crews gained ground against a blaze that burned halfway
through a grove of 2,700-year-old giant sequoias. Officials said it had not
killed any trees, which can withstand low-intensity fires.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  A helicopter with a water bucket flies through dense smoke near
Stevenson, Wash., Wednesday, Sept. 6, 2017, as it works to battle the Eagle
Creek wildfire on the Oregon side of the Columbia River Gorge. (AP Photo/Randy
L. Rasmussen)  A hiker and two others look at smoke from the Eagle Creek
wildfire on the Oregon side of the Columbia River Gorge from the Bridge of the
Gods, spanning the Columbia River between Washington and Oregon states, near
Stevenson, Wash., Wednesday, Sept. 6, 2017. (AP Photo/Randy L. Rasmussen)
Cascade Locks, Ore., nestled in tall fir trees alongside the Columbia River, is
inundated by smoke from the nearby Eagle Creek wildfire Wednesday, Sept. 6,
2017. The growing blaze east of Portland in the scenic Columbia River Gorge was
one of dozens of wildfires in the U.S. West that sent smoke into cities from
Seattle to Denver. (AP Photo/Randy L. Rasmussen)  A firefighter maintains a
spray of water on the trees around Multnomah Falls Wednesday Sept. 6, 2017 as
the Eagle Creek Fire continues to burn east of Troutdale, Ore. (Chris
Pietsch/The Register-Guard via AP)  A wildfire continues to burn on the Oregon
side of the Columbia River Gorge near Cascade Locks, Ore., and the Bridge of the
Gods, late Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017. (Genna Martin/seattlepi.com via AP)  The sun
is barely visible over downtown Portland, Ore., Wednesday, Sept. 6, 2017, as
seen through smoke from wildfires burning in the Columbia River Gorge east of
Portland. The growing blaze east of Portland, Oregon, in the scenic Columbia
River Gorge, was one of dozens of wildfires burning in western U.S. states that
sent smoke into cities from Seattle to Denver. (AP Photo/Don Ryan)  Bill Leong
covers his face as a smoke fills Spokane, Wash. on Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017. The
growing blaze east of Portland in the scenic Columbia River Gorge was one of
dozens of wildfires in the U.S. West that sent smoke into cities from Seattle to
Denver. (Kathy Plonka/The Spokesman-Review via AP)  Children are evacuated from
South Weber Elementary School as a fire burns at the mouth of Weber Canyon,
Utah, Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017. A fast-moving wildfire swept down a northern Utah
canyon Tuesday morning, destroying homes, forcing evacuations and closing
highways. A least five homes were burned as more than 1,000 people and two
schools were evacuated amid high winds that fed the flames in a canyon north of
Salt Lake City. (Trent Nelson /The Salt Lake Tribune via AP)  A barricade closes
the Bridge of the Gods, spanning the Columbia River between Washington and
Oregon states, near Stevenson, Wash., Wednesday, Sept. 6, 2017. The Eagle Creek
fire continues to burn on the Oregon side of the river near the town of Cascade
Locks, Ore. (AP Photo/Randy L. Rasmussen)  A wildfire continues to burn on the
Oregon side of the Columbia River Gorge near Cascade Locks, Ore., and the Bridge
of the Gods, late Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017. (Genna Martin/seattlepi.com via AP)
FILE--This Monday, Sept. 4, 2017, file photo provided by KATU-TV shows a
wildfire as seen from near Stevenson Wash., across the Columbia River, burning
in the Columbia River Gorge above Cascade Locks, Ore. The fast-moving wildfire
chewing through Oregon's Columbia River Gorge is threatening more than homes and
people. It's also devouring the heart of the state's nature-loving identity.
(Tristan Fortsch/KATU-TV via AP, file)  This Monday Sept. 4, 2017, photo
provided by KATU-TV shows the Eagle Creek wildfire as seen from Stevenson Wash.,
across the Columbia River, burning in the Columbia River Gorge above Cascade
Locks, Ore. A lengthy stretch of highway Interstate 84 remains closed Tuesday,
Sept. 5, as crews battle the wildfire that has also caused evacuations and
sparked blazes across the Columbia River in Washington state. (Tristan
Fortsch/KATU-TV via AP)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              902 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           October 4, 2017 Wednesday

Washington: #SubEnvironment Examines Air Quality Impacts of Wildfires

LENGTH: 608  words



Washington, DC: Energy & Commerce Committee United States House of
Representatives  has issued the following press release:
The Environment Subcommittee, chaired by Rep. John Shimkus (R-IL), today held a
hearing examining the impact wildfires have on air quality and emissions in the
affected areas across the country. Members examined how better management of our
forests is needed to avoid and minimize catastrophic wildfires - particularly
members looked at how prescribed burns and fuel reduction are important forestry
management tools.


"Just this summer in my home state of Oregon, we watched as fires burned more
than 678,000 acres - equivalent to two-thirds the size of Rhode Island - and
over $340 million has been spent - so far - to fight them," said full committee
Chairman Greg Walden (R-OR). "Across Oregon schools were forced to close because
of smoke and poor air quality. Communities have watched timber jobs disappear as
more and more of our federal land has become locked up. Those same communities
are now watching tourism dollars slip away as visitors stay away from the
smoke."
In discussing how to better prevent catastrophic fires, John Bailey, Professor
at Oregon State University, College of Forestry, commented, "The solution to
unwanted wildfire behavior is NOT to pressure young men and women to take more
risks by using more aggressive tactics on the fireline and more expensive
technology attempting to suppress fire. The solution is to harness the expertise
and dedication of federal, state, tribal, NGO, and private sector fire managers
to use active and sustainable forest management today, including fire as one of
the tools, to help mitigate the effects of future fires."
Jim Karels, Director and State Forester for the Florida Forest Service, spoke to
the important differences between prescribed burns and uncontrolled wildfires,
stating, "The differing air quality impacts from prescribed fire compared to
unplanned wildfires are important to recognize. One of the keys to prescribed
fire for hazardous fuels management is that it is done in seasons under
conditions where fire managers have the ability to control fire location,
spread, intensity, and many other parameters. ... It is becoming increasingly
evident through science and experience that without prescribed fire and the
small amount of managed smoke that comes with it, we are perpetuating the
conditions that generate catastrophic air quality issues and put communities and
individuals at risk."
Knox Marshall, Vice President of Resources at Murphy Company, discussed ways in
which we can mitigate the size and scope of wildfires, commenting, "Aggressive
action must be taken to address the root cause of the worsening catastrophic
wildfires - poor forest health. While we can't (and shouldn't) prevent all
fires, science does tell us that we can reduce the size and severity of
wildfires through active forest management, including timber harvesting,
mechanical thinning, and prescribed fire."
"The statistics are staggering. So far this year, there have been almost 49,000
wildfires in the United States destroying nearly 8.5 million acres. And the
emissions from these fires can have serious impacts on air quality over a range
that can stretch for many miles. As a result, millions of Americans can be
exposed to the pollutants found in wildfire smoke, sometimes for extended
periods of time. Congress should be looking at any and all ways to address
wildfires and their air emissions, and most important of all, the policy measure
that can help prevent or minimize wildfires in the first place," concluded
#SubEnvironment Chairman Shimkus.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              903 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 16, 2015 Saturday

Oregon: Seven Western States Proclaim May Wildfire Awareness Month

LENGTH: 339  words

DATELINE: Salem


The Office of Governor, Oregon has issued the following news release:

The governors of seven western states have signed a proclamation recognizing May
2015 as Wildfire Awareness Month. The governors of Oregon, Nevada, California,
Idaho, Utah, Montana, and South Dakota encourage all citizens to take steps to
better prepare their home and communities for wildfires and work toward becoming
a fire-adapted community.

In partnership with Keep Oregon Green www.keeporegongreen.org/ and the Oregon
Department of Forestry www.oregon.gov/ODF/Pages/index.aspx , Governor Brown
appears in two public service announcements explaining how all Oregonians can
take steps to keep our state safe this summer.  Oregon is entering the 2015 fire
season after historic back-to-back wildfire years. In 2013, a record 103,809
acres burned on state-protected lands and firefighting costs soared to $122
million. In 2014, Oregon faced another endless season of fire, with 712
human-caused fires burning 20,052 acres - nearly six times the 10-year average.

Forest conditions going into the 2015 season are ominous: Oregon is experiencing
the lowest snowpack in nearly 40 years.

This month, Keep Oregon Green is reminding Oregonians that when it comes to
wildfires, remember "Ready, Set, Go!"

o Be READY for a wildfire by maintaining 100 feet of defensible space and
hardening your home with fire-resistant building materials.
o Be SET for a wildfire by having a wildfire action plan in place so you know
what to take and where to go if you are evacuated.
o Lastly, GO early when a wildfire approaches or you are asked to evacuate.

In 1941, the Keep Oregon Green Association (KOG) was charged to fight fires with
publicity. An established 501(c)(3) non-profit corporation, KOG conducts a broad
public fire prevention program, designed to educate the public in the prevention
of human-caused wildfires and protect Oregon's residents and natural assets.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              904 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    The Floyd County Times, Prestonburg, Ky.

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           October 27, 2016 Thursday

Wildfire gets close to homes in Harold

BYLINE: Andrea Saddler, The Floyd County Times, Prestonburg, Ky.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 262 words


Oct. 27--HAROLD -- A wildfire was blazing on Kentucky Route 3379 in the
community of Harold on Wednesday evening. Mud Creek Fire Department firefighters
were on scene fighting the blaze as light winds carried the flames close to
homes in the area.

Bonnie Rockwell is a homeowner in Harold where the fire started. She was not
home when the blaze started. Rockwell arrived home with fire trucks blocking her
driveway. Water tankers were attempting to extinguish the blaze that was getting
dangerously close to Rockwell's home.

"I have been to the doctor all day, I do not need the stress of coming home and
finding my home in danger of catching on fire," said Rockwell.

As many as nine percent of wildfires in the United States are caused by humans.
Last year, Kentucky experienced 774 wildfires that burned over 19,207 acres,
according to the Insurance Information Institute.

The Division of Forestry is responsible for fighting wildfires on private lands
and enforcing forest fire hazard seasons and other outdoor burning regulations.
During forest fire hazard season, it is illegal to burn between the hours of 6
a.m. and 6 p.m. in or within 150 feet of any woodland or bush land.

The Fall Forest Fire Hazard Season is October 1 through December 15. Spring
Wildfire Hazard Season is February 15 through April 30.

Andrea Saddler is a reporter for The Floyd County Times. She can be reached at
(606) 886-8506.

___ (c)2016 The Floyd County Times (Prestonsburg, Ky.) Visit The Floyd County
Times (Prestonsburg, Ky.) at www.floydcountytimes.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20161027-QO-Wildfire-gets-close-to-homes-in-Harold-1027-20161027

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QO


            Copyright 2016 The Floyd County Times, Prestonburg, Ky.


                              905 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              July 11, 2014 Friday

Pelosi Statement on Emergency Wildfire Spending Discharge Petition

LENGTH: 223  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the House of Representative Nancy Pelosi, U.S Government has issued
the following news release:

Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi released the following statement on the discharge
petition filed by Congressman Scott Peters to bring legislation to designate
wildfires as emergency spending (H.R. 3992) to the floor for a vote:

"With rising temperatures and record droughts across the country, we could be
headed into one of the worst wildfire seasons in our history.  But with fires
raging across the west, the money is running out - and House Republicans can't
be bothered to act.

"Wildfires are clearly emergencies, and fighting them shouldn't be subject to
Washington's dysfunction.  As Republicans hold up the emergency supplemental
appropriation, the need to break wildfire efforts free from partisan obstruction
is clearer than ever.  The discharge petition led by Congressman Scott Peters
demands a vote on bipartisan and long-overdue legislation to designate wildfires
as emergency spending.

"Communities battling wildfires cannot wait for House Republicans to get their
act together, and they shouldn't have to.  Congress should move swiftly to
approve the supplemental appropriation request, and pass this bill to protect
wildfire funding from partisan politics."

For further information please visit: http://pelosi.house.gov

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              906 of 987 DOCUMENTS

                                 Network World

                               September 7, 1998

Canadian wireless users jump into the fire

BYLINE: Denise Pappalardo

SECTION: CARRIER SERVICES; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 221 words


If you're a wireless phone user looking for an easier way to manage your
incoming and outgoing calls, Wildfire may answer your burning needs.Bell
Mobility of Toronto and Wildfire Communications last week rolled out Wildfire
service for Bell's cellular and personal communications service (PCS) wireless
customers. Wildfire is a speech recognition technology that lets users make
calls, control their voice mail and employ call waiting without touching their
telephone keypad.

Although Wildfire has worked with a handful of service providers for about two
years, one user doesn't seem to mind the wait."The voice recognition
capabilities are unbelievable," says Bil Harmer, a systems administrator at
Wired Solutions, a Toronto Web page design and development firm. "I've used some
other speech recognition programs, and they were horrible. With Wildfire, I said
three words, and that was it. It never asks me to repeat a command," he
adds.Bell Mobility's Wildfire service will only be available in Toronto when
first introduced. Pacific Bell Mobile Services, CenturyTel and BellSouth have
conducted Wildfire service trials, but none have announced plans to offer the
service.Bell Mobility's Wildfire service will cost $13 to $19 per month
depending on extra service features. Bell Mobility: (416) 213-9453


LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1998 Network World, Inc.


                              907 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                               Berwick Advertiser

                            February 5, 2018 Monday

Fire chiefs complete latest training in tackling wildfire

LENGTH: 358  words


Fire officials have joined their European counterparts for the final time to
learn more about tackling wildfires.

Officers from Northumberland Fire and Rescue Services were in France for the
final conference for IGNIS, a European-wide wildfire training project.

The two-year IGNIS (Initiative for Global Management of big fires through
Simulation) project, co-financed by the European Commission, involved four
European partners, who designed and developed a wildfire simulation tool to
train fire officers in the command and control of large wildfires.

The simulation tool consists of a network of computers running advanced
software, which presents officers with a realistic virtual environment.

Commanders are shown what they would see at a wildfire incident, and use their
knowledge, skills and experience to make informed decisions on how to
effectively command the incident.

Paul Hedley, chief fire officer, Northumberland County Council, said: "The IGNIS
project has been an extremely ambitious project and some major advances have
been made over a relatively short period of time.

"Working with partners across Europe has allowed us to develop a fantastic
training tool that allows officers to train in wildfire management in a
realistic, real-time environment.

"Following the success of the development of IGNIS, the partners were also
discussing further exchanges and projects to help continue the valuable exchange
of knowledge and experience following that which has taken place during the last
two years."

Coun John Riddle, cabinet member with responsibility for the fire and rescue
service, said: "Having the ability to train for wildfire incidents is invaluable
to our Fire and Rescue Service, especially as a rural fire service where
wildfires are a potential risk.

"I'm proud of the work carried out by NFRS within this project and we can use
this experience and knowledge to take us forward and continue to work together
with colleagues across Europe."

At the final conference, lead officers signed a Statement of Intent to continue
working as a partnership over the next year to further develop simulation
training for wildfire incidents.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SBBA


                       Copyright 2018 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              908 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            December 4, 2016 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Tennessee fire's speed stunned residents, officials, visitors

BYLINE:  By ADAM BEAM and KRISTIN M. HALL Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 607 words


GATLINBURG, Tenn. - Tracey Mayberry told her boss to fire her.

It was 2 o'clock Monday afternoon in Gatlinburg, and the sky was dark with
smoke. Mayberry's shift as a manager at the resort where she worked did not end
until 5 p.m., but she could see a wildfire crawling down the mountain. Local
officials said the city had nothing to worry about, and Mayberry's boss had no
plan to close. But she knew something was wrong, so she walked home, coughing
and crying through the smoke until a stranger handed her a mask.

That wildfire had ignited five days earlier on a steep, rugged peak known as
Chimney Tops, about 4 miles away from Gatlinburg. In less than 24 hours, aided
by 87 mph wind and months of suffocating drought, the blaze would spread,
forging a path to this tourist mecca. In all, 13 people were killed, about 85
were injured and nearly 1,000 homes and businesses were charred or destroyed.

The flames came with little warning.

At 5 o'clock, there were no fires in Gatlinburg. Within an hour, 20 buildings
were ablaze.

Over the next few hours, the fires transformed a city busily preparing for
holiday festivities in the foothills of the Great Smoky Mountains into the scene
of a grim, building-by-building search for the missing and the dead. Rain fell
by midweek, dousing much of the fire but leaving hollow-eyed city officials,
firefighters and police officers working around the clock. Many had to put news
of their own gutted homes from their minds.

Tracey Mayberry and her husband - also named Tracy - packed their 2007 Ford
Escape with valuables. They stopped when a tree fell on their house and sparks
from a downed power line showered their yard. It was time to go.

They did not get far. Traffic was snarled on the parkway heading out of town.
Tracy, sitting anxiously behind the wheel, watched as the wind blew a fireball
into the Alamo Steakhouse just a few feet from his window. He gunned the engine
and swerved into the middle turn lane, the speedometer racing toward 90.

"I wasn't stopping for nothing or nobody," he said.

Across the city, firefighters were locked in a hopeless battle. The wind was
scattering chunks of flame across a thirsty landscape and knocking trees into
power lines, creating new fires. At 6 o'clock, authorities shifted their focus
to evacuating the city.

"There was no stopping the fire," said Clayton Jordan, deputy superintendent for
the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.

Heather Stargle was at the Travellers Motel, on the phone with her mother, when
there was a knock at her door.

It was her neighbor, warning her that police officers were at the bottom of the
hill asking people to leave. She took a red backpack and stuffed it with three
changes of clothes, a hair brush, deodorant and two bottles of medicine.

Flames surrounded the motel as she left. But Stargle had one more stop to make.
She pounded on the door of a neighbor at the motel, Pamela Johnson - "Mama Pam"
to those who frequented the McKinney Food Mart where she worked for the past 13
years.

"I sat there and said, 'Pam, please just open up the door and come on.' I said,
'The place is catching on fire,'" Stargle said. "She said, 'Get away from the
door, I am not coming.' She said that if she was meant to live, she would live.
If not, she wouldn't.

The Travellers Motel was completely destroyed. On Wednesday, authorities
announced they had discovered an unidentified body at the scene. Behind the door
that night, Johnson had been on the phone with Karyssa Dalton, her
granddaughter, 19. They had talked for five minutes at 7:40 p.m., and again for
six minutes and 47 seconds at 8:45 p.m.

At 10:36 p.m., Johnson did not answer.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  The stone walls are all that stands of the Roaring Fork Baptist Church
in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016, following the devastating wildfires
from Monday night, Nov. 28. (Amy Smotherman Burgess/Knoxville News Sentinel via
AP)  Crews work to clear a fallen tree off a teachers' car outside Orange High
School in Orange, Calif., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Cold Santa Ana winds swept
across Southern California on Friday, raising danger of wildfires and toppling
trees onto cars, at least one home and onto a busy freeway just ahead of rush
hour. (Kevin Sullivan/The Orange County Register via AP)  A fire damaged vehicle
rest in a ditch in the Roaring Fork area of Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2,
2016. Residents on Friday, were getting their first look at what remains of
their homes and businesses in Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore through the
resort community on Monday, Nov. 28. (Amy Smotherman Burgess/Knoxville News
Sentinel via AP)  The burnt remains of a home known to visitors as The Castle is
seen from downtown Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents were
getting their first look at what remains of their homes and businesses in
Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov.
28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  A burnt home sits on a
hillside in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents were getting
their first look at what remains of their homes and businesses in Gatlinburg,
after a wildfire tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov. 28. (Michael
Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  Veronica Carney looks at the skyline
from the remains of the home she grew up in, Thursday, Dec. 1, 2016, in
Gatlinburg, Tenn. Carney flew in from Massachusetts to assist her parents,
Richard T. Ramsey and Sue Ramsey who safely evacuated as a wildfire approached
Monday evening. (Andrew Nelles/The Tennessean via AP)  This Dec. 1, 2016,
satellite image using near-infrared (NIR) provided by DigitalGlobe shows damage
from the wildfire near Ripley's Aquarium of the Smokies in Gatlinburg, Tenn. NIR
imagery causes healthy vegetation to appear red and the burn scar from the
wildfire to be dark brown. More than 14,000 residents and visitors in Gatlinburg
were forced to evacuate, and the typically bustling tourist city has been
shuttered ever since. (Digital Globe via AP)  Charred home and cars sit on a
property, while a neighbor's home, background, is undamaged Thursday, Dec. 1,
2016, in Gatlinburg, Tenn. A devastating wildfire destroyed numerous homes and
buildings on Monday. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  Police
officers examine papers as vehicles wait to enter Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday,
Dec. 2, 2016. Residents were getting their first look at what remains of their
homes and businesses in Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore through the resort
community on Monday, Nov. 28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)
The burnt remains of Laurel Point Resort on Sky Mountain Rd. sits atop a hill in
Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents were getting their first look
at what remains of their homes and businesses in Gatlinburg, after a wildfire
tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov. 28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville
News Sentinel via AP)  Trina Rial retrieves her father's Harley vest from their
belongings in a motal room at Travelers in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2,
2016. Residents were getting their first look at what remains of their homes and
businesses in Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore through the resort community on
Monday, Nov. 28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  Utility
workers install a line in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016. Residents
were getting their first look at what remains of their homes and businesses in
Gatlinburg, after a wildfire tore through the resort community on Monday, Nov.
28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  A burnt vehicle sits on a
wildfire damaged property in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016, after
residents were allowed back in following the devastating fires on Monday night,
Nov. 28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  A burnt vehicle sits
on a wildfire damaged property in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday, Dec. 2, 2016, after
residents were allowed back in following the devastating fires on Monday night,
Nov. 28. (Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)  The stone walls are
all that stands of the Roaring Fork Baptist Church in Gatlinburg, Tenn., Friday,
Dec. 2, 2016, following the devastating wildfires from Monday night, Nov. 28.
(Michael Patrick/Knoxville News Sentinel via AP)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              909 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                              July 15, 2013 Monday
                                 Early Edition

Alberta sends crews to Manitoba to battle wildfires

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 147 words


FORESTS Alberta is sending help to Manitoba in its battle against a large number
of wildfires.

A total of 44 Alberta firefighters depart Monday to assist with efforts to
contain several dozen fires, most of which are burning across parts of
northeastern Manitoba.

"Currently, rain and cooler temperatures in Alberta have reduced the wildfire
danger to the point where Alberta firefighters can be sent to work in other
parts of the country," the province said in a statement. "These exported
firefighters can be recalled very quickly should the wildfire situation in
Alberta change unexpectedly."

There are 30 wildfires burning in Alberta, but all are listed as being held or
under control.

There have been 797 wildfires in the province so far this year, and 19,000
hectares of land have been burned.

Alberta last sent wildfire help to Manitoba in 2011, when three air tankers were
deployed.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2013 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              910 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        The East Bay Times (California)

                            October 30, 2017 Monday

Editorial: California ratepayers should not pay PG&Es Wine Country wildfires
bill

BYLINE: East Bay Times editorial board

LENGTH: 550 words



HIGHLIGHT: PG&E wants to make it easier for the company to charge ratepayers --
rather than shareholders -- when its power lines and other electrical equipment
cause wildfires.


PG&E never learns.

PG&E wants ratepayers to pay California wildfire costs

Editorial: PG&E records show utility cannot be trusted

PUC auditors find PG&E electricity system violations      The Wine Country
wildfires have yet to be fully contained, but the utility already knows who it
believes should accept responsibility for the estimated $1 billion in damages:
ratepayers. Even if CalFire investigators determine it was PG&Es negligence that
caused the blazes that killed 42 people and destroyed 8,700 homes and buildings.

What did you expect?

The Bay Area News Groups Paul Rogers reported Sunday that top PG&E executives
met as recently as last week to lobby officials at the California Public
Utilities Commission to make it easier for the company to charge ratepayers
rather than shareholders  when its power lines and other electrical equipment
cause wildfires.

CalFire investigators have not determined what caused the wildfires. But the
notion that ratepayers should bear the burden for any PG&E incompetence is
unconscionable. If current law isnt clear enough on that issue  and there is
plenty of evidence to suggest it isnt  the Legislature should step in.

A key factor is PG&Es acknowledgment that it has only $800 million in insurance
to cover any damages from the wildfires.

It wasnt ratepayers who decided that issue. Nor was it ratepayers who decided
where and how their money should be spent on maintaining the utilitys power
equipment.

No one wants to see PG&E go bankrupt. The utility also has a fiduciary
responsibility to protect shareholders. But just as shareholders benefit from
the annual $1 billion in profits PG&E rakes in, they should also absorb primary
responsibility for PG&Es shortcomings as the risk they take when they invest in
the utility. If PG&E can just turn to ratepayers to foot the bill, there is less
incentive to buy the necessary insurance or do the necessary maintenance.

Under California law, PG&Es shareholders were given a guaranteed 11.35 percent
profit on any investment in system upgrades. The PUC gave PG&E the highest rate
of return in the nation following the utilitys bankruptcy in 2001 as an
inducement for investors to buy shares in PG&E.

At the same time, PG&E ratepayers pay some of the highest rates in the nation to
maintain what is in concept a high quality system. But the Bay Area News Group
reported last week that PG&E had failed in thousands of instances from 2010-2015
to conduct timely inspections and work orders required by the PUC in Sonoma and
Napa counties, where the Wine Country fires burned.

The latest PG&E outrage is business as usual. The utility has repeatedly tried
to force ratepayers to bear the brunt of its $1.6 billion fine resulting from
its criminal conviction for causing the 2010 San Bruno gas pipeline tragedy. It
has done this despite having taken $150 million of ratepayer money that was
intended for gas pipeline repairs and instead spent it on an executive salaries
and bonuses.

You cant put a corporation in jail. The only way to force accountability is to
penalize shareholders. Theyll demand change when their return on investment
drops.

And if that doesnt work, its time to look at dismantling the utility and
starting over with a plan to provide power to Northern California.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              911 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 12, 2015 Thursday

Idaho:Boise Fire Captain Recognized by National Organizations to Receive Fire
Service Leadership Award

LENGTH: 232  words

DATELINE: Boise


City of Boise Idaho, has issued the following news release:

The National Association of State Foresters, International Association of Fire
Chiefs, National Fire Protection Association, and USDA Forest Service 2015
notified Captain Jerry McAdams he has been recognized with the Fire Adapted
Community Fire Service Leadership Award. He was nominated for this honor by Ivy
Dickinson with Idaho Firewise.

Established in 2014, in response to an overwhelming number of great wildfire
mitigation program efforts across the nation, the Wildfire Mitigation Awards are
the highest national honor one can receive for outstanding work and significant
program impact in wildfire preparedness and mitigation.

The three categories for the awards include:

Fire Adapted Communities Fire Service Leadership
    Wildfire Mitigation Innovation
    Community Wildfire Preparedness Pioneer

These awards are designed to recognize outstanding service in wildfire
preparedness and safety across a broad spectrum of activities and among a
variety of individuals and organizations.

"Captain McAdams work in mobilizing southwestern Idaho in wildfire mitigation is
second to none," commented Boise Fire Marshall Romeo Gervais.  The award will be
presented at the 2015 WUI Conference in Reno this March.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com Boise:

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              912 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 12, 2015 Thursday

Idaho:Boise Fire Captain Recognized by National Organizations to Receive Fire
Service Leadership Award

LENGTH: 232  words

DATELINE: Boise


City of Boise Idaho, has issued the following news release:

The National Association of State Foresters, International Association of Fire
Chiefs, National Fire Protection Association, and USDA Forest Service 2015
notified Captain Jerry McAdams he has been recognized with the Fire Adapted
Community Fire Service Leadership Award. He was nominated for this honor by Ivy
Dickinson with Idaho Firewise.

Established in 2014, in response to an overwhelming number of great wildfire
mitigation program efforts across the nation, the Wildfire Mitigation Awards are
the highest national honor one can receive for outstanding work and significant
program impact in wildfire preparedness and mitigation.

The three categories for the awards include:

Fire Adapted Communities Fire Service Leadership
    Wildfire Mitigation Innovation
    Community Wildfire Preparedness Pioneer

These awards are designed to recognize outstanding service in wildfire
preparedness and safety across a broad spectrum of activities and among a
variety of individuals and organizations.

"Captain McAdams work in mobilizing southwestern Idaho in wildfire mitigation is
second to none," commented Boise Fire Marshall Romeo Gervais.  The award will be
presented at the 2015 WUI Conference in Reno this March.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com Boise:

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              913 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                Jefferson Post (West Jefferson, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              July 1, 2013 Monday

Firefighter from Ashe County among 19 killed in Arizona wildfire

BYLINE: Dylan Lightfoot, Jefferson Post, West Jefferson, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 477 words


July 01--Photo courtesy of The Daily Courier, Prescott, Ariz. -- Jefferson Post

Firefighter Eric Marsh, an Ashe County native, was among 19 members of the
Granite Mountain Hotshots who were killed battling a wildfire near Prescott,
Ariz., Sunday.

Photo courtesy of The Daily Courier, Prescott, Ariz. -- Jefferson Post
Firefighter Eric Marsh, an Ashe County native, was among 19 members of the
Granite Mountain Hotshots who were killed battling a wildfire near Prescott,
Ariz., Sunday.

slideshow

Firefighter Eric Marsh, 44, a graduate of Ashe Central High School, was among 19
firefighters killed while battling an Arizona wildfire Sunday.

Marsh served as Superintendent of the Granite Mountain Hotshots, a crack team of
firefighters trained to combat wildfires, according to his father John Marsh of
Prescott, Ariz. Eric moved to Arizona eight years ago to help organize the unit,
he said.

The Granite Mountain Hotshots were an interactive team, on-call anywhere in the
U.S. The team was flown in to N.C. two years ago to fight spring wildfires, he
said.

Eric had been involved in firefighting since right after high school. He
graduated from Appalachian State University, a student of biology and a
naturalist.

Eric was married, but had no children.

The wildfire that took the lives of Eric Marsh and his 18 team members, began
near Yarnell, Ariz., just southwest of Prescott.

The fire started about a mile-and-a-half from the town. The temperature was 101
degrees with 40-50 mph winds when a lightning storm started several small fires
in the area, according to John.

The Granite Mountain Hotshots were in "direct attack" mode, John said, meaning
they had "one foot in the fire," attempting to keep the blaze from taking the
town.

The 19 firefighters were under their fire-resistant shields when they were
overrun by the fast-moving fire, he said.

Of his son, John said, "He was a great son. He was compassionate and caring
about his crew."

"I want to thank the people of Ashe County for their concern," he said.

John and his wife Jane, Eric's mother, moved to Prescott from Ashe County
approximately five years ago to be near Eric, their only child.

Granite Mountain, which John said can be seen from his home, was used by Eric
and his crew as a training ground -- the team took their name from it.

John, a former teacher at Northwest Ashe High School, served on the Ashe County
Board of County Commissioners from 1994-2000.

Local fire departments and police departments in Prescott are planning a
memorial service for the team.

Eric is featured in a video, courtesy of The Daily Courier, of Prescott, Ariz.,
of the Granite Mountain Hotshots at
http://www.dcourier.com/main.asp?ArticleID=83123§ionID=1?sectionID=1086

___ (c)2013 the Jefferson Post (West Jefferson, N.C.) Visit the Jefferson Post
(West Jefferson, N.C.) at www.jeffersonpost.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130701-1WJ-Firefighter-from-Ashe-County-among-19-killed-in-Arizona-
wildfire-0701-20130701

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1WJ


                         Copyright 2013 Jefferson Post


                              914 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                             August 25, 2017 Friday
                                 Final Edition

New wildfire triggers evacuations; Joe Rich: Nearly 500 properties affected by
order as blaze exceeds three square kilometres in size

BYLINE: Harrison Mooney, - With files from the Kelowna Daily Courier and The
Canadian Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 578 words


About 1,100 people living east of Kelowna have been ordered to evacuate Thursday
because of a rapidly advancing wildfire.

The new blaze is burning in the Highway 33/Philpott Road region.

An evacuation order has been issued for the entire area of Joe Rich, from Walker
Hill on the Highway 33 western boundary of Kelowna, to Big White Road to the
east, and Mission Creek and Joe Rich Creek along the south, according to Central
Okanagan Emergency Operations. About 474 properties are affected, but should
conditions worsen, more people could be forced to evacuate.

All properties west of Cardinal Creek Road have been placed on evacuation alert.

The Philpott Road wildfire, which is burning about 20 kilometres east of
Kelowna, was reported around 1:30 p.m. on Thursday. It reportedly grew to 1 1/2
square kilometres in just a matter of hours, and has since doubled to three
square kilometres, drawing fire crews from the Joe Rich, Kelowna, Ellison and
Lake Country departments to battle the blaze. The B.C. Wildfire Service is at
the scene as well.

"It is considered out of control at the moment," said Melanie Moran, a B.C.
Wildfire Service information officer.

An Emergency Support Services reception centre is being set up at Willow Park
Church in Kelowna.

Fortis B.C. interrupted service for about 2,500 customers in the area to assess
damage from the fire and determine the impact on the electricity system.

The public has been asked to avoid the Hwy. 33 area so emergency-responders can
effectively perform their duties.

Elsewhere, calmer weather and continuing progress battling some of the other
wildfires in the province mean hikers and campers can soon return to some parts
of the backcountry in the Central Interior, the Ministry of Forests said.

Recreation Sites and Trails B.C.

said select campsites and trails in the Cariboo fire centre were scheduled to
reopen at noon today.

It follows a decision Wednesday to rescind a sweeping ban on access to Crown
land in the region.

"We wanted to get a return to normalcy as soon as it was safe, as soon as it was
practical," said Kevin Skrepnek with the wildfire service.

The sites were closed July 13, one week after a lightning storm tore across the
Central Interior, sparking dozens of separate wildfires that forced 45,000
people from their homes.

The number of evacuation orders has declined over the last two weeks and
Emergency Management B.C. said earlier Thursday that about 2,500 people remained
out of their homes as 154 fires continued to burn.

Although some backcountry areas will reopen today, the ministry said other
trails and recreation sites remain closed.

People are encouraged to check the websites of the wildfire service, sites and
trails, and B.C. Parks for the latest information on closures.

A campfire ban remains in effect throughout the Cariboo fire centre, which
covers most of central B.C., including Williams Lake and Quesnel, the closest
communities to a 4,600-sq.-km wildfire that is the biggest ever recorded in the
province.

The campfire ban is also in effect for most of the southern half of the
province.

Skrepnek said although weather conditions have improved, dry conditions across
the province are unprecedented, leaving it unclear when the campfire ban can be
lifted.

There are scattered showers in the forecast for some fire-affected areas, but
Skrepnek said there is still no sign of significant rainfall coming.

hmooney@postmedia.com !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Kelowna Daily Courier; A wildfire broke out in Kelowna's Joe Rich area
on Thursday, prompting hundreds of people to be evacuated as crews fought the
blaze from the air and the ground. The fire, on the north side of Highway 33
East, was reported shortly after 1:30 p.m.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 The Vancouver Province
                              All Rights Reserved


                              915 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                            March 2, 2005 Wednesday
                    Flagler/palm Coast News-tribune Edition

Storm debris increases fire danger

BYLINE: AARON LONDON - STAFF WRITER

SECTION: SECTION A; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 458  words

DATELINE: PALM COAST


PALM COAST The aftermath of last year's hurricanes have forestry officials on
edge. Unlike populated areas where hurricane debris was quickly cleaned up and
hauled away, debris from the storms in wooded areas could serve as extra fuel
for wildfires that would be difficult to extinguish. "After all the storms and
rain last summer, most Floridians might think the threat of wildfires has been
reduced, but in fact the opposite is true," said Timber Weller, a wildfire
mitigation specialist with the Florida Division of Forestry in Bunnell.

"One of the legacies of the hurricanes may be an elevated wildfire risk lasting
several years." After the hurricanes, leaves and twigs blanketed the ground of
neighborhoods while trees were stripped of their branches. "Visualize the huge
piles of plant debris produced by a single neighborhood and then multiply that
by the hundreds of thousands of acres of forests throughout Florida," Weller
said. While May and June are the peak months for wildfires, Weller said the
reality is that Florida has a year-round burn season. "If we get rain frequently
enough we don't have a problem," he said. "If we don't get rain we do have a
problem and it doesn't matter what month is on the calendar." Weller said in
addition to the larger amount of potential fuel for fires, large logs and other
debris make it difficult for forestry crews to operate equipment in the woods.
But there are things homeowners can do to prepare for wildfire season, said Bill
Butler, Palm Coast landscape architect. "If homeowners have any debris on their
site, get them out to the street so the refuse company can pick it up," Butler
said. "The important thing is the area around the house. That's the area
homeowners need to focus on." "When it comes down to it, there is just a brief
period when a home is exposed to wildfire," Weller said. "If the home can defend
itself, it will survive and the wildfire will move on." Weller said efforts by
the Division of Forestry to reduce wildfire risks have paid off in recent years.
"We've seen a reduction in the number of fires over the last couple of years,"
he said. But, he said, the risks are still there. And that is why homeowners
need to take positive measures to protect themselves. "We know we're going to
have more fires," he said. "We don't know if we have to have more
catastrophes."Reduce Your RiskHomeowners can take precautions to limit the
chances of damage from wildfires, including: Removing leaves, pine straw and
debris from roof and rain gutters.Removing or reducing flammable material near
buildings and providing at least 30 feet of buffer space between a house and
potential wildfire fuels.Landscaping with nonflammable mulch and choosing plants
with high moisture content.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2005 News-Journal Corporation


                              916 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       Redlands Daily Facts (California)

                           September 15, 2017 Friday

California has fewer wildfires;
Data: In 40 years, blazes have declined all across the state according to
research

BYLINE: Daniel Tedford; dtedford@scng.com @dgtedford on Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1014 words

ABSTRACT

OCR-L-WILDFIRE-TREND-0913: Despite 2017 being one of the worst fire seasons in
recent memory for California and one of the worst ever for the western US, new
research shows a surprising trend: Over the last 40 years, California has seen a
decline in wildfires. Why is that? Researchers don't know yet but they intend to
find out.Reporter: DTEDFORDLength: 1000 wordsArt: FILE + two line charts showing
recent trends

FULL TEXT

In a year that is already being called one of the worst ever for wildfires in
the western United States, there is another fact that some might find
remarkable: For nearly 40 years, the number of wildfires in California has
declined.

California wildfire data reviewed by a USGS research ecologist shows a trend
that many could find hard to believe: Since a peak in 1980, there have been
fewerwildfires in California. This is true across thestate, according to
researcher Jon Keeley, who is also a professor at UCLA.

According to his paper, co-authored with Alexandra D. Syphard, we need to
rethink our ideas about the frequency of wildfires.

"The claim commonly made in research papers and the media that fire activity is
increasing throughout the western USA is certainly an over-statement," wrote the
authors.

The trend of fewer, but not smaller, fires is apparent in recent years. State
data regarding large wildfires (300 acres or more) from 2000 to 2015 show total
numbers - not fire size - has been in decline, despite a sharp spike in 2008.

So, what's the reason for this decline? Well, they don't knowyet.

"Can't say at this point what has changed in the last 100 years that has caused
this decline ... but I am hoping we might find out," Keeley said.

Keeley has just begun

to analyze the data and look for a reason, but he expects to finish that
analysis by the end of September. He also will send his research to Calfire for
review.

Keeley is confident the culprits behind the decline can be narrowed down to two-
prevention or climate - but he is reserving his judgment for now.

"Maybe fire prevention strategies or could be related to climate," Keeley said.
"My guess is they would probably like to think it is increasing efficiency in
fire prevention but remains to be seen if that is the answer at this point."

Keeley is hoping Calfire might be able to point to some specific prevention
strategies and dates they implemented to help him suss out if they had a major
impact in wildfire declines.

"We definitely have the education side," Calfire spokesman Scott McLean said.
"We spend a lot of money being proactive in trying to educate the public."

While McLean said the organization has adopted social media and other modern
tactics in recent years to better reach the public about fire prevention,
Calfire's education efforts have been happening for decades.

"There are some embarrassing programs out there with blue leisure suits and
mullets," he said.

McLean said a decline in the numberof wildfires was a win for the agency's
outreach programs since the majority of wildfires are the result of human
causes.

"I love to see the trend of wildfires going down," McLean said. "That means we
are getting the message out."

Despite the decline in overall fires, the amount of acres burned by wildfiresis
doing just the opposite.

"For most ignition sources we have found a decline in the numbers since the
1980s, but not a decline in the area burned," Keeley said.

Large wildfire numbers from 2000 to 2015 illustrate the growth in burned
acreage. While the numbers are volatile year to year, the overall trend shows
growth in fire sizes.

McLean attributes the growth in acres burned to environmental factors that have
made fires burn hotter and faster than in the past. Despite that, he credited
Calfire for its work in keeping the majority of fires from spreading. According
to Calfire data, 95 percent of fires are kept under 10 acres.

"We are constantly training. We always pay attention to what is going on, we
always investigate," he said. "We investigate what took place and we learn from
it and we make sure our firefighters learn from it."

One reason acreage could be up is from the record winter rains that replenished
fuel for fires by spawning plant growth, including the return of grass that had
disappeared from wildland areas throughout Southern California during the
drought.

Grass fires tend to burn faster and increase the amount of acres burned,
according to a 2008 paper published by UC Merced Sierra Nevada Research
Institute's Anthony Westerling.

Other researchers point to climate change, but Keeley says he thinks there might
be other variables at-play.

"People who have written on it tend to ascribe it to climate change, but I think
we are a long way from knowing if that is what is going on," he said.

During the past 40 years, there have been a number of years that have bucked the
trend of dwindling wildfire numbers and 2017 is already well on its way to being
one of those outliers.

As of Sept. 11, Calfire has reported 5,102 wildland fires in their jurisdiction
with nearly 230,000 acres burned. During the same time period in 2016, there
were 3,803 wildfires and 204,000 acres burned. The five-year average has been
3,872 wildland fires and 155,807 acres burned, according to Calfire.

This yearis also the most expensive year for wildfires as Montana, Washington
and Oregonall have been hit by devastating blazes. As a result, U.S. Secretary
of Agriculture Sonny Purdue announced Thursday the cost of fighting fires has
exceeded $2 billion. It has also been a record-setting year for heat in
California and other western states, according to the National Climate Report
produced by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

While 2017 has been worse than predicted across western states after there were
hopes a wet winter would diminish the fire season, McLean wasn't surprised by
the numbers considering the years of drought and the fuel created by the rain
that preceded fire season.

"As a firefighter, you wake up in the morning 'what's the weather doing' because
that tells you what your day is going to be like," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group,
                              All Rights Reserved


                              917 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        San Bernardino Sun (California)

                           September 15, 2017 Friday

California has fewer wildfires;
Data: In 40 years, blazes have declinedacross the state according to research

BYLINE: Daniel Tedford; dtedford@scng.com @dgtedford on Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1014 words

ABSTRACT

OCR-L-WILDFIRE-TREND-0913: Despite 2017 being one of the worst fire seasons in
recent memory for California and one of the worst ever for the western US, new
research shows a surprising trend: Over the last 40 years, California has seen a
decline in wildfires. Why is that? Researchers don't know yet but they intend to
find out.Reporter: DTEDFORDLength: 1000 wordsArt: FILE + two line charts showing
recent trends

FULL TEXT

In a year that is already being called one of the worst ever for wildfires in
the western United States, there is another fact that some might find
remarkable: For nearly 40 years, the number of wildfires in California has
declined.

California wildfire data reviewed by a USGS research ecologist shows a trend
that many could find hard to believe: Since a peak in 1980, there have been
fewerwildfires in California. This is true across thestate, according to
researcher Jon Keeley, who is also a professor at UCLA.

According to his paper, co-authored with Alexandra D. Syphard, we need to
rethink our ideas about the frequency of wildfires.

"The claim commonly made in research papers and the media that fire activity is
increasing throughout the western USA is certainly an over-statement," wrote the
authors.

The trend of fewer, but not smaller, fires is apparent in recent years. State
data regarding large wildfires (300 acres or more) from 2000 to 2015 show total
numbers - not fire size - has been in decline, despite a sharp spike in 2008.

So, what's the reason for this decline? Well, they don't knowyet.

"Can't say at this point what has changed in the last 100 years that has caused
this decline ... but I am hoping we might find out," Keeley said.

Keeley has just begun to analyze the data and look for a reason, but he expects
to finish that analysis by the end of September. He also will send his research
to Calfire for review.

Keeley is confident the culprits behind the decline can be narrowed down to two-
prevention or

climate - but he is reserving his judgment for now.

"Maybe fire prevention strategies or could be related to climate," Keeley said.
"My guess is they would probably like to think it is increasing efficiency in
fire prevention but remains to be seen if that is the answer at this point."

Keeley is hoping Calfire might be able to point to some specific prevention
strategies and dates they implemented to help him suss out if they had a major
impact in wildfire declines.

"We definitely have the education side," Calfire spokesman Scott McLean said.
"We spend a lot of money being proactive in trying to educate the public."

While McLean said the organization has adopted social media and other modern
tactics in recent years to better reach the public about fire prevention,
Calfire's education efforts have been happening for decades.

"There are some embarrassing programs out there with blue leisure suits and
mullets," he said.

McLean said a decline in the numberof wildfires was a win for the agency's
outreach programs since the majority of wildfires are the result of human
causes.

"I love to see the trend of wildfires going down," McLean said. "That means we
are getting the message out."

Despite the decline in overall fires, the amount of acres burned by wildfiresis
doing just the opposite.

"For most ignition sources we have found a decline in the numbers since the
1980s, but not a decline in the area burned," Keeley said.

Large wildfire numbers from 2000 to 2015 illustrate the growth in burned
acreage. While the numbers are volatile year to year, the overall trend shows
growth in fire sizes.

McLean attributes the growth in acres burned to environmental factors that have
made fires burn hotter and faster than in the past. Despite that, he credited
Calfire for its work in keeping the majority of fires from spreading. According
to Calfire data, 95 percent of fires are kept under 10 acres.

"We are constantly training. We always pay attention to what is going on, we
always investigate," he said. "We investigate what took place and we learn from
it and we make sure our firefighters learn from it."

One reason acreage could be up is from the record winter rains that replenished
fuel for fires by spawning plant growth, including the return of grass that had
disappeared from wildland areas throughout Southern California during the
drought.

Grass fires tend to burn faster and increase the amount of acres burned,
according to a 2008 paper published by UC Merced Sierra Nevada Research
Institute's Anthony Westerling.

Other researchers point to climate change, but Keeley says he thinks there might
be other variables at-play.

"People who have written on it tend to ascribe it to climate change, but I think
we are a long way from knowing if that is what is going on," he said.

During the past 40 years, there have been a number of years that have bucked the
trend of dwindling wildfire numbers and 2017 is already well on its way to being
one of those outliers.

As of Sept. 11, Calfire has reported 5,102 wildland fires in their jurisdiction
with nearly 230,000 acres burned. During the same time period in 2016, there
were 3,803 wildfires and 204,000 acres burned. The five-year average has been
3,872 wildland fires and 155,807 acres burned, according to Calfire.

This yearis also the most expensive year for wildfires as Montana, Washington
and Oregonall have been hit by devastating blazes. As a result, U.S. Secretary
of Agriculture Sonny Purdue announced Thursday the cost of fighting fires has
exceeded $2 billion. It has also been a record-setting year for heat in
California and other western states, according to the National Climate Report
produced by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

While 2017 has been worse than predicted across western states after there were
hopes a wet winter would diminish the fire season, McLean wasn't surprised by
the numbers considering the years of drought and the fuel created by the rain
that preceded fire season.

"As a firefighter, you wake up in the morning 'what's the weather doing' because
that tells you what your day is going to be like," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              918 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 18, 2017 Thursday

Idaho: 5th Annual Southwest Idaho Wildfire Mitigation Forum to be Hosted in
Boise

LENGTH: 306  words




Boise: The City of boise, Idaho has issued the following news release:
Southwest Idaho Wildfire Mitigation Forum will be hosted in Boise. This
presentation is supported by Promoting Ecosystem Resilience and Fire Adapted
Communities Together, a cooperative agreement between The Nature Conservancy,
USDA Forest Service and agencies of the Department of the Interior through a
subaward to the Watershed Research and Training Center; this institution is an
equal opportunity provider.


Wildfire Mitigation Coordinator Captain Jerry McAdams states that "the Southwest
Idaho Wildfire Mitigation Forum provides an opportunity for regional
stakeholders in wildfire mitigation to meet, network and to share their latest
efforts in wildfire mitigation. For homeowners, fire managers, non-profits,
funding agencies, utility companies and other stakeholders, the forum is
designed to encourage new cooperative partnerships and build efficiencies in
area wildfire mitigation efforts."
Attendees from past forums have included members and representatives from
multiple fire departments, the Bureau of Land Management, US Forest Service,
Idaho Department of Lands, Idaho Office of Emergency Management, Idaho Firewise,
Idaho State Fire Marshal's Office, County managers, local university professors,
city planners, open space managers, conservation organizations, non-profit
organizations, as well as residents and Firewise advocates that live in the
wildland urban interface. Captain McAdams stated that "with the increased
incidence and severity of wildfires that threaten lives and property in our
area, the need to address mitigation efforts in a cooperative fashion with
limited resources has become increasingly important."

 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              919 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 16, 2017 Tuesday

Idaho: 5th Annual Southwest Idaho Wildfire Mitigation Forum to be Hosted in
Boise

LENGTH: 378  words





Boise: The City of boise, Idaho has issued the following news release:
Southwest Idaho Wildfire Mitigation Forum will be hosted in Boise. This
presentation is supported by Promoting Ecosystem Resilience and Fire Adapted
Communities Together, a cooperative agreement between The Nature Conservancy,
USDA Forest Service and agencies of the Department of the Interior through a
subaward to the Watershed Research and Training Center; this institution is an
equal opportunity provider.


Wildfire Mitigation Coordinator Captain Jerry McAdams states that "the Southwest
Idaho Wildfire Mitigation Forum provides an opportunity for regional
stakeholders in wildfire mitigation to meet, network and to share their latest
efforts in wildfire mitigation. For homeowners, fire managers, non-profits,
funding agencies, utility companies and other stakeholders, the forum is
designed to encourage new cooperative partnerships and build efficiencies in
area wildfire mitigation efforts."
Attendees from past forums have included members and representatives from
multiple fire departments, the Bureau of Land Management, US Forest Service,
Idaho Department of Lands, Idaho Office of Emergency Management, Idaho Firewise,
Idaho State Fire Marshal's Office, County managers, local university professors,
city planners, open space managers, conservation organizations, non-profit
organizations, as well as residents and Firewise advocates that live in the
wildland urban interface. Captain McAdams stated that "with the increased
incidence and severity of wildfires that threaten lives and property in our
area, the need to address mitigation efforts in a cooperative fashion with
limited resources has become increasingly important."
The forum is being hosted by Ada County Parks & Waterways, whose mission is to
protect "...resources and natural habitats for the safe enjoyment of our
residents and visitors."  The forum is financially sponsored by the Fire Adapted
Communities Learning Network (FACLN), which "...encourages the development and
sharing of best practices and innovations in order to accelerate the adoption of
fire adapted community concepts nationwide."

 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              920 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The Telegraph-Journal (New Brunswick)

                             July 21, 2015 Tuesday

National wildfire strategy talks spark interest in province

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 606 words


FREDERICTON * New Brunswick wants to be a part of discussions surrounding a
national wildfire strategy, but the province's head of forest fire management
says it's too early to commit to anything.

Last week, premiers from Saskatchewan and British Columbia called on the federal
government to draft a plan that will help provinces be more prepared for future
large wildfires, arguing that large-scale blazes, which have sent thousands of
people fleeing from their homes, are going to become the norm.

Len Mosher, manager of forest fire management with the provincial Department of
Natural Resources, said New Brunswick needs to know exactly what such a strategy
would entail before signing onto it.

But after watching the situation in Western Canada this summer, Mosher said the
province would be interested in tracking down additional resources that could
help fight major wildfires in the future.

"With the amount of fire activity in the West this year, and in 2014 to a lesser
extent, there were not enough resources available and firefighters were brought
in from several other provinces and countries," Mosher said in an emailed
statement.

Most of the firefighters the Department of Natural Resources sent to help battle
the wildfires returned home last week and during the weekend. The province is
considering sending more people if it can find the resources.

"Whether those staff are mobilized will depend upon the current needs of the
agencies with fires," Mosher said.

Ashley Fraser spent more than two weeks in the hot zone in central Saskatchewan,
working 14-hour days co-ordinating three crews of firefighters on the front
lines. The conditions were hot and dry.

"Seeing their fires and seeing how big they get, we see a lot of fire behaviour
we would never see in our province," he said.

Fraser, who is an assistant district ranger based out of Hampton, has travelled
to Quebec and Alberta to fight wildfires in past years. He said the department
never has trouble finding crews willing to fight wildfires in other parts of
Canada. In order to make the trip, firefighters have to pass a rigorous fitness
test.

While New Brunswick has never seen the kind of wildfires that ravaged Western
Canada this summer, Fraser believes it's important for New Brunswick
firefighters to get a taste of the action so they're prepared if the situation
ever arises here.

"It's great for us to go out there because we're always training, but you have
to be able to use what you learn," he said.

David Martell, a wildfire expert from the University of Toronto, said it's hard
to pinpoint one exact cause for this year's wildfires, but hot and dry
conditions are likely the culprit.

When you mix the two, you often see lightning fires. Add in high winds and
there's a mixture for trouble.

Martell also pointed to the sea surface temperatures in the Pacific Ocean, which
are affecting the jet stream and weather patterns across Canada. There's
widespread belief that these things seem to be happening more often, likely due
to climate change, he said.

"Can we expect to see more of this? I would say yes. Are we going to see it
every year? My guess would be probably not every year."

He said New Brunswick should keep sending firefighters to hot zones on the west
coast in order to be prepared if the province does have a big wildfire.

"They're going to be better equipped to deal with fires in New Brunswick when
they do occur," Martell said.

The New Brunswick chapter of the Canadian Red Cross still has four volunteers
helping evacuees in Saskatchewan, while two people have already returned home
from tours. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2015 Telegraph-Journal (New Brunswick)

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 The Telegraph Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              921 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                             July 21, 2015 Tuesday

National wildfire strategy discussion sparks interest in New Brunswick

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 646 words


FREDERICTON * New Brunswick wants to be a part of discussions surrounding a
national wildfire strategy, but the province's head of forest fire management
says it's too early to commit to anything.

Last week, premiers from Saskatchewan and British Columbia called on the federal
government to draft a plan that will help provinces be more prepared for future
large wildfires, arguing that large-scale blazes, which have sent thousands of
people fleeing from their homes, are going to become the norm.

Len Mosher, manager of forest fire management with the provincial Department of
Natural Resources, said New Brunswick needs to know exactly what such a strategy
would entail before signing onto it.

But after watching the situation in Western Canada this summer, Mosher said the
province would be interested in tracking down additional resources that could
help fight major wildfires in the future.

"With the amount of fire activity in the West this year, and in 2014 to a lesser
extent, there were not enough resources available and firefighters were brought
in from several other provinces and countries," Mosher said in an emailed
statement.

Most of the firefighters the Department of Natural Resources sent to help battle
the wildfires returned home last week and during the weekend. The province is
considering sending more people if it can find the resources.

"Whether those staff are mobilized will depend upon the current needs of the
agencies with fires," Mosher said.

Ashley Fraser spent more than two weeks in the hot zone in central Saskatchewan,
working 14-hour days co-ordinating three crews of firefighters on the front
lines. The conditions were hot and dry.

"Seeing their fires and seeing how big they get, we see a lot of fire behaviour
we would never see in our province," he said.

Fraser, who is an assistant district ranger based out of Hampton, has travelled
to Quebec and Alberta to fight wildfires in past years. He said the department
never has trouble finding crews willing to fight wildfires in other parts of
Canada. In order to make the trip, firefighters have to pass a rigorous fitness
test.

While New Brunswick has never seen the kind of wildfires that ravaged Western
Canada this summer, Fraser believes it's important for New Brunswick
firefighters to get a taste of the action so they're prepared if the situation
ever arises here.

"It's great for us to go out there because we're always training, but you have
to be able to use what you learn," he said.

David Martell, a wildfire expert from the University of Toronto, said it's hard
to pinpoint one exact cause for this year's wildfires, but hot and dry
conditions are likely the culprit.

When you mix the two, you often see lightning fires. Add in high winds and
there's a mixture for trouble.

Martell also pointed to the sea surface temperatures in the Pacific Ocean, which
are affecting the jet stream and weather patterns across Canada. There's
widespread belief that these things seem to be happening more often, likely due
to climate change, he said.

"Can we expect to see more of this? I would say yes. Are we going to see it
every year? My guess would be probably not every year."

He said New Brunswick should keep sending firefighters to hot zones on the west
coast in order to be prepared if the province does have a big wildfire.

"They're going to be better equipped to deal with fires in New Brunswick when
they do occur," Martell said.

The New Brunswick chapter of the Canadian Red Cross still has four volunteers
helping evacuees in Saskatchewan, while two people have already returned home
from tours.

"We have been providing emergency aid like shelter, food, clothing and other
support to evacuees on behalf of the Saskatchewan government under a formal
disaster assistance agreement between the province and the Canadian Red Cross,"
Bedell said. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2015 Times &; Transcript (Moncton)

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              922 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 27, 2015 Tuesday

Colorado: New measure targets wildfire funding

LENGTH: 468  words

DATELINE: Denver


Democratic Party has issued the following news release:

Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., and Sen. Mike Crapo, R-Idaho introduced a bipartisan
bill Thursday that would overhaul federal wildfire policy by increasing funding
for fire prevention and treat the largest wildfires as natural disasters.

The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act, sponsored by Sen. Michael Bennet and Sen.
Cory Gardner, would allow the U.S. Forest Service to access the pre-existing
disaster fund used by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to adequately
respond to wildfires.

While responses to other natural disasters can draw money from an emergency
fund, wildfire suppression budgets are based on their average costs for the past
10 years, which often results in underfunding. The senators described this as an
"outdated" tradition.

The U.S. Forest Service and the Department of the Interior as a result are often
forced to "borrow" money budgeted to other programs to make up for insufficient
funding.

This legislation would make any fire-suppression spending above 70 percent of
the 10-year average for fire suppression eligible to be funded under a separate
disaster account.

"Colorado and other Western states continue to face year after year of
catastrophic wildfires that threaten people and property and are busting our
budgets. We need to restructure the way we pay for fighting and mitigating
wildfires," Bennet said in a statement. "This bill will ensure that these
disasters receive adequate funding to end the damaging practice of 'fire
borrowing' that results in taking critical funding away from fire prevention
efforts."

Gardner also expressed his support in a statement.

"Major wildfires are natural disasters in every place but the federal budget,"
Gardner said. "But because the law doesn't allow funding for these events to be
properly budgeted, the Forest Service routinely has to pull money from other
important priorities, including fire prevention and forest management, in order
to fight these major wildfires. It's time for that counterproductive cycle to
end, and this bill does it."

U.S. Forest Service and Interior Department estimates found that 1 percent of
fires consume 30 percent of firefighting budgets, and thus should be treated as
true natural disasters.

It was also estimated that proper budgeting could free up $412 million in
discretionary funds for fire-prevention programs.

The legislation's other co-sponsors include Sens. James Risch, R-Idaho; Maria
Cantwell, D-Wash., the top Democrat on the Energy and Natural Resources
Committee; Steve Daines, R-Mont.; and Tammy Baldwin, D-Wis.

Michael Cipriano is a student at American University in Washington, D.C., and an
intern for The Durango Herald.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutioLondon:

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              923 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                            February 27, 2015 Friday
                                 Early Edition

Alberta already gearing up for wildfire season

BYLINE: Clara Ho, Calgary Herald

SECTION: CITY; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 369 words


There may still be snow on the ground, but the province is already gearing up
for wildfire season, which officially begins on March 1. Preparations include
getting crews, aircraft and equipment in place and deploying them to Alberta's
Forest Protection Area as required.

Training is also underway for new firefighting personnel and Alberta's lookout
towers are being staffed.

"For the first couple of weeks, with lookout observers and firefighters, we'll
have about 150 people," said Geoffrey Driscoll, wildfire information officer
with Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. "We're going to
slowly increase the amount of people as the wildfire hazard increases and as we
get closer to summer."

Driscoll said by the beginning of May, the province will have 500 firefighters
at the ready, with access to another 1,500 on an emergency basis. And more
firefighting personnel can be requested across Canada, in the United States,
even Mexico.

In addition, businesses with industrial or commercial operations - such as rail,
lumber and oil and gas companies - in forested areas must ensure their emergency
response and wildfire management systems are updated and prepared to respond to
potential wildfire situations, he said.

That includes having a phone number that wildfire officers can reach if there is
a fire, having an evacuation plan, and taking steps to prevent fires, such as
checking off-road vehicles for debris near the exhaust or engine areas.

Between March 1 and Oct. 31, anyone in the Forest Protection Area who plans to
do any type of burning, with the exception of lighting campfires, must obtain a
permit. They are free and can be requested at any Alberta Environment and
Sustainable Resource Development office.

People or companies found responsible for starting a wildfire could be on the
hook for the cost of battling the blaze, and could also face fines under the
Forest and Prairie Protection Act.

"If you're going to get caught as the one who started the fire, you're going to
get the bill," he said, adding these emergencies can quickly add up to hundreds
of thousands of dollars.

cho@calgaryherald.com twitter.com/clara_ho !@COPYRIGHT=© 2015 Postmedia Network
Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2015 Calgary Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              924 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 5, 2015 Tuesday

Sen. Murkowski: Forest Service is Morphing into Emergency Fire Service

LENGTH: 586  words

DATELINE: Washington, DC


U.S. Senate Committee on Energy & Resources has issued the following press
release:

U.S. Sen. Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, today called for changes to the way the U.S.
Forest Service handles wildfires in response to the increasing severity and
costliness of wildfires in Alaska and across the West.Murkowski, chairman of the
Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, told Forest Service Chief Thomas
Tidwell, at a hearing Tuesday before the committee on wildfire management
policies, that the agency needs to focus on policies that responsibly fund
wildfire suppression, end the unsustainable practice of fire borrowing, help
communities conduct firewise practices to guard against property damage
wildland-urban interface, and make necessary investments in a range of fuel
treatments.

As the expense of fighting wildfires has grown, the Forest Service has exceeded
its budget and instead relied on funding borrowed from other programs to cover
the costs. Murkowski called the practice of "fire borrowing" unsustainable and
said the agency needs to stop treating every wildfire like a disaster. Instead,
she said, the agency needs to make a greater effort to improve the resiliency of
public lands by better managing underbrush and other fuel sources through
thinning and prescribed burns to reduce the damage when fires do occur.

"It is looking more and more like the Forest Service is morphing into an
emergency fire service that throws everything it has at every wildfire, whether
effective or not," Murkowski said. "We need a paradigm shift from fire control
at all costs to actual fire management."

Murkowski focused her questions at the hearing on rising fire suppression costs
even while the number of fires has actually declined.
"Fire suppression costs are out of control, yet there has been less than half
the number of fires, less than half the number of acres burned, and less than
half the number of houses burned," Murkowski said. "We need to strategically
address the fuel accumulation problem in our forests and integrate our fuels
management objective into the wildfire management operations because 'hoping'
for a tame fire season simply won't work."

While the threat of a major wildfire is predominately an issue in the West,
Alaska is not immune. Last May, the Funny River Fire burned through the Kenai
National Wildlife Refuge, spreading smoke as far as Fairbanks, more than 500
miles away. The fire burned nearly 200,000 acres before it was finally
extinguished, making it the second-largest ever recorded on Alaska's Kenai
Peninsula.

The Funny River Fire was likely started by human activity, but the area has also
changed dramatically in the last 20 years, due in part to mass spruce bark
beetle kill. Grasses have replaced forests, and those grasses are simply more
susceptible to fire. More than half of the Peninsula's total forested land,
nearly a million acres, has been lost.

"It's critical that we responsibly fund the Forest Service and the Department of
the Interior's wildfire suppression needs and stop the cycle of fire borrowing,"
Murkowski said. "I am concerned though that suppression costs are out of
control. Wildfire suppression and its costs are economically, socially and
ecologically unsustainable. I know the Forest Service wants a wildfire cap
adjustment but I don't see how that is going to be the silver bullet to
addressing skyrocketing wildfire suppression spending."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:
editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              925 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Bakersfield Californian

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 16, 2013 Friday

New fire prevention campaign spreads message like wildfire

BYLINE: Laura Liera, The Bakersfield Californian

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 381 words


Aug. 16--Did you know that a wildfire can be started by a chain dragging on the
road? The spark that results when the two make contact is just one example of
how many wildfires begin.

"If you think about it, where do you see the burn scars along the mountains?"
asked Abby Bolt, branch director for Central California for the One Less Spark,
One Less Wildfire campaign. "You usually see them on the side of the road."

A new wildfire campaign, introduced to the public on Friday, is making its way
into Kern County and California after intensive research about wildfires.

According to Bolt, 94 percent of wildland fires are caused by people and most
can be prevented. Many truckers who travel up and down highways don't secure
their chians safely and as they drive, sparks fly.

It's small things like this that Bolt asks the community to remember.

"A large amount of our fires are costing a lot of money, there is a lot of
property destroyed and many times, the lives of firefighters are put at risk,"
Bolt said.

This year, the Kern County Fire Department has kept busy with local fires in the
Grapevine area. Capt. Sean Collins, a fire department spokesman, said some of
those fires were preventable.

Collins said Kern's dry terrain is extremely dangerous because even a minute
spark that jumps from the road can cause a massive wildfire.

"The smoke alarm in your home is like having a firefighter looking after you
24/7 and this campaign is the same thing," Collins said. "Keeping an eye out for
your surroundings and making sure you won't cause a fire is important."

Dangerous fires also start in residential areas. During the summer, temperatures
rise pretty quickly and many people are not aware that something as simple as
mowing the lawn can be a fire hazard.

In the hot blaring sun, the metal blades at the bottom of a lawnmower can cause
a fire if the equipment is turned on and accidently hits a rock.

"The best time to mow your lawn is before 10 a.m. when the temperatures haven't
picked up and just be aware of your surroundings during the summer," said Vince
Montes, an engineer with the U.S. Forest Service.

___ (c)2013 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) Visit The
Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) at www.bakersfield.com Distributed
by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130816-BK-New-fire-prevention-campaign-spreads-message-like-wildfire
-0816-20130816

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BK


                   Copyright 2013 The Bakersfield Californian


                              926 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                  Nanton News

                           October 19, 2016 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Nominate a hero of the Wood Buffalo wildfire

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 192  words


The Heroes of the Wildfire program gives Albertans the opportunity to nominate
individuals or organizations that made a difference during the wildfire. "It's
important we take the opportunity to extend our gratitude to the thousands of
individuals, organizations and businesses who reached out to assist residents of
the Wood Buffalo region during the wildfire. Their courage and compassion
demonstrates the spirit of Alberta ," said Premier Rachel Notley. Anyone
involved in the wildfire emergency, aftermath and recovery - including friends,
family members, neighbours, first responders, public service members, nonprofit
representatives and organizations - can be nominated in the online recognition
program. The nomination form is available online where the wildfire stories of
resiliency will be featured. Nominators are encouraged to include anything that
helps share the nominee's story including pictures, and the contact information
of the nominee. Nominations will be open until Nov. 28. A certificate of thanks
signed by Premier Rachel Notley will be mailed to nominees provided their
contact information is submitted as part of the nomination.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2016 Nanton News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              927 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    The Wilson Daily Times (North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              July 8, 2011 Friday

BRIEF: Wildfire smoke expected to return

BYLINE: Gina Childress, The Wilson Daily Times, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 242 words


July 08--Smoke from wildfires could emerge again today in Wilson County.

Because of the wildfires that continue to rage in North Carolina, particularly
in Pender County, "Code Orange" air quality conditions might hit Wilson County
intermittently throughout the day on Friday.

Forecast maps had smoke coming into Wilson County from different wildfires
reaching the eastern and western ends of the county today.

A Code Orange air quality condition is deemed unhealthy for sensitive groups.
Those groups include "active children and adults, and people with respiratory
disease, such as asthma." All outdoor activities are recommended to be limited.

Residents can keep up with smoke forecasts through the Air Quality Control
website: www.ncair.org. Since the onset of three major wildfires in Eastern
North Carolina, most notably in Pender, Dare and Cumberland counties, the state
is now issuing Special Air Quality/Smoke Forecasts separate from the regular air
quality forecasts.

Smoke from these fires has affected multiple regions of North Carolina, reaching
as far west as Raleigh and in some cases other states.

To see more of The Wilson Daily Times or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.wilsondaily.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, The Wilson Daily Times, N.C.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110708-ZW-BRF-Wildfire-smoke-expected-to-return-0708-20110708

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZW


                     Copyright 2011 The Wilson Daily Times


                              928 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Ashcroft Cache Creek Journal

                           December 26, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

The Rundown: Clinton News

SECTION: COMMUNITY

LENGTH: 886  words


Updates from the Wildfire Recovery Manager

If you are a business owner in Clinton, the Wildfire Recovery Manager, Daniela
Dyck, would like to invite you to complete a survey that will be used to develop
the Economic Wildfire Recovery Plan for the Village.

The survey takes approximately 15 minutes, and can be completed at
http://bit.ly/2plsJVP.

Information gathered from business owners who participate in the survey will be
compiled in aggregate and will remain anonymous. If you have any questions or
concerns, contact Dyck by email at cdc@village.clinton.bc.ca or by phone at
(250) 459-2261.

Dyck recently participated in an Agri-Recovery teleconference that included
guests from both the Ministry of Agriculture and the BC Cattlemen's Association.

Though the teleconference was full of useful information regarding provincial
Wildfire Recovery Programs, Dyck chose to share a few important items with the
general public through her Wildfire Recovery Facebook page.

She reminded residents that the Red Cross is still available for funds and
assistance, and noted that all ranchers and farmers are encouraged to apply for
wildfire-related funding by the end of January. Dyck said that in addition to
the Wildfire Recovery Programs, the BC Ministry of Agriculture has also
developed a new farm business advisory program for livestock producers that will
help families and businesses recover from losses caused by the recent wildfires.

Due to the hay deficit, Dyck also reminded ranchers to order their hay in as
soon as possible, since rangelands may not be viable for grazing in 2018. Plenty
of feed has been shipped in from Alberta and the Peace region, and for those
interested in a full list of hay suppliers, the BC Cattlemen's Association can
provide that.

Under the Farm Business Recovery Advisory Program, ranchers can even access a
qualified advisor's support to help them build a recovery plan. To be eligible
for advisory assistance, your farm or ranch must have farm income through CRA
classification.

To read more about the available advisory programs, visit http://bit.ly/2BpKxAL.
For detailed updates from the Wildfire Recovery Manager or to read more about
the recent Agri-Recovery teleconference, be sure to follow Clinton's Wildfire
Recovery Facebook page.

Communities in Bloom Christmas Light-Up results

The results of the Clinton Communities in Bloom Christmas Light-Up contest were
announced on December 21 by Yvette Marie May.

This year the committee asked the public to nominate their choices for the best
light displays in the community, with the nominations then tallied by the
committee to reflect the choices made by those who took the time to phone in or
email the Village.

The winner of the "Best Commercial" display was As the Crow Flies;
congratulations to Brenda Slade!

Honourable mention for Commercial display goes to the BC Liquor Store;
congratulations to Tracey Fallstrom and company!

There were two "Best Residential" display winners. Congratulations to Margaret
Fletcher and Jake McLean of McDonald Street, as well as Amanda and Trevor Nelson
of Lagoon Court. Honourable mentions for Residential display go to D. L'Heureux,
K. Allan, and the McCalls of Lagoon Court.

The Communities in Bloom committee would like to thank the community for getting
out to enjoy the displays and cast their votes again this year. Local support
truly made it a spectacular one. Well done, Clinton!

Changes accompany Country Squire's closure

On December 22 the Country Squire Gift Shop closed its doors for the last time.
Owner and former Journal columnist Susan Swan wishes to remind residents that
the Loomis Express Depot will be moving to Munro's Feed and Supplies in 2018.

If you are expecting something to come by Loomis Express during the holidays and
are wondering what will happen now that the Country Squire Gift Shop has closed,
not to worry. Swan will be in the shop for a few hours each day and will be able
to receive your parcels and call the recipients of any deliveries.

The last Loomis Express delivery to the Country Squire Gift Shop will take place
on the evening of December 28. In the new year, Jane Munro will be your Loomis
go-to gal.

For those who normally have their garbage picked up on Mondays by The Country
Squire-aka Greg Swan-please note: December 25 and January 1 garbage pickup will
instead be done on Friday, December 29.

Please have your garbage out at the usual time. Thank you!

David Stoddart Christmas Concert another success

The annual Seniors' Christmas Dinner took place at David Stoddart School on
December 20, followed by the evening Christmas Concert in the school gymnasium.

The entertaining concert was well-attended by residents, parents, and
grandparents alike, and was complete with countless hand-painted decorations
created by DSS students.

Children of all ages helped contribute to the Christmas production, with singing
from Mrs. Burrage's pre-schoolers and support from the Grade 12 students too.
Clinton resident Jessica Lawrence was presented with a white poinsettia to thank
her for volunteering to help put on the After School Program's production of How
the Grinch Stole Christmas. A truly wonderful time was had by all who were in
attendance.

Don't forget: students head back to class after the Christmas break on Monday,
January 8.

Happy Holidays, everyone!

Contacts

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              929 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             August 2, 2015 Sunday

Just as many wildfires start with humans, so can prevention, experts say

BYLINE: BY SILAS ALLEN Staff Writer sallen@oklahoman.com

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 657 words


Wildfires have burned more than 800,000 acres of Oklahoma forest and prairie
over the past 15 years, and records show the overwhelming majority of the blazes
were set deliberately.Most of those fires are started not by arsonists, but by
people burning off brush or setting fires for other reasons, state forestry
officials say.Since 1999, 63 percent of the state's wildfires have been
classified as incendiary, according to data from the Oklahoma Forestry Services.
That's a nebulous category that includes any fire that was set deliberately
under circumstances in which the person knew the fire shouldn't be lit, such as
during a burn ban.Another 20 percent of wildfires were started by a person who
was burning debris and lost control of the fire. Another 7 percent were sparked
by equipment use. Other causes, including campfires, smoking and children
playing, made up smaller percentages.Mark Goeller, assistant director and fire
management chief for the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food and Forestry,
said people across the state intentionally set fires for a number of reasons -
most of them nonmalicious. Some people think burning off fields controls&nbsp;

ticks and chiggers, he said, and others think it helps huckleberries grow. Still
others light fires to keep brush down."We have a lot of fires that are set
across the state for various reasons," he said.Depending on the circumstances,
those fires might be categorized as incendiary, Goeller said. In those cases, he
said, investigators generally have a hard time tracking the fire back to its
source. Investigators in some states, including Georgia, use bloodhounds to
track down people who start fires, he said, but no such program exists in
Oklahoma.The number of human-caused fires isn't unique to Oklahoma, Goeller
said. Across most of the southeastern United States, most wildfires are started
by humans. Farther west, natural causes like lightning are more common, he
said.Forestry officials are working to help people understand how to prevent
wildfires. When officials identify an area where human-caused wildfires are
becoming common, teams go into that area to talk to school groups about the
difference between good fires and bad fires, Goeller said.Hot timesOklahoma is
in the middle of what is typically one of its busiest seasons for wildfires,
state climatologist Gary McManus said.In late July and early August, vegetation
typically begins to dry out and turn brown after weeks of heat and little rain,
McManus said. Dry grass and vegetation ignite easily, so when a fire begins, it
can spread out of control quickly, McManus said.Wildfires are somewhat less of a
concern this year, since heavy rains in the spring and a relatively wet June and
July have kept vegetation green later into the summer."This is definitely not a
normal year," McManus said.The state's primary wildfire season is in early
spring, when vegetation is still dead or dormant. Spring weather patterns often
bring high winds, creating the perfect combination of conditions for fire to
spread, McManus said.After a wildfire occurs, investigators usually try to
determine a cause through a process of elimination, said Jerry Flowers, chief
agent of the state Agriculture Department's law enforcement division. They're
usually able to determine quickly if it was caused by factors like lightning or
an electrical line being knocked down, he said.In a few cases each year,
wildfires are started by arsonists, Flowers said. Although it's often difficult
to track a single fire to a single individual, an arsonist may set 100 or more
fires if given the opportunity, Flowers said. Eventually, serial arsonists
usually leave some trace behind that investigators can use to track them
down."In nearly all arson investigations, there is physical evidence left
behind," Flowers said. "These guys know what to look for, how to collect it, how
to find it and preserve that for criminal prosecution."

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2015 The Daily Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                              930 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             August 2, 2015 Sunday

Just as many wildfires start with humans, so can prevention, experts say

BYLINE: BY SILAS ALLEN Staff Writer sallen@oklahoman.com

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 657 words


Wildfires have burned more than 800,000 acres of Oklahoma forest and prairie
over the past 15 years, and records show the overwhelming majority of the blazes
were set deliberately.Most of those fires are started not by arsonists, but by
people burning off brush or setting fires for other reasons, state forestry
officials say.Since 1999, 63 percent of the state's wildfires have been
classified as incendiary, according to data from the Oklahoma Forestry Services.
That's a nebulous category that includes any fire that was set deliberately
under circumstances in which the person knew the fire shouldn't be lit, such as
during a burn ban.Another 20 percent of wildfires were started by a person who
was burning debris and lost control of the fire. Another 7 percent were sparked
by equipment use. Other causes, including campfires, smoking and children
playing, made up smaller percentages.Mark Goeller, assistant director and fire
management chief for the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food and Forestry,
said people across the state intentionally set fires for a number of reasons -
most of them nonmalicious. Some people think burning off fields controls&nbsp;

ticks and chiggers, he said, and others think it helps huckleberries grow. Still
others light fires to keep brush down."We have a lot of fires that are set
across the state for various reasons," he said.Depending on the circumstances,
those fires might be categorized as incendiary, Goeller said. In those cases, he
said, investigators generally have a hard time tracking the fire back to its
source. Investigators in some states, including Georgia, use bloodhounds to
track down people who start fires, he said, but no such program exists in
Oklahoma.The number of human-caused fires isn't unique to Oklahoma, Goeller
said. Across most of the southeastern United States, most wildfires are started
by humans. Farther west, natural causes like lightning are more common, he
said.Forestry officials are working to help people understand how to prevent
wildfires. When officials identify an area where human-caused wildfires are
becoming common, teams go into that area to talk to school groups about the
difference between good fires and bad fires, Goeller said.Hot timesOklahoma is
in the middle of what is typically one of its busiest seasons for wildfires,
state climatologist Gary McManus said.In late July and early August, vegetation
typically begins to dry out and turn brown after weeks of heat and little rain,
McManus said. Dry grass and vegetation ignite easily, so when a fire begins, it
can spread out of control quickly, McManus said.Wildfires are somewhat less of a
concern this year, since heavy rains in the spring and a relatively wet June and
July have kept vegetation green later into the summer."This is definitely not a
normal year," McManus said.The state's primary wildfire season is in early
spring, when vegetation is still dead or dormant. Spring weather patterns often
bring high winds, creating the perfect combination of conditions for fire to
spread, McManus said.After a wildfire occurs, investigators usually try to
determine a cause through a process of elimination, said Jerry Flowers, chief
agent of the state Agriculture Department's law enforcement division. They're
usually able to determine quickly if it was caused by factors like lightning or
an electrical line being knocked down, he said.In a few cases each year,
wildfires are started by arsonists, Flowers said. Although it's often difficult
to track a single fire to a single individual, an arsonist may set 100 or more
fires if given the opportunity, Flowers said. Eventually, serial arsonists
usually leave some trace behind that investigators can use to track them
down."In nearly all arson investigations, there is physical evidence left
behind," Flowers said. "These guys know what to look for, how to collect it, how
to find it and preserve that for criminal prosecution."

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2015 The Daily Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                              931 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                             July 9, 2015 Thursday

Battling the blazes

SECTION: A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 567 words


LA RONGE, Saskatchewan (AP) -- Firefighters made some progress Wednesday in
quelling hundreds of wildfires raging across western Canada that are threatening
thousands of people and triggering air quality warnings across the country and
in the U.S. West and Midwest, authorities said.

Steve Roberts, a Saskatchewan wildfire management official, said better
visibility has allowed aircraft to dump water on the flames there. Several
hundred Canadian soldiers were involved in firefighting efforts and the military
said another 500 troops from Manitoba were on standby. Fire-fighting crews from
across Canada and from South Dakota have been helping out.

But even as progress was being made in Saskatchewan, wildfires burned in parts
of British Columbia and northern Alberta and authorities were forced to seek
help from around the country and other countries, including Mexico and
Australia.

"As we started down the road with these fires, Alberta and British Columbia fire
hazards escalated, the numbers of fires increased and they had community
evacuations as well," Roberts said. "That has stretched the availability of
resources across the country."

Karen Hill, a spokeswoman for Saskatchewan's provincial emergency services, said
an estimated 10,000 to 12,000 people in the province have been forced to leave
their homes in recent days. The evacuations are mostly from more than 50
communities in the northern part of the province.

The Canadian Interagency Forest Fire Centre, which co-ordinates firefighting
services for the provinces and territories, said Canada may have to seek more
help from the U.S. and abroad.

The latest report on the agency website said the wildfire hazard is extreme and
major wildfires "have the potential to exhaust agency fire resources
nationally."

Alberta said Wednesday that it was bringing in 62 firefighters from Mexico to
help battle 92 wildfires burning in the province, including 33 listed as out of
control.

British Columbia, with more than 180 fires, was bringing in crews from
Australia.

Environment Canada continued to issue special air quality advisories for parts
of British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba and northwest Ontario due to
wildfire smoke.

Smoke from the wildfires has also led to air quality advisories in the U.S.,
including Washington state, North Dakota, South Dakota and Colorado.

Wildfire expert Mike Flannigan said tinderbox conditions in the Western
provinces set the stage for the wildfires. "Our weather this year has been very
hot, dry and windy," said the University of Alberta professor.

"This is consistent with what we expect with climate change. I'm not saying
every year is going to be a bad fire year, but we are going to see a lot more
fire on the landscape."

Kerry Anderson, a research scientist with the Canadian Forest Service, said the
weather pattern known as El Nino, which is caused by the warming of the Pacific
Ocean off the coast of South America, is responsible.

He expects weather conditions will settle down in Saskatchewan in the coming
weeks, but warmer than normal temperatures will likely persist for a while in
B.C. and Alberta.

Anderson said even if crews bring the Saskatchewan fires under control, they may
not actually be put out until the fall.

"The large fires that are burning there will continue to burn until they are
contained or until a fire-ending event may occur, and that may just end up being
the first snowfall."

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2015 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              932 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 27, 2015 Friday

Simpson Discusses Wildfires, Sage Grouse and Expresses Support for PILT with DOI
Secretary

LENGTH: 503  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of House of Representative Mike Simpson, U.S Government has issued the
following news release:

Idaho Congressman Mike Simpson, vice-chairman of the House Interior
Appropriations Subcommittee, discussed the need to change the budget process for
wildfires during Secretary of Interior Sally Jewell's testimony to the
subcommittee on Wednesday. Simpson is the lead sponsor of H.R. 167, the Wildfire
Disaster Funding Act, which would end the destructive cycle of fire borrowing
and would treat catastrophic wildfires like other natural disasters such as
hurricanes and floods.

"Like many of my Western colleagues, I have seen the impacts of catastrophic
wildfires first hand as they rage across Idaho each summer, threatening the
lives and property of my constituents.  In order to manage our federal lands, we
need to stop using funding intended for land management to fight fires. This is
a devastating cycle and it is destroying our forests," said Simpson. "Until we
address this issue, anything we do to increase needed management activities in
the forests, like hazardous fuels removal, timber harvest, conservation, or
trail maintenance, will continue to be decimated during wildfire season. Fixing
the wildfire budget is the critical first step in making our forests healthier
and, ultimately, reducing the cost of wildfires in the future."

Secretary Jewell included similar language in her fiscal year 2016 budget
request and commended Congressman Simpson for his work on H.R. 167, which has
bipartisan support in the House of Representatives and U.S. Senate.

Congressmen Simpson and Congressman Schrader (D-OR) introduced legislation
earlier this year to make common sense changes to the federal wildfire budget.
Last Congress, H.R. 167 was cosponsored by 140 Members of Congress and was
supported by a broad coalition of over 300 organizations.

"We're either going to pay for fires by taking the money from other budgets and
try to repay them later, which doesn't work, or we are going to find a better
way to manage this account," said Simpson. "I'm pleased to see Secretary Jewell
address this vital change in wildfire funding in her budget proposal and I look
forward to working with my colleagues in Congress to advance this much needed
change."

Congressman Simpson also raised concerns regarding a potential listing of the
sage grouse which has a court ordered listing deadline in September of this
year.

"I have long said that the Department needs to fully engage the states in order
to ensure we are doing everything possible to prevent a listing," said Simpson
after the hearing. "I am concerned that if the Department doesn't honor the
language which prevents the agency from writing a rule, stakeholders may not
have adequate time to finish their management plans that are essential to
preventing the listing. I will continue to advocate for the states involvement
in this process."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              933 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                               

                      December 12, 2017 Tuesday 18:33 EST

Are the American West's Wildfires Inevitable?;
Nonfiction

BYLINE: BRENDAN I. KOERNER

SECTION: BOOKS; review

LENGTH: 1366 words



HIGHLIGHT: Michael Kodas's "Megafire" and Edward Struzik's "Firestorm" analyse
the misguided history and dire results of America's wildfire management policy.


MEGAFIRE
The Race to Extinguish a Deadly Epidemic of Flame
By Michael Kodas
365 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $28.

FIRESTORM
How Wildfire Will Shape Our Future
By Edward Struzik
257 pp. Island Press. $30.

On Aug. 20, 1910, unusually vicious winds whipped through Idaho's Coeur d'Alene
Mountains, where firefighters had been keeping a number of small yet pesky
wildfires in check all summer. Aside from nearly knocking the men off their
horses, the gales caused isolated blazes to combine, yielding a single giant
conflagration that would come to be known as the Big Blowup. A forest ranger
named Ed Pulaski was among those encircled by the fire, and he feared death was
as certain as the smoke that blotted out the sun. "The whole world seemed to us
men back in those mountains to be aflame," he would later recall. "Many thought
that it really was the end of the world."

Pulaski guided 45 firefighters to shelter in a mine shaft, where he fended off
the encroaching flames with wet blankets. When one firefighter panicked and
tried to flee, Pulaski saved the man's life by holding him at gunpoint. Although
the whole crew eventually passed out from lack of oxygen, all but five of them
survived the ordeal. Scores of their colleagues weren't so lucky: In addition to
scorching a swath of land the size of Connecticut, the Big Blowup claimed the
lives of at least 78 firefighters, some of whom opted to commit suicide rather
than burn alive.

Staggered by the scale of the destruction and the vitriol of the resulting
newspaper headlines, the five-year-old United States Forest Service felt
compelled to declare an all-out war on wildfires. Instead of letting minor fires
run their course to rejuvenate the land, the Forest Service began to snuff out
any blaze, no matter how tiny or remote -- preferably by 10 o'clock on the
morning after it was first spotted. Zero tolerance thus became the core tenet of
modern wildfire management; to this day, legions of firefighters equipped with
special axes known as "Pulaskis" attack every wildfire with militaristic zeal.

And yet, like many well-intentioned policies that arise in the wake of tragedy,
the war on wildfires has proved to be self-defeating. As detailed in Michael
Kodas's bracing "Megafire" and Edward Struzik's drier "Firestorm," today's
forests are often clogged with desiccated vegetation because -- unlike in
countless millenniums past -- they are seldom cleansed by naturally occurring
blazes. With such an abundance of fuel to feast on, wildfires like those
currently raging in California have become increasingly ruinous and intense. Ten
million acres of the United States burned in 2015, over three times more than
the annual average throughout the 1970s. And the Forest Service now spends more
than half its budget fighting fires, compared with just 16 percent in 1995.

The bureaucrats and scientists who have tried to warn against the folly of
treating every wildfire like a mortal foe have discovered their message is a
nonstarter. That's partly because so many businesses are keen to preserve the
status quo: About 40 percent of America's wildfire-fighting resources, from
helicopters that can cost as much as $7,000 an hour to catering services that
charge $100,000 a day, are now provided by private companies. "Most don't get
paid if they're not actively fighting a fire," Kodas points out, "so they lobby
to fight as many fires as they can."

But the most powerful constituency in favor of perpetuating the futile war on
wildfires is the people who've chosen to inhabit risky terrain. According to a
2015 study, America's 13 Western states contain 1.1 million homes deemed "highly
vulnerable to wildfires" because of their proximity to forests full of tinder.
There is no easy way to convince the owners of those homes that a fire they can
glimpse from their bedrooms should be allowed to burn for long-term strategic
purposes. Nor have denizens of the so-called "wildland-urban interface" been
receptive to the idea that controlled burns, set and supervised by government
employees, are necessary to thin out cluttered woodlands. In fact, when the
Forest Service attempted to burn off some high-risk brush near Prescott, Ariz.,
a few years ago, angry locals threatened to kill anyone involved in the
operation.

As mammoth wildfires have been turning more and more forests into charred
moonscapes, they've also been accelerating climate change. Blazes that penetrate
the soil spur the release of substantial quantities of greenhouse gases,
particularly in chilly places like Alaska, where carbon and methane have been
sealed beneath the permafrost for eons. The warming effects of these gases
create a devastating feedback loop: A hotter climate extends the length of the
wildfire season, which in turn leads to more wildfires that produce more
greenhouse gases.

Carbon and methane aren't the only substances wildfires shake loose. As Struzik
observes in the most frightening chapter of "Firestorm," blazes often churn up
the hazardous remnants of old mining activity -- asbestos, arsenic, even
uranium. That phenomenon should be of grave concern even to city folk who never
venture within a thousand miles of a burning forest. "Wildfire experts and
public health officials are just beginning to appreciate that toxins that are
liberated by fire can migrate to far-flung places where most people are
completely unaware of the consequences," Struzik warns. (He cites a 2016 study
by Australian and Canadian epidemiologists who found that wildfire smoke could
be responsible for as many as 600,000 deaths per year, worldwide.)

Though "Megafire" and "Firestorm" cover much of the same alarming ground,
Kodas's book is far better at capturing the Sisyphean struggles of the men and
women who battle blazes for a living. The author of a previous book about the
tourist trade on Mount Everest, Kodas has a knack for fluid prose and an eye for
ghoulish detail. In recounting one Colorado firefighter's brush with fiery
death, for example, he notes that her severely burned fingers "felt like
balloons about to pop"; later, he evokes the desolation of a burned-out
wilderness by describing how "thousands of incinerated ponderosas looked like
brushstrokes of black ink against the gray ash."

Struzik, an academic and environmental journalist whose most recent book dealt
with the effects of climate change on the Canadian Arctic, writes with a certain
stiffness, even when narrating the moment-by-moment drama of a 2016 wildfire
that forced 88,000 people to evacuate the Canadian oil town of Fort McMurray.
("Formulating a wildfire management plan is as much an art as it is a science"
is one of his typically anodyne observations.) "Firestorm" comes alive when
Struzik discusses the work of offbeat scientists, like the man who has been
"monitoring the fate of flammulated owls in the Manitou Experimental Forest on
the front ranges of the Colorado Rockies since 1981." But lay readers might have
a limited appetite for such geeky tangents.

"Megafire" may be the more engaging of the two books, but I also found it to be
the more downbeat -- although unintentionally so. Kodas concludes by chronicling
the story of the Granite Mountain Hotshots, a group of 19 firefighters who
perished under mysterious circumstances in an Arizona inferno in 2013. He
expresses hope that these deaths will begin to awaken people to the fact that,
ever since the Big Blowup, wildfire policy has been guided by a "tangled tree of
legends" rather than solid science. But that sentiment struck me as depressingly
naïve. In recent years, high-profile tragedies have rarely transformed public
discourse; instead, they've tended to inspire people to cling ever more
fervently to their customary beliefs, as if it would be dishonorable to admit
the existence of complexity and nuance. Such is life in the era of the knee-jerk
double down, which is why the era of megafires is likely here to stay.

Brendan I. Koerner is a contributing editor at Wired and the author, most
recently, of "The Skies Belong to Us: Love and Terror in the Golden Age of
Hijacking."

DRAWING (DRAWING BY MARK PERNICE)

Related Articles


     ·    In a Warming California, a Future of More Fire
     ·    Wildfires at Your Doorstep


LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                
                              All Rights Reserved


                              934 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 8, 2016 Tuesday

Florida: Florida Forest Service Alerts Public to Heightened Wildfire Danger

LENGTH: 471  words




 Tallahassee:  Department of Agricuture And Consumer Service, The State of
Florida has issued the following news release:



   Florida Commissioner of Agriculture Adam H. Putnam and the Florida Forest
Service are urging the public to use caution with all outdoor fires due to
increased wildfire danger levels throughout the state. Dry conditions have
sparked wildfires in many areas of the state recently and have threatened 20
homes within the last three weeks.





 "Florida's wildland firefighters will likely battle additional wildfires in the
coming weeks due to continued dry conditions," said Commissioner of Agriculture
Adam H. Putnam. "Citizens can do their part to stop preventable wildfires by
using extreme caution with outdoor fires."



 Florida's number one cause of wildfires is human carelessness, with
approximately 20 percent caused by escaped yard trash burns. Dry conditions are
expected to increase in the coming weeks, especially in the Big Bend and
Panhandle areas. With no rain forecast until after Veterans Day, the Florida
Forest Service is urging residents to exercise caution when using fire outdoors,
including: burn piles, camp fires and grills. Requirements for safe outdoor
burning include the following:



     Never leave a fire or outdoor heat source unattended;

     Avoid burning on dry, windy days;

     Keep a water source and a shovel or suppression tool on hand;

     Make sure your fire meets Florida's required setbacks;

     Call before you burn to obtain an authorization for acreage burns or burn
piles larger than eight feet wide; and

     Completely extinguish any fire before leaving.



 "When citizens are careful with fire, they are doing more than just protecting
themselves and their property," said Jim Karels, Florida State Forester. "They
are helping to protect the lives of Florida's wildland firefighters and first
responders."



 There are approximately 33 active wildfires currently burning throughout
Florida. Since January, the Florida Forest Service and its partners have
responded to 2,489 wildfires that burned 69,467 acres. Visit the Florida Forest
Service's wildfire information webpage to view an interactive map of current
active wildfires, drought and fire danger forecast information, and a list of
current county burn bans.



 The Florida Forest Service, a division of the Florida Department of Agriculture
and Consumer Services, manages more than 1 million acres of state forests and
provides forest management assistance on more than 17 million acres of private
and community forests. The Florida Forest Service is also responsible for
protecting homes, forestland and natural resources from the devastating effects
of wildfire on more than 26 million acres.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              935 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             

                           September 15, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taming Wildfires Near and (Mostly) Far

BYLINE:  By ALAN BISBORT

SECTION: Section 14CN; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1223 words


WHEN wildfires strike out West, a hotline rings in Connecticut. The person who
answers it, more often than not, is Ralph Scarpino, forest fire supervisor for
the State Department of Environmental Protection.

The person calling is one of his counterparts in the United States Forest
Service. The federal government needs firefighters in a hurry and Mr. Scarpino
has them available.

Since a relatively small amount of Connecticut's forest is destroyed each year
by fire (1,300 acres, on average), it may seem strange that the state is home to
a team of expert wildfire fighters that can be mobilized at a phone call's
notice.

The reason is simple enough. In 1978, the D.E.P. set up a group called the
Connecticut Wildfire Crew, an action that went virtually unnoticed at the time.
Since 1988, however, the crew has become increasingly vital to the federal
firefighting effort as wildfires increased out west at a time the United States
Forest Service has had to reduce its staff due to budget cuts.

For that reason, Mr. Scarpino's phone is likely to ring anytime from June
through September, the western wildfire season, with a request to mobilize the
Connecticut Wildfire Crew. This strike force is comprised of a pool of 80
firefighters from around the state specially trained in wildfire-fighting
techniques.

This year, 54 crew members were needed for three separate western excursions
over a two-month period. The first crew of 20 went out in late June to help
battle widespread blazes in New Mexico and Arizona. The second crew was
mobilized in early July to tackle two separate 1,000-acre fires in Minnesota and
Utah. The third crew was sent to California's high desert in August to fight
brushfires in the dry chaparral, a particularly dangerous and fast-moving type
of wildfire.

Among those who regularly answer the call are Mark Blazejak, a park maintainer
at Pachaug State Forest; Nancy Murray, a biologist with the D.E.P.'s Geological
and Natural History Survey, and Mike Kinane, a college student and volunteer
firefighter in New Hartford who was first sent west, to Montana, in 2000.

"It seemed like the entire state of Montana was on fire," said Mr. Kinane, a
Class A chainsaw operator as well as registered ("red-carded") firefighter. "We
saw 100-foot pines that had flame lengths reaching 300 feet in the air. The fire
was moving at 30 miles an hour. Luckily, we were on a safe ridge top two miles
away."

Mr. Blazejak has been making regular trips west since 1988, when he began
fighting wildfires in Yellowstone National Park. Ms. Murray made her first trip
in 1987, the year the D.E.P. opened the program to more than forestry staff. In
2002, Mr. Blazejak and Ms. Murray were senior crew members. As a crew boss, Mr.
Blazejak is in charge of three squads totaling 20 firefighters.

"I don't get into the actual firefighting," he said. "I can't have my head down
digging. I'm standing near the crew talking to the squad boss below me and the
strike team leader above me. A wildfire is not like a structure fire, with hoses
dousing one tree at a time. We have a lot of things to think about, like triage,
structure protection, setting up sprinkler systems, anticipating oncoming
flames."

Their gear, which is all stashed at a D.E.P. site in Marlborough, is also
different. It's made of Nomex, a fire-resistant fabric light enough to allow
hard physical work. The primary means of dousing a wildfire is "digging line,"
or cutting swaths in the landscape to serve as a break beyond which a fire can't
spread.

"Firefighters who do structure fires tell us 'You're crazy to go out into a
blazing forest' " said Ms. Murray, who as a squad boss directs the work of a
team of six or seven crew members. "Maybe we are."

The most dangerous part of wildfires, Ms. Murray said, are the "falling snags,"
or limbs, and "crown fires," when canopies of trees are engulfed in flames that
pass from tree to tree above the firefighters' heads, creating an intense well
of heat. These can result in "blow-ups," when a dry tree suddenly explodes into
tall flames.

Even as the number and size of wildfires has increased in recent years, close
calls have decreased, at least for the Connecticut Wildfire Crew. Ms. Murray
said this was because four concepts -- lookouts, communication, escape routes,
safety zones -- are drilled into the crews long before they head west.

"We pull crews out of any potential danger zones, and we always have a safe
anchor point that we can get back to if a fire blows up on us," she said.

For the most part, fear is not a factor.

"When a spreading fire is coming close to your position, you do get excited, no
question, but we are so safety conscious that we're concentrating on the work,"
said Mr. Blazejak, who has developed one phobia: bus rides. "An hour in a bus on
an old logging road can make you glad to get to the fire site," he said.

Surprisingly, animals are seldom encountered in wildfires.

"Animals are smarter than most humans," Mr. Blazejak said. "They sense a fire
coming and they get out of the way. On my last trip, I saw an elk herd move into
our safety area with us."

Once a wildfire has passed through an area, it is designated a "burn over" or
"burn through". Then the crew's work continues even more earnestly. Mr. Kinane
was reminded of that this year.

"In California, you rarely see any vegetation over 6 feet tall," he said. "Here
and there you see an oak, but most of it is high brush. After a fire passes, the
root systems of the trees and brush are still smoldering. You can work for days
on end trying to get rid of the hot spots. We used garden hoses to snuff out the
duff. If a fire line is not dug down to mineral soil, then the fire can spread
underground through the duff and start in another spot. It happens all the
time."

Connecticut's Wildfire Crew has no illusions about the work. It is hard and
long, 12- to 14-hour shifts at a time. The accommodations are rough, too: mostly
two-person tents. Assignments last 14 days, with travel days added to both ends
of the stint.

"Let's face it," Mr. Blazejak said. "It's difficult being with 20 people 24
hours a day for two weeks. We don't even spend that kind of time with our
families. But this helps us with leadership training and enhances social
skills."

Ms. Murray said: "The best part is the camaraderie, the teamwork and the
challenge. I've met some of the finest people out there. People are at their
best when reduced to bare necessities: eat, sleep, work. How much simpler and
better can it get?"

Mr. Kinane said: "It makes you feel good to see the signs that say 'Thank you'
as you pass the driveways," he said.

Being one of the younger crew members, he also likes the adventure.

"Some people get their adrenaline pumped by riding a mountain bike; mine gets
pumped fighting wildfires," he said.

He is currently training to be a helicopter crewman. He said he doesn't think
that job is as dangerous as smoke jumping.

"Smoke jumpers parachute into forest wildfires with 90 pounds of gear on their
backs and stomach," Mr. Kinane said. "Now that is hardcore. They don't ask any
of the Connecticut crews to do that."

Ms. Murray said she enjoys the wildfire trips. "But I won't be disappointed if
I'm not called," she said. "My life is busy enough as it is."

Even so, she said she always has a bag packed, waiting by the door.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mark Blazejak of the Connecticut Wildfire Crew has been making
trips out west to fight fires since 1988. Right, Mr. Blazejak inspecting a tree
at Pachaug Park. (Photographs by C. M. Glover for The New York Times)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              936 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       The Virginia Gazette, Williamsburg

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           October 13, 2016 Thursday

BRIEF: Fall wildfire season begins Saturday

BYLINE: Jack Jacobs, The Virginia Gazette, Williamsburg

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 149 words


Oct. 13--As the temperature drops, the risk of wildfire rises.

The fall wildfire season begins on Saturday, according to a Virginia Department
of Forestry news release. Autumn is prime time for wildfire beacuse dried leaves
collect on the ground, winds increase and humidity levels drop.

These conditions create a source of fuel for fire and a way for it to spread
rapidly, resulting in property damage or injury, according to the release.

About 1,000 wildfires happen in Virginia every year, and more than 95 percent of
the fires are the result of human activity, often stemming from incidents of
burning yard debris or trash, the release states.

Fall wildfire season runs until Nov. 30.

Jacobs can be reached by phone at 757-298-6007.

___ (c)2016 The Virginia Gazette (Williamsburg, Va.) Visit The Virginia Gazette
(Williamsburg, Va.) at www.vagazette.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency,
LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20161013-1VG-BRF-Fall-wildfire-season-begins-Saturday-1013-20161013

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VG


                      Copyright 2016 The Virginia Gazette


                              937 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       The Virginia Gazette, Williamsburg

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           October 13, 2016 Thursday

BRIEF: Fall wildfire season begins Saturday

BYLINE: Jack Jacobs, The Virginia Gazette, Williamsburg

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 149 words


Oct. 13--As the temperature drops, the risk of wildfire rises.

The fall wildfire season begins on Saturday, according to a Virginia Department
of Forestry news release. Autumn is prime time for wildfire beacuse dried leaves
collect on the ground, winds increase and humidity levels drop.

These conditions create a source of fuel for fire and a way for it to spread
rapidly, resulting in property damage or injury, according to the release.

About 1,000 wildfires happen in Virginia every year, and more than 95 percent of
the fires are the result of human activity, often stemming from incidents of
burning yard debris or trash, the release states.

Fall wildfire season runs until Nov. 30.

Jacobs can be reached by phone at 757-298-6007.

___ (c)2016 The Virginia Gazette (Williamsburg, Va.) Visit The Virginia Gazette
(Williamsburg, Va.) at www.vagazette.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency,
LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20161013-1VG-BRF-Fall-wildfire-season-begins-Saturday-1013-20161013

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VG


                      Copyright 2016 The Virginia Gazette


                              938 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 27, 2015 Tuesday

Colorado: New measure targets wildfire funding

LENGTH: 468  words

DATELINE: Denver


Democratic Party has issued the following news release:

Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., and Sen. Mike Crapo, R-Idaho introduced a bipartisan
bill Thursday that would overhaul federal wildfire policy by increasing funding
for fire prevention and treat the largest wildfires as natural disasters.

The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act, sponsored by Sen. Michael Bennet and Sen.
Cory Gardner, would allow the U.S. Forest Service to access the pre-existing
disaster fund used by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to adequately
respond to wildfires.

While responses to other natural disasters can draw money from an emergency
fund, wildfire suppression budgets are based on their average costs for the past
10 years, which often results in underfunding. The senators described this as an
"outdated" tradition.

The U.S. Forest Service and the Department of the Interior as a result are often
forced to "borrow" money budgeted to other programs to make up for insufficient
funding.

This legislation would make any fire-suppression spending above 70 percent of
the 10-year average for fire suppression eligible to be funded under a separate
disaster account.

"Colorado and other Western states continue to face year after year of
catastrophic wildfires that threaten people and property and are busting our
budgets. We need to restructure the way we pay for fighting and mitigating
wildfires," Bennet said in a statement. "This bill will ensure that these
disasters receive adequate funding to end the damaging practice of 'fire
borrowing' that results in taking critical funding away from fire prevention
efforts."

Gardner also expressed his support in a statement.

"Major wildfires are natural disasters in every place but the federal budget,"
Gardner said. "But because the law doesn't allow funding for these events to be
properly budgeted, the Forest Service routinely has to pull money from other
important priorities, including fire prevention and forest management, in order
to fight these major wildfires. It's time for that counterproductive cycle to
end, and this bill does it."

U.S. Forest Service and Interior Department estimates found that 1 percent of
fires consume 30 percent of firefighting budgets, and thus should be treated as
true natural disasters.

It was also estimated that proper budgeting could free up $412 million in
discretionary funds for fire-prevention programs.

The legislation's other co-sponsors include Sens. James Risch, R-Idaho; Maria
Cantwell, D-Wash., the top Democrat on the Energy and Natural Resources
Committee; Steve Daines, R-Mont.; and Tammy Baldwin, D-Wis.

Michael Cipriano is a student at American University in Washington, D.C., and an
intern for The Durango Herald.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutioLondon:

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              939 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                     Kamloops Daily News (British Columbia)

                             June 5, 2013 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

B.C. man appealing massive fine for starting wildfire; Camper faces $860,000
penalty for Cariboo blaze

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 349 words

DATELINE: WILLIAMS LAKE


A Caribooarea man who was fined more than $860,000 for starting a wildfire while
camping on his own property is appealing the penalty.

According to documents filed with the provincial Forest Appeals Commission,
Robert Unger was determined to be responsible for a wildfire that began on his
property and spread to Crown land.

"Mr. Unger lit a campfire on land he owned, when it was unsafe to do so, and he
failed to establish a fuel break around the fire," the documents said.

"The fire escaped and caused a wildfire, and the ministry responded to the
wildfire."

Unger's land was not in an area covered by a fire department, the decision
noted.

In May 2011, Darrell Orosz, the manager of the Cariboo Fire Centre, issued a
decision ordering Unger to pay the costs of fighting the fire.

Orosz noted that he did not order Unger to pay compensation to the province for
damage to public property, which is possible under provincial laws.

Unger asked for a review and the same fire centre manager determined - again -
that Unger should pay.

Orosz acknowledged that Unger did not wilfully cause the fire, but said that
alone does not preclude payment of costs.

The ability to pay is not a factor in a decision, he wrote.

"I have considered ability to pay but conclude that the legislature could not
have intended ability to pay to be a valid consideration, since in many cases,
and certainly in the most serious cases, the government's fire control costs
will be beyond the ability of most persons to pay, in the absence of adequate
insurance coverage," he wrote in the original decision.

Patrick Vert, a spokesman for the Ministry of Forest, Lands and Natural Resource
Operations, which includes the B.C. Wildfire Management Branch, said the
ministry is limited in what it can say about an individual case, but that humans
cause almost half the wildfires in B.C. every year.

"When a wildfire is caused by a human, there may be an investigation of the
fire," Vert said in an email response.

The Wildfire Act allows the province to recover wildfire suppression costs or
damages from people deemed responsible, he said.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2013 Kamloops Daily News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              940 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 11, 2008 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

Dangerous Wildfire Advances in California

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 520 words

Dangerous Wildfire Advances in California

OROVILLE, Calif. -- Firefighters worked to keep flames from reaching more homes
after a lightning-sparked wildfire advanced Thursday in the Sierra Nevada
foothills of California.

The wildfire in Butte County destroyed at least 50 homes earlier in the week,
mostly in Concow, and has sent as many as 10,000 residents fleeing. It continued
burning through brush and trees, but no other homes were reported lost
overnight, officials said Thursday.

Firefighters made their stand along the Feather River on the banks  across from
the city of Paradise, which is at risk if the winds shift and the blaze jumps
the river. The fire threatens nearly 4,000 homes in Paradise, where last month a
separate wildfire destroyed 74 homes.

Across the state, fire crews have strained to cover hundreds of wildfires that
have burned 1,100 square miles and destroyed nearly 100 homes since a lightning
storm ignited most of them more than two weeks ago.  About 1,460 fires had been
contained, but more than 320 were still active, authorities said.

No to Labels for Anti-Seizure Drugs

Drugs used to treat epileptic seizures can raise suicide risks, but not enough
to deserve the strongest warning labels available, a government panel of experts
said.

Advisers to the Food and Drug Administration voted 14 to 4 against adding a
"black box" warning about the risks of suicidal tendencies to all anti-seizure
drugs.

Woman Restored to 9/11 Toll

NEW YORK -- A doctor missing since the day before  Sept. 11, 2001, was restored
to the city's official death toll from the terrorist attacks, months after an
appeals court said there was no other plausible reason for her disappearance.
The city medical examiner's office said Sneha Anne Philip, 31, was among 2,751
victims killed at the World Trade Center on Sept. 11.

Two Russians Take Spacewalk

CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. -- In a daring spacewalk, two space station astronauts cut
into the insulation of their descent capsule  and removed an explosive bolt that
could have blown off their hands with firecracker force. Spacewalkers Sergei
Volkov and Oleg Kononenko managed to safely disconnect the bolt from the Soyuz
capsule that will be their ride home this fall. They quickly slid it into a
blast-proof container.

Senate Confirms Petraeus, Odierno

The Senate voted 95 to 2 to confirm Gen. David H. Petraeus as top commander in
the Middle East, and 96 to 1 to confirm Lt. Gen. Raymond T. Odierno  as
Petraeus's replacement as chief military officer in Iraq. Democratic Sens.
Robert C. Byrd (W.Va.) and Tom Harkin (Iowa) opposed Petraeus's promotion;
Harkin opposed Odierno.

Teen's Gift Cookies Found to Be Drug-Free

LAKE WORTH, Tex. -- A teenager jailed on accusations that he delivered
drug-laced cookies to a dozen police stations was released  after tests showed
no drugs in the goodies. Blue Mound and Lake Worth Police said tests by the
Tarrant County medical examiner showed there were no controlled substances in
cookies delivered by Christian V. Phillips, 18, who had been jailed on $75,000
bond on a charge of tampering with a consumer product.

-- From News Services

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; By Ben Margot -- Associated Press; A California National
Guardsman prepares to fight wildfires, with more than 320 fires still active.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              941 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                             Northumberland Gazette

                           September 15, 2014 Monday

Northumberland research will help firefighters worldwide

LENGTH: 497  words


Field research carried out in Northumberland over the summer gathered
much-needed data that will help to predict how wildfires will spread in peatland
and bog.

Northumberland Fire and Rescue Service, Northumberland National Park Authority
and the Forestry Commission helped researchers from the Netherlands and the USA
to gather the data for the project, which determined how quickly different areas
of peatland and bog took to burn and how different types and amounts of
vegetation would affect how a wildfire might burn and spread.

This research will help firefighters reliably predict where fires will spread
and where the fires can be safely and effectively extinguished.

Peat fires are one of the hardest types of wildfire to extinguish as they can
smoulder underground with almost no indication of where the fire is, or how
intense it is. The field research provided existing wildfire prediction models
with much-needed information on peatland vegetation and addressed the knowledge
gap in these models.

Chief Fire Officer Alex Bennett said: "The research gathered in Northumberland
will be invaluable to firefighters in Northumberland and across the world. Peat
fires are particularly challenging for firefighters as they can burn underground
for days or even weeks, emerging at the surface at various points, becoming
difficult to control.

"We have attended fewer wildfires this year compared to previous years, but as
happens every year we have still attended some significant wildfire incidents
and the risk that wildfires pose to the county of Northumberland remains high.
We will continue to work closely with our colleagues from the Netherlands and
the USA to better understand how we can use models to predict how and where
wildfires will spread."

The research has been completed by a partnership of institutions including the
Institute of Physical Safety (IFV) and van Hall Larenstein University in the
Netherlands, and the Stephen F. Austin University in Texas, USA.

Andrew Miller, head of conservation at Northumberland National Park Authority,
said: "Northumberland National Park contains peatlands of international
importance. Peat that has formed over many thousands of years acts as an
enormous carbon store and helps to hold water on the hills reducing flooding
downstream.

"The vegetation that grows on the peat is home to unusual plants and animals,
but all of this can be destroyed in a matter of hours by wildfire. It is
therefore critical that we learn more about how to prevent these wildfires in
the first place and how to best to manage them if they do occur."

The researchers have delivered two information sessions to practitioners from
Northumberland and the UK during their study visit. The researchers are now
analysing their data and plan to return to the county in October to present some
of the results of their study.

For more information on the Wildfire Conference, visit
{http://www.thesill.org.uk/events | the website | Click here for details}.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NPNG


                       Copyright 2014 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              942 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                           February 16, 2017 Thursday
                                 Early Edition

Budget remains unclear as wildfire season starts

BYLINE: Emma Graney, Calgary Herald

SECTION: CITY; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 347 words

DATELINE: EDMONTON


Water tankers hired to fight fires in Alberta will see their contracts
re-extended to 120 days when the province's wildfire season begins March 1.

The new Forest and Prairie Protection Act means Albertans will also face
increased fines for abandoning campfires or burning during bans, and
corporations can be fined up to $1 million for fire safety breaches.

Since the 2017-18 budget han't been set yet, it's not clear is how much the
province will spend on fire prevention programs or its base wildfire management
budget, which received cuts in 2016.

The government was slammed last year for cutting its water tanker contracts by
$5.1 million and its base wildfire management budget by a further $9.6 million.

The province hasn't had any word on when it might see a third-party wildfire
report it commissioned after the devastating Fort McMurray blaze, which is
supposed to offer lessons learned from the disaster.

That fire reduced to ash an area the size of Prince Edward Island, destroying
2,302 residences in 1,599 structures, and 15 commercial properties, and burned a
$500-million hole in Alberta's coffers.

Insurable losses topped $3.6 billion, making it the most expensive disaster for
insurers in Canadian history.

The government is already deploying firefighting equipment across the province
in preparation for this year's fire season.

While last year saw a fair bit of precipitation, Agriculture and Forestry
Minister Oneil Carlier said Wednesday a dry winter has elevated the fire risk
unless there are notable spring rains.

Carlier said he would like to see more buy-in when it comes to fire safety - but
that doesn't necessarily mean more cash for the Fire Smart program.

More than 60 per cent of the wildfires in 2016 were caused by human activity and
Carlier hopes increased fines will push Albertans to do their part in preventing
fires.

Last year, 1,338 wildfires burned more than 611,000 hectares, including the
Horse River wildfire that spread into Fort McMurray. egraney@postmedia.com
Twitter.com/EmmaLGraney !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ian Kucerak; Oneil Carlier, right, Minister of Agriculture and
Forestry, hopes increased fines will push Albertans to prevent wildfires. In
2016, more than 60 per cent of wildfires in Alberta were caused by people.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Calgary Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              943 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            Cranbrook Daily Townsman

                            August 31, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Forest service road closures in Southeast Fire Centre

BYLINE: Barry Coulter

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 387 words


CRANBROOK - Due to recent wildfire activity in the Southeast Fire Centre, the BC
Wildfire Service has closed three forest service roads near active fires to help
protect public safety and assist firefighting operations.

Lamb Creek wildfire:

· As of the afternoon of Aug. 30, 2017, the Lamb Creek wildfire (about five
kilometres northwest of the community of Moyie and 18 kilometres southwest of
Cranbrook) covered about 60 hectares.

· Thirty-four personnel are on site building fire guards with the assistance of
heavy equipment, airtankers and helicopters.

· The Lamb Creek Forest Service Road has been closed, starting at the
1.5-kilometre mark of the Mineral and Lamb Creek Forest Service Road to the
Whitney and Irishman Creek Forest Service Road junction.

· A map of the affected area is available online: http://ow.ly/SnGm30eNyMn

· The area restriction for Moyie Lake that was implemented on Aug. 29 remains in
place.

Mount King George wildfire:

· As of the afternoon of Aug. 30, 2017, the Mount King George wildfire (about 49
kilometres northeast of Invermere) covered about 100 hectares.

· The Palliser Forest Service Road has been closed starting at the
54.25-kilometre mark.

· A map of the affected area is available online: http://ow.ly/iRjr30eNC07

Quinn Creek wildfire:

· As of the afternoon of Aug. 30, 2017, the Quinn Creek wildfire (east of the
Top of the World Provincial Park and about 34 kilometres northwest of Sparwood)
covered about 1,282 hectares.

· Seventy-two personnel are working on this fire with the assistance of heavy
equipment and a helicopter.

· The Quinn Creek Forest Service Road has been closed, starting at the
60-kilometre mark at the Bull River Junction Forest Service Road.

· A map of the affected area is available online: click here

The Southeast Fire Centre extends from the U.S. border in the south to the Mica
Dam in the north and from the Okanagan Highlands and Monashee Mountains in the
west to the B.C.-Alberta border in the east. The Southeast Fire Centre includes
the Selkirk Natural Resource District and the Rocky Mountain Natural Resource
District.

To report a wildfire or open burning violation, call *5555 on a cellphone or 1
800 663-5555 toll-free. For the latest information on current wildfire activity,
burning restrictions, road closures and air quality advisories, visit: click
here

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              944 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      Kimberley Daily Bulletin (Cranbrook)

                            August 31, 2017 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Forest service road closures in Southeast Fire Centre

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 387 words


CRANBROOK - Due to recent wildfire activity in the Southeast Fire Centre, the BC
Wildfire Service has closed three forest service roads near active fires to help
protect public safety and assist firefighting operations.

Lamb Creek wildfire:

· As of the afternoon of Aug. 30, 2017, the Lamb Creek wildfire (about five
kilometres northwest of the community of Moyie and 18 kilometres southwest of
Cranbrook) covered about 60 hectares.

· Thirty-four personnel are on site building fire guards with the assistance of
heavy equipment, airtankers and helicopters.

· The Lamb Creek Forest Service Road has been closed, starting at the
1.5-kilometre mark of the Mineral and Lamb Creek Forest Service Road to the
Whitney and Irishman Creek Forest Service Road junction.

· A map of the affected area is available online: http://ow.ly/SnGm30eNyMn

· The area restriction for Moyie Lake that was implemented on Aug. 29 remains in
place.

Mount King George wildfire:

· As of the afternoon of Aug. 30, 2017, the Mount King George wildfire (about 49
kilometres northeast of Invermere) covered about 100 hectares.

· The Palliser Forest Service Road has been closed starting at the
54.25-kilometre mark.

· A map of the affected area is available online: http://ow.ly/iRjr30eNC07

Quinn Creek wildfire:

· As of the afternoon of Aug. 30, 2017, the Quinn Creek wildfire (east of the
Top of the World Provincial Park and about 34 kilometres northwest of Sparwood)
covered about 1,282 hectares.

· Seventy-two personnel are working on this fire with the assistance of heavy
equipment and a helicopter.

· The Quinn Creek Forest Service Road has been closed, starting at the
60-kilometre mark at the Bull River Junction Forest Service Road.

· A map of the affected area is available online: click here

The Southeast Fire Centre extends from the U.S. border in the south to the Mica
Dam in the north and from the Okanagan Highlands and Monashee Mountains in the
west to the B.C.-Alberta border in the east. The Southeast Fire Centre includes
the Selkirk Natural Resource District and the Rocky Mountain Natural Resource
District.

To report a wildfire or open burning violation, call *5555 on a cellphone or 1
800 663-5555 toll-free. For the latest information on current wildfire activity,
burning restrictions, road closures and air quality advisories, visit: click
here

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              945 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Cape Times (South Africa)

                            January 09, 2009 Friday
                                   e1 Edition

Taming the wildfires

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 408 words


The number of wildfires for the Cape Peninsula are down when compared to the
same period last year, and while the late winter rains and green vegetation have
something to do with it, so do the residents of Cape Town who have become more
responsible.

The common causes of wildfires, including illegal or unattended braais,
discarded cigarette butts, burning rubbish and fireworks, remain a threat, but
the increased awareness of the public is playing a huge part in reducing
ignitions.

In addition to the increased number of members of the Volunteer Wildfire
Services (based at the Table Mountain National Park firebase at Newlands) to
address the symptoms, huge progress has been made in addressing the causes in
the Cape Peninsula.

Combined projects between the Volunteer Wildfire Services, TMNP and the Cape
Peninsula Fire Protection Association include advisory and training programmes
for landowners and their staff over the past 12 months; awareness programmes for
children and adults; roadside pamphlet handouts during peak-hour traffic; and
early warning services for home-owner associations such as Misty Cliffs and
Scarborough.

In contradiction to public comments made recently, communication and
co-operation between agencies on the ground is good, with response times being
improved dramatically. Despite the often very strong prevailing winds, no
wildfire in the Cape Peninsula has exceeded 6ha this season and the quick
reporting of fires by the public (TMNP Hotline 086 110 6417), coupled with the
rapid response of patrolling teams and fire-fighting services, has added to
unplanned wildfires being brought under control quickly.

Many people know that fynbos needs to burn and that people should not be
building houses on the urban edge where there is a large risk of wildfire
damage.

What we all in Cape Town need to do is find the solution to living safely with
fynbos and in so doing reduce the risk of wildfire damage to our homes. This can
be done through planning and managing the fynbos in the area.

This management would include clearing of fire breaks, permit-approved
prescribed burning of old vegetation, and the removal of fire corridors that
could allow the fire to creep from the fynbos. Houses on the urban edge, fynbos
and fire are here to stay.

The progress being made at all levels is promising and ongoing support from the
public is needed. For more info visit www.capefires.com

Rob Erasmus

Manager: Volunteer Wildfire

Services

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CT


                 Copyright 2009 Independent News and Media Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              946 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                             August 14, 2017 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Evacuation orders expanded as lightning fuels new wildfires

SECTION: CITY; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 500 words


The Cariboo Regional District expanded evacuation orders Sunday for areas near
Canim Lake, Hawkins Lake and the Canim Lake First Nation near 100 Mile House
after lightning sparked dozens of new wildfires in the Interior.

The B.C. Wildfire Service said crews stayed overnight Saturday to battle one
fire near the east end of Canim Lake, and more resources arrived Sunday.
Officials said fire behaviour was described as quiet Sunday morning, and the
area received rain overnight. B.C. Wildfire Service spokesman Ryan Turcot said
28 new fires were sparked in the province between Saturday and Sunday, most of
which were from lightning. Turcot said gusty winds caused aggressive growth in
the Cariboo region.

A total of 163 fires were burning in B.C. Sunday.

RCMP spokeswoman Dawn Roberts said that in Alexis Creek, where police helped
people leave, officers removed items from the RCMP detachment in the community.

On the south shores of Green Lake where an order was issued, Roberts said some
people didn't leave. But she said they changed their minds when buildings
started to burn.

The wildfire service said smoke originating from the large wildfires in the
Cariboo has drifted north and was visible throughout the Prince George region.

The increase in smoke was attributed to a shift in wind direction that was
pushing the smoke from the Cariboo fires into the entire northern part of the
province. The largest wildfire in the Prince George Fire Centre was burning east
of Lucas Lake about 65 kilometres southwest of Fraser Lake. No communities or
structures were threatened by this fire.

In the West Kootenay region, a weekend music festival that was cancelled due to
an encroaching wildfire was resurrected.

Organizers of the Shambhala Music Festival said Sunday that damp, cool weather
had downgraded the threat of the fire moving close to the Salmo River Ranch
property where the event was being held.

They said the decision followed hours of meetings on Sunday morning with the
Regional District of Central Kootenay and other local government.

Sunday was the final night for the festival, which was celebrating its 20th
anniversary.

The regional district had issued an evacuation alert Saturday after the B.C.
Wildfire Service reported that flames had crossed the Salmo River and were
heading toward Salmo. In Metro Vancouver and Fraser Valley, an air quality
advisory caused by smoke from the Interior wildfires was lifted Saturday after
almost two weeks.

The advisory was issued Aug. 1 and alerted residents to "fine particulate
matter" in the air, which had wafted across the region from wildfires burning
throughout B.C.

Changing weather means much of the haze lifted on Saturday, allowing for the air
quality advisory to be cancelled.

However, Metro Vancouver said the advisory could be back.

"If smoke from these fires causes air quality to deteriorate again, another
air-quality advisory may be initiated," the agency said in a news release.
!@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 The Vancouver Sun
                              All Rights Reserved


                              947 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 21, 2015 Monday
                            British Columbia Edition

DISPATCH;
Mayors to press Clark on wildfire prevention;
Aim is to fund reduction of wildfire fuel to limit blazes - a long-standing
recommendation - instead of spending more to fight them

BYLINE: JUSTINE HUNTER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. S1

LENGTH: 678 words

DATELINE: VICTORIA


jhunter@globeandmail.com

In July of 2009, wildfires chased 15,000 West Kelowna residents from their
homes. The district's Mayor, Doug Findlater, was one of the evacuees. Every
summer since, he stays home to keep vigil because of the recurring threat to his
community.

"I dread summer, I really do," he said in an interview. "That's not the way it
should be. Your life is never quite the same when you have been forced out of
your house and are wondering if everything is gone."

Mr. Findlater is leading the campaign at this week's Union of B.C.

Municipalities convention to press Premier Christy Clark to put more money into
preventing the wildfires that threaten B.C. communities with increasing
regularity.

He will present a resolution during the debates, and no doubt he will have
strong support from other local leaders. But those motions often have zero
impact on government policy. His hopes are pinned instead on the working
sessions where mayors get to meet privately with their local MLAs: His MLA is
Premier Clark.

This past July, the Premier rushed back to her constituency as wildfires once
again threatened West Kelowna. She visited crews fighting the Westside Road
blaze on Okanagan Lake, and later told reporters she recognizes that these kinds
of severe wildfires are a challenge that will only increase in the future due to
climate change.

"We have to be planning with the knowledge that this isn't going to be an
unusual year," she told reporters. "These things are going to happen more often.
... We have to be more ready for that."

The province spent $270-million fighting 1,800 wildfires this summer. That's
similar to 2014, which was recorded as the thirdworst wildfire season in the
province's history.

Municipal leaders want more money spent on prevention, and it's an old refrain -
a string of similar UBCM resolutions go back to 2005. The objective is to reduce
the risk of interface fires - those wildfires that encroach on communities - by
creating buffers of land where the underbrush has been cleared of potential
fuel.

The province has spent $68million in the past decade treating forest lands
adjacent to communities, but every year, new developments are spreading into
those areas most susceptible to severe fires. The backlog of untreated,
high-risk land remains significant. (Forest ministry officials can't say how
much; a new risk analysis is being prepared.)

Former Manitoba premier Gary Filmon was asked to report to the B.C. government
on the unprecedented interface fires of 2003 that destroyed 334 homes and many
businesses. Tragically, three pilots died while fighting those fires. One of Mr.
Filmon's top recommendations was to invest in prevention. "A fuel management
program must be reintroduced as a high priority in the interface zone," he wrote
in 2004.

Last spring, a special investigation by the independent Forest Practices Board
concluded that some progress has been made, but it is not nearly enough: "Most
communities in B.C. remain vulnerable to catastrophic wildfire."

The report makes for bleak reading: "Unfortunately, over the past 10 years, only
10 per cent or less of hazardous forest fuels have been treated. Funding to
protect at-risk communities in B.C. by removing interface fuel sources is
inadequate," the board found.

Instead, most of the budget is spent on fighting fires, and those resources are
limited, as well.

"As the climate changes, wildfire managers expect that the fire season will
start earlier and end later in the year, and wildfires will be larger and more
severe.

These managers have also warned that, in a busy fire season with large 'mega
fires,' resources may be overwhelmed and the public may not be able to count on
them to protect communities or natural resource values."

To recap: In the decade since the Filmon report, B.C. has tackled, at best,
one-tenth of the known problem. But the province now has a premier whose
constituents are living directly with the consequences of that meagre effort.
Mayor Findlater is hopeful this is the year the province will, finally, make it
a high priority.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2015 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              948 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                            April 11, 2015 Saturday
                                 Early Edition

Stifling civil service slightly sinister; Gag order for public servants even
includes Bertie Beaver

BYLINE: Paula Simons, Edmonton Journal

SECTION: CITY &; REGION; Paula Simons; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 804 words


The provincial Wildfire Management twitter feed isn't known for generating
partisan controversy.

Mostly, it tweets tips about how to spot wildfires, along with information about
local fire bans, and advice on how to get a fire permit. Last week, it even
posted a picture of its mascot Bertie Beaver working alongside the Easter Bunny
to teach kids how to prevent forest fires.

But then the writ dropped. And the Wildfire Twitter feed went strangely quiet.

No more safety tips. No more fire ban updates. No more Bertie Beaver.

"In keeping with public service rules during an election, our social media
activity will be limited until after the swearing-in ceremony," Wildfire
Management announced via Twitter Wednesday, the day after the provincial
election campaign began. "(I)n the case of a wildfire emergency we will resume
posting information to social media."

Well, that's a relief. At least if there's a dangerous fire, someone will warn
us, election or no election.

But it wasn't only Wildfire Management that was offering an absurdly strict new
interpretation of the usual rules, which prevent the public service from doing
anything that could be considered partisan during an election campaign.

The Alberta Parks Twitter feed went silent the moment the election began. So did
the Alberta Culture and Tourism account. Were tyrannosaurs cannibals? No one
from the Tyrrell Museum was allowed to say. It was equally tricky this week to
get information from the government on everything from snowpacks to snow geese.

Kim Capstick, executive director of public service communications and engagement
with the Alberta's corporate human services department, says it's long-standing
policy that public servants aren't supposed to speak out during the election
campaign period.

"It's protocol that the public service cannot be seen as advocating for one
party over another," says Capstick. "Also, they may not fetter any new
government that might come in."

During an election campaign there can be no funding announcement, no news
releases announcing new programs, no announcements that might seem to celebrate
or champion or defend government initiatives. "The public service takes on a
caretaker role when the writ is dropped," says Capstick. "We don't want the
public service to be seen as promoting a program that's part of a platform."

That is right and proper.

Provincial civil servants don't work for Jim Prentice or the PC party. They work
for all Albertans. They are supposed to be strictly nonpartisan, and not just
during elections.

But a sweeping gag rule on government-employed experts and senior bureaucrats
during the four-week election period takes scrupulosity to a surreal level. It
surely ought to be possible for a paleontologist to speak about dinosaurs eating
their own kind without bringing the Tories and the Wildrose into it. (Difficult,
I grant you. But not impossible.) And how is it partisan to tweet information
about birdwatching or spring avalanche risks in provincial park? Or to answer
media questions about snowpack?

Of course, we don't want government employees abusing their positions or their
social media platforms during an election campaign. This isn't a time for
ministries to be trumpeting their programs.

Yet stifling scientists and emergency service providers, in particular, from
providing factual information in a timely manner is both silly and slightly
sinister.

Friday morning, the province issued modified guidelines to the public service,
allowing staff to speak to the media, with the approval of their deputy
minister, in cases of "high-volume" media requests. But no one will be allowed
to use provincial social media accounts during the election period, except in
the case of exceptional circumstances such as a public emergency. No Bertie
Beaver - in fact, no educational or public service campaigns of any kind.

Of course, no one wants to be the poor civil servant who says the wrong thing
and provokes a political tempest mid-election. It's hard to blame gun-shy
bureaucrats for erring on the side of quiet caution. It's also true that
blanket, simple, blackand-white rules are easier to enforce than rules that
allow for individual discretion and common sense.

Still, daily life in Alberta doesn't stop just because politicians are on the
hustings. Nor does the public's need for accurate, neutral information about a
wide variety of subjects. How sad that our political culture has become so
toxic, we feel we can no longer trust professional public servants to do their
jobs professionally, without fear or favour.

psimons@edmontonjournal. com Twitter.com/Paulatics

edmontonjournal.com

Paula Simons is on Facebook. To join the conversation, go to
www.facebook.com/EJPaulaSimons or visit her blog at edmontonjournal.
com/Paulatics !@COPYRIGHT=© 2015 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Government Of Alberta; Bertie Beaver, the Alberta Wildfire Management's
mascot, won't have much to say until the provincial election is over.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 Edmonton Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              949 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                              July 8, 2012 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Smoke from U.S. fires could hide B.C. blazes

BYLINE: Christopher Reynolds, Vancouver Sun

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 346 words

DATELINE: VANCOUVER


Smoke from wildfires in the United States have swathed much of the B.C. interior
in a thin haze of carbon, say Wildfire Management officials.

"Last night we started to receive a lot of what we would call general smoke and
general haze reports," Wildfire Management spokeswoman Fionna Tollovsen said
Saturday.

The infernos south of the border, which became particularly severe with the
Colorado wildfire in late June, sent clouds of smoke across 1,300 kilometres to
hover above Kamloops, Merritt, Lillooet, Pemberton and even the Cariboo region,
Tollovsen said.

Wildfire officials launched a reconnaissance plane Friday evening to see if the
haze was masking any new blazes in the interior.

"This morning we [also] looked at our satellite imagery and started to look at
some of the weather mapping and confirmed that the smoke was actually coming up
from the Colorado wildfire."

Tollovsen said lingering smoke is a concern because it hinders discovery of new
blazes. "It can be harder to spot the plume of smoke that would be a new fire
start."

Wildfire officials predict the smoky conditions will remain in the interior
throughout the week, which is expected to be hot, dry and conducive to forest
fires.

The loitering smoke may be caused by "temperature inversion," when a layer of
warm air overlays a layer of cooler air, effectively capping smoke, dust and
other pollutants which would otherwise diffuse into the troposphere, Tollovsen
said.

Provincial air-quality meteorologist Ralph Adams said smoke has been building up
around Kamloops and concentrations will vary depending on winds and
temperatures.

The provincial air quality health index showed Kamloops at the highest risk
level of all regions Saturday, with many areas, including Kamloops, expected to
level out at a moderate risk level over the weekend.

Areas north and west of the interior such as Prince George were expected to
maintain a lower air risk level.

The U.S. Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho, has reported that dozens of
fires were burning in nine western states, destroying 600 homes and killing six
people.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Andreas Fuhrmann, Associated Press; A California Department of Forestry
and Fire Protection air tanker works the 500-hectare Dale Fire near Happy
Valley, Calif. Smoke from a spate of wildfires across the U.S. West has made its
way over British Columbia.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2012 Times Colonist, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                              950 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                               Waterloo Chronicle

                            January 19, 2010 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Wildfire firmly in 5th place after sweeping division rivals

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 263  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


The National Ringette League Wildfire swept both games of a weekend homestand at
RIM Park against two of their Southern Ontario Division rivals.

Saturday night the Wildfire scored just 29 seconds in and then battled through a
tight contest with a pesky Whitby Wild squad for a 5-3 victory.

Shelly Kraemer led the Wildfire with a goal and two assists, while Tara Gross,
Bryanna Kelly, Katie Dawson and Lindsey Vivian each tallied once.

Lisa Malanka kept the Wildfire in the game stopping 17 of 20 shots while her
teammates mustered only 18 on the Whitby net.

Sunday afternoon was a different story for Waterloo who directed 37 shots at
Richmond Hill Lightning goalie Ashley Vlaar on the way to an 8-2 win.

The Wildfire started more strongly than the previous evening and led 2-0 only to
have the Lightning come back to tie it early in the second half.

However, after that it was all Wildfire as they scored six unanswered goals,
four in a space of just over eight minutes by sophomore Kelly. Waterloo also got
singles from Shelagh Rouse, Amanda Somerville, Dawson and Vivian.

The two wins leave the Wildfire tied for fifth place in the 12-team Eastern
Conference with the Quebec City Cyclones each with 22 points. Waterloo has 11
games remaining in their 31-game schedule and must finish fifth or higher in
order to host one of four qualifying best-of-three series to have a shot at a
return trip to the NRL Championships being held this year in Saskatoon in early
April.

The Waterloo squad is idle now until Jan 30 at 7p.m. at RIM Park when they will
meet the undefeated Cambridge Turbos.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Sports

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              951 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         Williams Lake Tribune Advisor

                           November 15, 2016 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Ministry hosts open house on wildfire risk reduction in Borland Valley

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 377  words


A community information meeting and open house about upcoming wildfire risk
reduction activities in the Borland Valley will be held on Monday, Nov. 21,
2016, from 7 p.m. to 8:30 p.m.

Everyone is welcome to attend the meeting, which will be held at the 150 Mile
House firehall at 3038 Pigeon Rd.

The meeting will include an overview of the Borland Valley Wildfire Hazard
Reduction and Habitat Enhancement Project and also provide details about
wildfire risk reduction activities planned for the area over the next two to
three years.

Staff from the Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations will
host the meeting and answer questions about the Borland Valley project. They
will also be able to offer advice on using FireSmart principles to reduce
wildfire threats on private property.

The first phase of the Borland Valley Wildfire Hazard Reduction and Habitat
Enhancement Project is scheduled for later this year.

It involves six hectares of land between Pigeon Road and Borland Creek (south of
Ptarmigan Place and Brouse Road) which will be treated to help mitigate wildfire
risks and enhance wildlife habitat.

Crews will remove undergrowth, trim "ladder fuels" on larger trees (tree
branches up to three metres above the ground that could allow flames to spread
into the tree canopy) and cut down some smaller trees.

These treatments are expected to reduce the amount of surface fuels and ladder
fuels, clear branches from below the crowns of live trees, create conditions
where any wildfire in the area would likely be a low-intensity surface fire
instead of a high-intensity crown fire (which would also allow for more
efficient fire suppression and make it safer for ground crews to work there),
enhance wildlife habitat by removing obstructions to animal movement and
retaining and enhancing the health of large-diameter trees.

The second phase of the Borland Valley Wildfire Hazard Reduction and Habitat
Enhancement Project will cover about 450 hectares between Pigeon Road and Redeau
Lake Road.

Multiple treatment plans will be developed for this area through the winter of
2016-17, with on-the-ground work starting in the fall of 2017.

The goals of this phase are to reduce wildfire risks, enhance wildlife habitat
and improve overall forest health.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2016 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              952 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            July 23, 2014 Wednesday

Bennet, Udall Press for Additional Firefighting Resources

LENGTH: 387  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of The Senator Michael Bennet, U.S Government has issued the following
news release:

Amidst a record-setting wildfire season in the West, Colorado U.S. Senators
Michael Bennet and Mark Udall today called for swift passage of the president's
emergency supplemental funding request, which would allocate $615 million -
accessible immediately - to fight wildfires. The Senators also called for a vote
on the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act, a bill that would fix the broken system of
stealing funds from prevention programs to fight wildfires that are already
burning.

With persistent droughts, dry forest conditions, and new wildfires starting
daily, the West has experienced a particularly harsh wildfire season. At this
rate, it is expected to require more fire suppression funding than the amount
appropriated this fiscal year.

"We cannot afford to wait another year to fix this urgent problem," the Senators
wrote. "We urge you to take up the President's emergency funding request to deal
with wildfire funding once and for all."

The emergency supplemental funding request would grant $615 million, which would
be immediately accessible for firefighting efforts in western states through the
end of the year.

The cost of fighting wildfires has regularly exceeded the amount appropriated by
Congress in past years. To cover this need for additional funds, money must be
redirected from mitigation and prevention efforts. The Senators also pointed out
that key prevention programs, such as the hazardous fuel removal program, have
lost funding in the past two years.

To ensure that fires are treated like other natural disasters and ensure that
both firefighting and prevention efforts are adequately funded, the Senators
urged passage of the bipartisan Wildlife Disaster Funding Act.

"In the last two years, the U.S. Forest Service and the Department of Interior
have been forced to take money from other important programs to cover the cost
of fighting wildfires," the Senators wrote in the letter. "[...] We must act
immediately to pass emergency supplemental appropriations to ensure we do not
continue this vicious cycle of fire funding, and include legislation to
permanently fix the fire funding problem, such as the Wildfire Disaster Funding
Act of 2013."

For further information please visit: http://www.bennet.senate.gov

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              953 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            July 23, 2014 Wednesday

Bennet, Udall Press for Additional Firefighting Resources

LENGTH: 387  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of The Senator Michael Bennet, U.S Government has issued the following
news release:

Amidst a record-setting wildfire season in the West, Colorado U.S. Senators
Michael Bennet and Mark Udall today called for swift passage of the president's
emergency supplemental funding request, which would allocate $615 million -
accessible immediately - to fight wildfires. The Senators also called for a vote
on the Wildfire Disaster Funding Act, a bill that would fix the broken system of
stealing funds from prevention programs to fight wildfires that are already
burning.

With persistent droughts, dry forest conditions, and new wildfires starting
daily, the West has experienced a particularly harsh wildfire season. At this
rate, it is expected to require more fire suppression funding than the amount
appropriated this fiscal year.

"We cannot afford to wait another year to fix this urgent problem," the Senators
wrote. "We urge you to take up the President's emergency funding request to deal
with wildfire funding once and for all."

The emergency supplemental funding request would grant $615 million, which would
be immediately accessible for firefighting efforts in western states through the
end of the year.

The cost of fighting wildfires has regularly exceeded the amount appropriated by
Congress in past years. To cover this need for additional funds, money must be
redirected from mitigation and prevention efforts. The Senators also pointed out
that key prevention programs, such as the hazardous fuel removal program, have
lost funding in the past two years.

To ensure that fires are treated like other natural disasters and ensure that
both firefighting and prevention efforts are adequately funded, the Senators
urged passage of the bipartisan Wildlife Disaster Funding Act.

"In the last two years, the U.S. Forest Service and the Department of Interior
have been forced to take money from other important programs to cover the cost
of fighting wildfires," the Senators wrote in the letter. "[...] We must act
immediately to pass emergency supplemental appropriations to ensure we do not
continue this vicious cycle of fire funding, and include legislation to
permanently fix the fire funding problem, such as the Wildfire Disaster Funding
Act of 2013."

For further information please visit: http://www.bennet.senate.gov

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              954 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                 Republican & Herald (Pottsville, Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 18, 2014 Tuesday

Wildfire prevention stressed by firefighters

BYLINE: Amy Marchiano, Republican & Herald, Pottsville, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 439 words


March 18--Before you know it, a fire can get out of control.

Mike Stalnecker, chief of North End Fire Company, Pine Grove, said the
department responded to a call for a fire Saturday in a hay field in Washington
Township.

Pine Grove Hose Hook & Ladder Fire Company No. 1 also responded, he said.

Dumped ashes burned about an acre and a half of the field, he said Monday.

The fire was caused after a home-owner on Wolfe Road put the ashes outside about
7 a.m. and the wind fanned the ashes, causing a fire.

The wind, dry ground conditions and other weather conditions, like humidity, can
be ideal ingredients for starting a fire, he said.

"The usual scenario is careless burning or unattended burning," he said.

This week is Wildfire Prevention Week in the state.

"Much of our state woodlands still may have snow cover but one only has to look
back to last spring to see how quickly brush and forest fires can spring up when
sun and wind prevail," Gov. Tom Corbett said in a press release.

"Most of the more than 630 reported fires last year are linked to people; people
cause 98 percent of wildfires. A mere spark by a careless person can touch off a
devastating forest blaze during dry periods when conditions enable wildfires to
spread quickly," according to the press release.

The state Department of Conservation and Natural Resources said 85 percent of
wildfires take place in March, April and May.

Data from 2013 show 44.1 percent of wildfires last year were started due to
debris burning, accounting for 524 acres statewide.

Locally, the Weiser Forest District, which is District 18 and covers seven
counties including Schuylkill, had 134 wildfires, the most among the 20
districts in the state.

That accounts for 21.3 percent of total fires, according to state data.

As for the fire in Washington Township, Stalnecker said the homeowner looked out
the window about noon and noticed what he thought was a large shadow but
realized it was a fire after he saw flames.

The area was on a hill and gets a lot of sunlight, so there was very little
snow, he said.

"The wind had it fanned pretty good," Stalnecker said, adding the homeowner
tried unsuccessfully to put out the fire.

The fire was contained in a matter of minutes, he said.

Dave Sattizahn, president of HH&L Fire Company, agreed.

He said if burning, people should not leave the immediate area.

Frank Zangari, president of the Schuylkill County Fire Chiefs Association, said
the ground is dry and people should be careful outside.

___ (c)2014 the Republican & Herald (Pottsville, Pa.) Visit the Republican &
Herald (Pottsville, Pa.) at republicanherald.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140318-RN-Wildfire-prevention-stressed-by-firefighters-0318-20140318

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RN


                       Copyright 2014 Republican & Herald


                              955 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                 The Daily News (Jacksonville, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            March 30, 2013 Saturday

Croatan wildfire contained

BYLINE: Matthew Adkins, The Daily News, Jacksonville, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 321 words


March 30--Updated at 4:04 p.m.

A wildfire in the Croatan National Forest has been contained but is expected to
smoke through the night, according to officials.

N.C. Forestry personnel have set up signs to warn travelers of the thick smoke.

The fire, which officials are calling the "woodpecker wildfire," started around
6 p.m. Friday night and has burned nearly 700 acres near Pettiford creek in
Peletier, said Dennis Register, with N.C. Forestry. With assistance from high
humidity and rainy weather, it is expected to burn itself out within a few days.

The name was chosen because of the fire's proximity to the long leaf pine trees
that are inhabited by the endangered red cockaded-woodpecker.

Twenty people from the U.S. Forestry and N.C. Forestry responded to the scene.

A controlled burn is being planned under the unified command of state and
private personnel. While estimates show this will increase the total amount of
acreage burnt to roughly 1,100 acres, the procedure is necessary to stop the
wildfire.

The cause remains under investigation.

A wildfire in the Croatan National Forest has been contained.

The fire, which officials are calling the "woodpecker wildfire" started around 6
p.m. Friday night and has burned close to 500 acres near Pettiford creek in
Peleteir, according to forestry officials.

The name was chosen because of the fire's proximity to the long leaf pine trees
that are inhabited by the endangered red cockaded-woodpecker.

Twenty people from the U.S. Forestry and N.C. Forestry are currently on the
scene.

A controlled burn is being planned under the unified command of state and
private personnel. While this will inevitably increase the total amount of
acreage burnt, the procedure is intended to halt the wildfire.

The cause remains under investigation.

___ (c)2013 The Daily News (Jacksonville, N.C.) Visit The Daily News
(Jacksonville, N.C.) at www.jdnews.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130330-JN-Croatan-wildfire-contained-0330-20130330

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JN


                         Copyright 2013 The Daily News


                              956 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Credit Union Journal

                                 June 18, 2012

Goodwill Is Spreading Like Wildfire

BYLINE: Aaron Passman

SECTION: GENERAL NEWS; Pg. 14 Vol. 16 No. 25

LENGTH: 467  words


SAGINAW, Mich.-For the second summer in a row, Wildfire CU here is spreading
goodwill in the community by giving $100 to 100 different people between
Memorial Day and Labor Day.

VP of Membership Development Linda McGee said that this year's incarnation is
similar to last year's, however more employees are participating in 2012 so that
a greater variety of Wildfire staffers have the chance to get out into the
community.

Anyone in the three counties Wildfire serves is eligible to receive $100 and
there are no strings attached. The CU issues the $100 bills in Wildfire 100
moneyholders, but does not distribute any information about the products and
services the 36,000-member, $669-million credit union offers.

"It's not about the credit union; it's about Wildfire 100 and giving back to the
community," said McGee. "What we ask is that they consider paying it forward. It
doesn't have to be monetary, it can just be helping someone. It's really and
truly about being a part of our community and giving back to our community."

McGee noted that Michigan has been hit hard by the recession and a campaign like
this can make a difference in peoples' lives. "Although things are turning
around, there's still a lot of people struggling out there. This is a wonderful
way to give back to our community and give a helping hand to those who need it."

Wildfire is also performing its own random acts of kindness, including a recent
fundraiser that allowed staff to pay to wear jeans to work. Those funds, along
with a few hundred dollars from the credit union, were donated to an area
soldier and quadruple amputee recovering at Walter Reed Army Medical Center.

Local Media Attention

WCU is not promoting the giveaways itself, but the project has received the
attention of local media, including the region's CBS affiliate
(http://wnem.videodownload.worldnow.com/WNEM_20120529175209780AA.mp4), as well
as local newspapers and radio stations.

The $10,000 comes out of Wildfire's marketing budget, and McGee said the credit
union is not looking to increase loans or membership as a result. Membership at
the credit union is not a requirement to receive the money.

"Is the Wildfire 100 branded to look like our Wildfire Credit Union logo?
Absolutely. And we've had some members come our way because of it, because they
like somebody that gives back to the community." McGee did not know how many
members had joined the CU as a result of the giveaways.

While the giveaways are random at the beginning, they will become more targeted
as the program picks up steam throughout the summer. Visitors to
www.wildfire100.com can nominate others to receive the $100. "We'll take that
list and weigh what the reasons are that they're recommending people and go for
those that will have the most impact to that person," said McGee.

URL: http://www.cujournal.com/

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter

JOURNAL-CODE: CUJ


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              957 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                  Computerworld

                               November 21, 1994

Cant start a fire without a spark;
Start-up Wildfire pins hopes on digital secretary

BYLINE: Michael Fitzgerald; CW Staff

SECTION: COMP. IND; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 455 words


Wildfire Communications, Inc., a telecommunications software maker founded in
1992, has 23 employees, one Asteroids arcade game and two dogs.

The arcade game gives the engineers a way to vent their aggressions, and the
dogs have been key to helping staff stay calm amid intense pressure, says
co-founder Bill Warner, only half-kidding.

Warner is an Apollo Computer alumnus who went on to cofound Avid Technology,
Inc., a red-hot digital editing company in Tewksbury, Mass., whose systems have
been used to edit movies such as True Lies. Warner's idea for Wildfire came
while he was at Avid, casting about for an idea for a low-end voice product. At
about that time, he got a cellular phone.

"No one knows where you are and how to get to you, and you may not know your
[cellular] phone number," Warner said. Having read an article in which CNN
founder Ted Turner said "don't bother setting small goals," Warner said he
"decided to make the most popular software ever made."

Warner's product, Wildfire, would be a sort of digital secretary that handles
all of a user's incoming and outgoing phone calls, whether he is at his desk or
a pay phone [CW, Oct. 10]. Warner's hope was that the product's popularity would
spread, of course, like wildfire.

The flammability of the market will soon be tested, as Warner and co-founder
Nicholas D'Arbeloff near shipment of their first product.

Andrew Marcuvitz, a general partner at Boston venture capitalist Matrix
Partners, was Wildfire's first investor. He said he bought into the concept
because "I see this as a stage in the evolution of computing ... to where
computers disappear altogether." The Wildfire device, which is based on an Intel
Corp. Pentium-based server, is a small step in this direction, he said.

Quite a nickel

Still, it may be some time before people start putting their Wildfire numbers on
business cards: The product is pricey, at $ 40,000 to $ 70,000 for a department.

Warner and Marcuvitz said in separate interviews that the company must bring
down prices and decide whether their next product will be a high-end, high-cost
machine targeting cellular carriers and regional Bell operating companies or a
low-end, consumer-oriented device.

Technology may help make the choice because Wildfire uses voice recognition and
telecommunications add-in boards, both of which are on a diving cost curve.

The software must also evolve. Robert Womack, director of computer services at
Wildfire beta site Hale and Dorr, a large Boston law firm, said he is looking
seriously at buying a Wildfire system but wants assurances that a solid billing
component will be added in timely fashion.

Warner said billing will be built into the next version.


LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo, Bill Warner, Photo by Stella Johnson

                       Copyright 1994 Computerworld, Inc.


                              958 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 9, 2017 Saturday

Washington: Wyden, Crapo, Bipartisan Senators Urge Congress to Pass Wildfire
Funding Fix in Any Future Disaster Aid

LENGTH: 511  words



Washington: Office of the Senator Ron Wyden has issued the following news
release:

With large fires blazing across Oregon, Washington, Idaho, California, Colorado,
Montana, Nevada, Utah and Wyoming, a bipartisan group of senators led by Sens.
Ron Wyden, D-Ore., and Mike Crapo, R-Idaho, today urged Senate Leaders Mitch
McConnell and Charles E. Schumer to include a wildfire funding fix in any future
disaster aid legislation that passes through Congress.


In addition to Wyden and Crapo, the letter's signers include Sens. Jim Risch,
R-Idaho, Martin Heinrich, D-N.M., Jeff Merkley, D-Ore., Maria Cantwell, D-Wash.,
Michael Bennet, D-Colo., Kamala Harris, D-Calif., Jon Tester, D-Mont., Patty
Murray, D-Wash., Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, and Tom Udall, D-N.M.
The Senate today passed a bipartisan funding bill to help with the cost of
fighting the wildfires in western states as part of the disaster and government
funding bill expected to pass Congress this week. However, the funding included
today does not fix the long-term problem of consistently underfunding fire
suppression, which currently forces federal agencies to steal from fire
prevention to fight fires, so-called "fire borrowing."
Wildfires have burned almost 8 million acres of land across the West this year,
according to the National Interagency Fire Center. Thousands of residents have
been forced to evacuate from their homes, and the U.S. Forest Service has
already spent more than $1.7 billion this year to put out fires.
"We stand ready to work with our colleagues in a bipartisan way in Congress to
do everything we can to ensure the victims of Hurricane Harvey get the
assistance they need," the bipartisan group of senators wrote. "As we work to
assist Texas and Louisiana on the road to recovery, please do not forget about
wildfires - the natural disaster currently raging through the West.
"We ask that any disaster aid package or other must-pass legislation that passes
through Congress include a wildfire funding fix. This fix is long overdue and
people throughout the West desperately need our help."
With the Forest Service's fire suppression budget nearly depleted, the agency is
likely to have to borrow from fire prevention money to tackle wildfires during
the remainder of the fire season.
Wyden and Crapo first introduced bipartisan legislation to fix the way the
federal government funds the fight against wildfires, the Wildfire Disaster
Funding Act, in 2013. Another wildfire funding fix was included in July in
legislation under consideration by the Senate Banking Committee to reauthorize
the National Flood Insurance Program.
Both approaches would end the practice of fire borrowing by funding the largest
wildfires from disaster accounts similar to accounts used to fund other natural
disasters, freeing up funding for fire prevention and forest health projects.
In an August letter to the leaders of the Senate Banking Committee, Wyden,
Risch, Merkley, and Heinrich urged the Senate to pass the wildfire funding fix
under consideration by the Senate Banking Committee.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              959 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 13, 2016 Friday
                                Ontario Edition

EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS;
Time to use our wildfire strategy

BYLINE: TODDI STEELMAN

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 690 words


Wildfire management in Canada is at a crossroads. The tragedy under way in Fort
McMurray, Alta., with the loss of an estimated 2,400 structures and the
evacuation of tens of thousands of people, will be the largest and costliest
wildfire disaster in Canadian history.

In 2003, fires in Kelowna, B.C., left more than 200 homes destroyed and about
30,000 people evacuated. In May of 2011, fires devastated Slave Lake, Alta.,
with the loss of 510 homes and a cost of $700-million. Last year more than
13,000 people were evacuated in Saskatchewan because of fires. What can we do
about it?

The United States has been dealing with large wildland interface fires for
decades, so there may be a temptation to move more in the direction of that
country in fighting wildfires. In many respects, this would be a mistake.

In the United States, a wildfire industrial complex wakens each year and is fed
by up to $4-billion (U.S.) in federal funds annually. The country has 13
incident-management teams at the ready to fight the largest and most complex
fires, with fleets of aircraft, troops and heavy equipment. It is a costly model
that is mainly effective at protecting people and property, and probably
perpetuates the wildfire problem by putting out too many fires that could have a
positive ecological effect on the landscape.

What would be more effective would be to draw from the U.S. experience, but only
those aspects that would work in a Canadian context. For example, there may be
value in establishing an elite team that is available across Canada that can
build experience in managing complex interface fires.

The changing face of wildfire management demands a uniquely Canadian approach.

Fortunately, this country's firemanagement community developed the Canadian
Wildland Fire Strategy in 2005. Unfortunately, this strategy has languished,
mostly unfunded, and has been implemented in piecemeal fashion since that time.
It is time for the Canadian Council of Forest Ministers, in collaboration with
the federal government, to resurrect this strategy and breathe new life into it.

The strategy provides direction on how Canada can better coexist with wildfire.
Key principles remain as relevant now as they were a decade ago. These include
placing greater responsibility on communities to become more active in their
preparedness for wildfire and in planning for how to respond to wildfire
disasters.

Drawing on lessons from the U.S. experience with interface fires, this would
entail more active emergency management in anticipation of a wildfire event.
Forming strong relationships in advance among key responding organizations -
local fire agencies, law enforcement, animal shelters, utilities, emergency
managers and local governments - can go a long way toward being ready for a fire
when it happens.

Practising evacuation and road closings, familiarizing civilian personnel with
incident command systems and working on public information plans in advance can
result in clearer, collective expectations for disaster when it happens.

If communities anticipate wildfire, they could do more to prepare their
landscape to be more fire ready. The boreal forest wants to burn
catastrophically - that is part of its ecology.

However, unlike in the southwestern United States or other places where fuel
treatments can create breaks that help with fire management, a running crown
fire in a boreal forest will likely not be stopped. This is what we are
witnessing in Fort McMurray.

But fuel breaks can buy a bit of time to allow for evacuation, especially if
people are prepared and ready to leave. And houses and properties that are made
fire safe are more likely to survive when ash and embers descend as the fire
approaches; provincial and territorial grants, with federal matching funds,
could finance part of this work.

The goal is to create fire-resilient communities. This would be a uniquely
Canadian model, drawing lessons from its southern neighbour, offering the best
fire-management option for us to co-exist with wildfires.

Toddi Steelman is executive director and professor, School of Environment and
Sustainability, University of Saskatchewan.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2016 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              960 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                         The Daily News of Los Angeles

                           December 14, 2017 Thursday

California lawmakers unite for wildfire relief

BYLINE: Jeff Horseman; jhorseman@scng.com @JeffHorseman on Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1226 words

ABSTRACT

The state's House delegation is united behind a $4.4 billion request. But will a
packed congressional agenda complicate relief efforts?

FULL TEXT

The wildfires that ravaged California have thawed partisanship among the state's
congressional delegation as lawmakers from both parties work to secure billions
of federal dollars in disaster aid and tax relief for wildfire victims.

But how much help is coming from Washington, in what form and when, remains
unclear as Congress grapples with a full year-end agenda and a divided Capitol
Hill atmosphere.

Since October, California has been hit by massive infernos that have destroyed
hundreds of homes, killed more than 40 people and burned hundreds of thousands
of acres. Fires erupted in Northern California in October and at least five
major wildfires broke out this month in Southern California.

President Donald Trump approved a disaster declaration for the Northern
California wildfires in October and declared a state of emergency for the
Southern California blazes on Dec. 8. Both moves cleared the way for federal
help with firefighting efforts, although disaster declarations open the door to
even more assistance.

"Going forward, as the state transitions from fighting fires to rebuilding and
recovery, there may be additional need for federal assistance, up to and
including a presidential major disaster declaration" for the Southern California
wildfires, said Brian Ferguson, deputy press secretary for Gov. Jerry Brown.

"However, the extent and specifics of future requests to the federal government
won't be known until the emergency personnel have had additional time to get
into the impacted areas to evaluate what will be needed from the feds to bolster
ongoing state and local recovery efforts."

Millions of dollars already have been committed to helping California, and
billions more could be on the way.

In October, Congress approved and the president signed a $36.5 billion disaster
relief package that included $576 million for wildfire suppression efforts and
money for victims of hurricanes Harvey and Maria.

In an unusual move, all 53 California House delegation members signed another
letter, dated Dec. 1, to House Appropriations Committee leaders requesting $4.4
billion in wildfire aid.

The $4.4 billion request came after Rep. Ken Calvert, R-Corona, toured wildfire
devastation in Northern California with Rep. Mike Thompson, D-St. Helena.
Calvert is chairman of the California House GOP delegation and also heads the
House appropriations subcommittee overseeing Interior Department funding.

After the tour, Thompson and Calvert worked with House Majority Leader Kevin
McCarthy, R-Bakersfield, and the governor's office "to determine an appropriate
emergency funding request for California," said Calvert spokesman Jason Gagnon.
" ... This process will provide a model for future emergency funding requests."

"I fully expect the California delegation to continue working in a bipartisan
manner to ensure affected regions have the resources they require," Calvert
said. "Once the fires are out, we'll need to provide the funding for debris
removal and mitigating for flood risks. Congress will get this done."

Rep. Julia Brownley, D-Westlake Village, said the entire delegation "has stood
together to call on our colleagues in Congress to fulfill our state's request
for aid."

"Once the fires in Southern California are contained and a damage assessment is
complete, I would expect my colleagues to again do the same for any future
requests the state may make," said Brownley, who represents Ventura County,
which has been devastated by the Thomas Fire.

Full agenda

While there's unity over getting California money for wildfire relief,
California Democrats are angry over provisions in GOP tax reform legislation
that do away with tax deductions for property loss due to wildfires and other
natural disasters.

"Not only do these tax bills disproportionately hurt California families, but to
add insult to injury, this provision will cruelly increase taxes on disaster
victims, making it harder for families to recover," Brownley said.

While the provisions would not affect deductions filed for the 2017 tax year,
the House bill would scrap the deduction entirely while the Senate bill would
allow deductions only for federally declared disasters. Many wildfires don't
rise to the level of a federal declaration.

Rep. Mimi Walters, R-Laguna Beach, McCarthy and Thompson are sponsoring
bipartisan legislation that would let Californians make penalty-free withdrawals
from retirement accounts to cover those losses. That bill could be folded into
the $4.4 billion supplemental funding request.

The push for wildfire aid comes as a Dec. 22 deadline looms to fund the federal
government or cause a shutdown. GOP leaders want to pass tax reform by the end
of the year, pressure is mounting to extend funding for the Children's Health
Insurance Program - it runs out by January - and there's still no solution to
allow 800,000 undocumented immigrants covered by the Deferred Action for
Childhood Arrivals program to stay.

While aid for Hurricane Harvey was part of a deal between Trump and Democrats to
keep the government open, disaster aid hasn't always sailed through Congress.
Billions of dollars for victims of Superstorm Sandy passed Congress in 2013 over
the opposition of Republicans who said the bill was full of pork.

A packed year-end congressional agenda might help wildfire relief get through,
said Marcia Godwin, a professor of public administration at the University of La
Verne.

"It appears that several Republican members of Congress are already trying to
justify taking away a tax deduction for disaster losses by saying that they
support additional (Federal Emergency Management Agency) relief bills for
particular disasters instead," Godwin said.

"It is also possible that additional aid for Puerto Rico (devastated by
Hurricane Maria) and Northern California will be put into any wildfire recovery
bill."

Congress usually responds quickly to disaster aid requests, Godwin added.

"Congress shows that it's responsive to public sentiment, and sponsors can take
credit more than if budgeting was automatic," she said. "The long-term needs are
then likely to get bogged down with partisan and geographical divisions, as we
have seen with 9/11 and Hurricane Sandy."

Here's a rundown of what's being done at the federal level to help California
deal with massive wildfires that erupted in recent months.

Relief bill: $576 million for wildfire suppression was part of a $36.5 billion
spending bill signed by President Donald Trump in October. The bill includes
money to help victims of hurricanes Harvey and Maria.

Declarations: Trump has declared a disaster for the Northern California
wildfires and a federal emergency for the Southern California blazes. A disaster
declaration for the Southern California fires could be coming.

Money sought: All 53 members of California's House of Representatives delegation
signed a letter asking for $4.4 billion in wildfire relief.

Tax relief: Rep. Mimi Walters, R-Laguna Beach, is sponsoring bipartisan
legislation to provide tax relief for wildfire victims. The House and Senate
versions of Republican tax reform bills would either completely eliminate or
severely restrict the ability to deduct property losses from natural disasters
on federal tax returns.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2017 Digital First Media
                              All Rights Reserved


                              961 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Daily Miner & News (Kenora)

                           August 23, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Southeastern B.C. residents to return home as wildfire conditions ease

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 190  words

DATELINE: KAMLOOPS, B.C.


Conditions have eased around a wildfire sparked nearly two weeks ago in
southeastern British Columbia, prompting the Regional District of Central
Kootenay to rescind evacuation orders and alerts.

Officials said residents would be allowed to return early Tuesday evening to
nearly 40 properties that were evacuated Aug. 12 as an aggressive wildfire
flared 20 km southwest of Salmo.

The fire closed Highway 6 leading to the Canada-U.S. border crossing at Nelway,
and the regional district says both the highway and the border crossing were
also scheduled to reopen Tuesday evening.

The B.C. Wildfire Service website shows the blaze had scorched about four square
kilometres of bush and was 50-percent contained.

Wildfire officials reported 135 fires around B.C. on Monday and Wildfire Service
spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said calmer and cooler conditions helped firefighters.

There was concern about an approaching storm forecast to bring gusty winds and
lightning to the central Interior by Thursday, challenging crews trying to
contain a nearly 4,700-squarekilometre wildfire that formed last week when 19
smaller fires grew together west of Quesnel.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Leah Hennel, Postmedia; Aerial view of the Verdant Creek Wildfire in
Kootenay National Park on Tuesday. The fire was caused by lightning on July 15.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Daily Miner & News (Kenora)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              962 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Fort McMurray Today

                             June 16, 2016 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Alberta Forestry to review wildfire response

BYLINE: Vincent Mcdermott, Fort Mcmurray Today

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 262  words


Alberta's Agriculture and Forestry ministry is reviewing its response to the
wildfire that destroyed 2,400 structures in Fort McMurray and Anzac in early
May.

According to Renato Gandia, a spokesperson for the ministry, the review will
focus on wildfire behaviour, as well as the conditions and activity that
surrounded Fort McMurray at the time of the fire.

It will also examine the ministry's wildfire preparedness, readiness and
operations.

"It will look at the resources we had and how we can improve our system," said
Gandia. "We're talking about things like firefighter resources, equipment that
was in place."

The cause of the blaze will not be part of the review, as that is being handled
by a separate investigation. The actions of firefighters in the city will also
not be part of this review. That would need to be done by the municipality.

"This review is going to be strictly about the wildfire," said Gandia.

A request for proposals has been issued to select a contractor suitable for the
review.

The final report will be delivered to government by the end of the year.

As of Wednesday afternoon, the wildfire was 589,617 hectares in size. It was
first spotted May 1 by an aerial forestry patrol.

A similar review was held after the 2011 wildfire that destroyed 400 buildings
in Slake Lake. The review yielded 21 recommendations.

RCMP with Alberta's K Division are also investigating the cause of the fire,
after it was ruled out the possibility of natural causes, such as lightning.

vmcdermott@postmedia.com !@COPYRIGHT=© 2016 Sun Media Corporation. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2016 Fort McMurray Today
                              All Rights Reserved


                              963 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    Prince George Citizen (British Columbia)

                             July 25, 2015 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Cost of Saskatchewan wildfires to top $100 million, says Premier Wall

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 136 words

DATELINE: LAC LA RONGE, Sask.


Saskatchewan Premier Brad Wall says the cost of fighting wildfires in northern
Saskatchewan this year will top $100 million dollars.

Wall says he and Prime Minister Stephen Harper have discussed how the system of
fighting wildfires could be improved in the future.

He says this could include a streamlined training program for soldiers and
creating a reserve of equipment that could be made available to any province
dealing with wildfires.

Wall says the province will apply for federal financial assistance to help cover
some of the wildfire costs.

The Opposition NDP has accused the provincial government of cutting wildfire
fighting budgets in recent years and wants a review.

About 50 northern Saskatchewan communities were evacuated over the last month
because of wildfires that forced 13,000 people from their homes.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 Prince George Citizen
                              All Rights Reserved


                              964 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                             May 28, 2015 Thursday
                                 Early Edition

Forests 'consumed' by raging wildfires; 30,000 hectares destroyed, with humans
to blame in most cases

BYLINE: Otiena Ellwand And Alexandra Zabjek, Edmonton Journal

SECTION: CITY; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 511 words

DATELINE: EDMONTON


Alberta's wildfire season is only three months in and already it has consumed
significantly more forest than last year.

So far this season, there have been 720 wildfires in the province, burning just
under 30,000 hectares of forest, compared to 400 fires at this time last year
that burned about 700 hectares.

"The actual amount of forest that's been consumed is dramatically different ...
It's been a significant increase in terms of activity," said Wildfire
Information Officer Richard Horne, adding that the majority of those fires have
been caused by humans.

The wildfire season, which began March 1, has been "very, very hectic," with
some firefighters working up to 24 days straight, said Horne.

"The forested areas of the province have been incredibly dry, so much so that
our meteorologists are talking about this being almost unprecedented," he said
at the Lesser Slave Lake Fire Centre on Wednesday.

All evacuation orders related to wildfires raging in Alberta were lifted as of
Wednesday afternoon, but 15 fires are still burning out of control, including a
blaze that's been creeping toward oil and gas infrastructure near Cold Lake,
Scott Long from the Alberta Emergency Management Agency told a news conference.

Cenovus and CNRL both have operations in the area.

"There's no rain. That's the biggest concern, certainly for the foreseeable
future. The conditions remain dry and there is the possibility of further
lightning strikes in the coming days," Long said, adding that shifting winds
could further complicate the situation for fire crews.

Wildfire information manager GeoffDriscoll said the fire grew in size to about
17,000 hectares as of Wednesday, from 10,000 hectares on Tuesday. However, the
blaze remained five kilometres away from oil operations, the same distance it
was before.

As of Wednesday morning, about 250 firefighters and 10 helicopters were fighting
the blaze, which is still considered out of control and is expected to keep
growing in the days ahead.

At least some of 150 extra firefighters coming to Alberta from other provinces
are expected to be deployed to the Cold Lake fire.

"We have been increasing the amount of resources at this fire each day,"
Driscoll said.

Further west, a wildfire near Wabasca that forced the evacuation of almost 5,000
people is now "being held."

Long credited "numerous and significant perimeter guards" that firefighters have
worked on over the last 72 hours on the west, south and east sides of the fire.

The reception centres in Athabasca and Calling Lake are still open, but he said
there is a co-ordinated "re-entry" for residents. Premier Rachel Notley is being
briefed on the wildfire threats daily.

"Of course, we're very concerned.

We know that Albertans across the province are concerned," Notley said in
Calgary.

She said she was pleased to learn evacuation orders were lifted for residents.

"But we know this is a critical issue, that it requires constant attention and
oversight and that's why I've asked to be briefed every day," she said.
!@COPYRIGHT=© 2015 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Edmonton Journal; A helicopter drops water on a hot spot along the edge
of a contained fire east of Slave Lake. Alberta has seen 720 wildfires already
this season, compared to just 400 by this time last year.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2015 Calgary Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              965 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                             July 30, 2011 Saturday

Gunfire causing more wildfires than past years

BYLINE: By Gina Barker The Salt Lake Tribune

SECTION: BREAKING; News; State

LENGTH: 748 words


In Northern Utah, the number of wildfires started by guns this year is at an
all-time high.

Of the four largest wildfires started in northern Utah, three have been linked
to shooters.

The most recent fire was started Wednesday night by three shooters near
Farmington, said Jason Curry, a fire investigator for the Utah Division of
Forestry, Fire and State Lands.

"This year's been an exceptional year [for gun-related wildfires]," he said.
"Why that is, we don't know yet."

As soon as Curry's department got a handle on one fire, another was already
breaking out, he said.

Although the largest wildfires have been in northern Utah, a majority of the
fires have started near Saratoga Springs along Utah Lake.

Utah County had six fires in the past month that have been attributed to
recreational shooters, a high number in such a short period, Curry said.

Four of the six fires were started in less than a two-week period in July.

The most recent of the Utah County fires, last week's 500-acre blaze dubbed the
"Dyno Fire," was close to a dynamite plant and a Saratoga Springs neighborhood.
The local fire department was calling for voluntary evacuations of nearby homes,
though no structures were damaged.

As the Dyno Fire was at its peak, Adam Buehner was with a friend kicking off a
long weekend by shooting a few rounds at a more remote area on the western side
of Utah Lake.

After Friday's fire near Saratoga Springs was reported on the evening news,
Buehner's mother texted him to ask if it was his gun that started the wildfire.
He quickly assured her it wasn't, but said he saw the irony in his mother's
concern.

Buehner said his friends and family were aware of the wildfires started by guns
-- that it was common knowledge for anyone in the area.

Others were unaware of role recreational shooting has played in starting
wildfires this year.

It doesn't take much to start a fire with a handgun in the dry season he said.
Research shows that steel striking a rock can easily cause a spark, and more
than ever people are turning to cheaper steel-cased bullets.

"That spark will be about 1,400 degrees," said Curry. "The light grasses here
can ignite at under 400 degrees."

Ryan McAffee, a Herriman resident and shooter, said he didn't realize steel
bullets could start wildfires.

"You get people who shoot the steel I guess. I always thought it was the tracer
rounds and stuff [that started fires]," he said with a shrug.

Northern Utah's largest gun-related fire of the year was contained after four
days, but not before it consumed 16,000 acres west of the Great Salt Lake,
costing hundreds of thousands of dollars to control.

Smaller fires like the Target Fire and the Tannerite Fire burned fewer than 15
acres each, but even those smaller fires cost several thousand dollars to
extinguish.

Cami Lee, a fire investigator trainee with the Bureau of Land Management, said a
bit of common sense goes a long way.

"If people had a proper backstop, bullets wouldn't ricochet off of things they
shouldn't," she said.

Fires have also been linked to exploding targets and close-range shooting. Those
responsible for accidentally starting wildfires can be held responsible for the
costs, Curry warned. But that hasn't stopped people from shooting in Utah's most
wildfire-prone areas.

The ground at some Utah County roadside pull-offs is layered with shotgun shells
and bullet casings, indicating they are popular places to fire off a few rounds.

"There's a lot of garbage," Curry said last week at a pull-off near Saratoga
Springs.

"You can look around here and you can see all the shotgun shells here," he
added, "all the glass and plastic bottles and TV set and computer monitors that
people bring up here to shoot."

Meanwhile, an ominous warning lies above the littered ground: a jagged black
line running along the mountain telling shooters that this is where wildfires
happen.

gbarker@sltrib.com @ginabarker Alt Heads:

Gunfire causing more wildfires than past years Recent northern Utah wildfires
started by gunfire

Lakeside Fire » 16,000 acres, estimated cost $800,000

Dyno Fire » 508 acres, estimated cost $250,000

Patterson Pass Fire » 116 acres, estimated cost $194,000

Grandview Fire » 5 acres, estimated cost $10,000

Target Fire » 5 acres, estimated cost $10,000

MP 21 Fire » 3 acres, estimated cost $7,000

Rudd Canyon » 20 acres, no cost estimate available

Tannerite Fire » 13 acres, no cost estimate available

Kitchen Fire » 5 acres, no cost estimate available

Source: Utah Division of Forestry, Fire and State Lands

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cody Woolsey watches as Krista Robertson lines up her scope for a shot
at a shooting range near Saratoga Springs July 21, 2011. The area has had six
wildfires in the past month caused by bullet sparks and exploding targets.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              966 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Brunswick News (Georgia)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 11, 2013 Monday

Debris burning ignites risks

BYLINE: Gordon Jackson, The Brunswick News, Ga.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 562 words


March 11--Over the past 50 years, Glynn County has averaged 75 reported
wildfires a year, burning an average of 355 acres.

Things have improved the past two decades in the county, which now averages
about 45 wildfires a year.

But the number could and should be lower, the Georgia Forestry Commission says.

While lightning strikes and other acts of nature cause some wildfires, humans
are the main culprit, with arson and debris burning accounting for more than 50
percent of wildfires in the state.

"Debris burning is the No. 1 cause of wildfires in Georgia," said Jason Harris,
a Georgia Forestry Commission ranger.

In the past seven years, 39 homes have been lost or damaged by wildfires in
Glynn County, resulting in estimated losses of more than $272,000, according to
forestry commission officials. Additionally, 41 vehicles valued at more than
$85,000 and seven pieces of mechanical equipment valued at more than $170,000
were lost to wildfires during that period.

While it's not illegal for people to burn yard debris outside the city limits of
Brunswick, where outdoor fires are banned, they are only allowed to burn with a
permit issued by the forestry commission. One can be obtained by telephone or
via the Internet.

But simply getting a burn permit doesn't end a person's responsibility or
liability if something goes wrong. People with burn permits must be present at
all times while yard debris is burning.

If an unattended fire spreads and firefighters have to be called, it could be
the person with the burn permit who pays the price.

And people aren't just liable for damage from the fire itself. If smoke drifts
over a road obscuring motorists' vision and causes an accident, the person who
set the fire can be liable for damages, even if he or she has been issued a burn
permit, Harris said.

If the Georgia Forestry Commission is called to respond to a wildfire and has to
bring in heavy equipment to cut fire containment lines, the person responsible
for the fire can be required to pay the cost, which can quickly escalate to
thousands of dollars.

Not every wildfire requires response from Georgia Forestry. Glynn County Fire
Chief Al Thomas says wildfires keep his department busy every year, too.

"We have our share of fires," he said. "We have woods and grass fires pretty
much every year."

People who are caught burning on their property without a permit or those who
have a permit but leave the fire unattended and it spreads can be cited for
illegal burning, Thomas said.

"If it causes damage to adjacent properties, they are responsible," he said.

As precautions against wildfires, residents should trim all shrubs and vines to
30 feet from structures, trim overhanging limbs, replace flammable plants near
homes with less flammable varieties and remove vegetation around chimneys.

-- Reporter Gordon Jackson writes about government and other local topics.
Contact him at gjackson@thebrunswicknews.com, on Facebook or at 265-8320, ext.
323.

Get a permit

Residents of unincorporated Glynn County must have a permit from the Georgia
Forestry Commission to legally burn yard debris. Contact the commission at
877-652-2876 or online at gfc.state.ga.us/OnlinePermits. (Open burning is not
permitted in the city.)

___ (c)2013 The Brunswick News (Brunswick, Ga.) Visit The Brunswick News
(Brunswick, Ga.) at www.thebrunswicknews.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130311-GE-Debris-burning-ignites-risks-0311-20130311

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GE


                       Copyright 2013 The Brunswick News


                              967 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       Vallejo Times Herald (California)

                           September 14, 2012 Friday

Solano, Napa county homes at risk for wild fire damage

BYLINE: By Rachel Raskin-Zrihen

SECTION: LOCAL

LENGTH: 645 words


Hundreds of properties worth millions of dollars are at risk for wildfire damage
in Solano and Napa counties, according to a new study.

CoreLogic's first Wildfire Hazard Risk Report, released this week, identifies
more than 740,000 residences across 13 western U.S. states at high or very high
risk for wildfire damage. That represents a combined total property value
estimated at more than $136 billion.

In Solano County, the report shows 175 properties valued at more than $76
million are at high or very high risk. That figure rises to 387 properties and
more than $160 million, when urban properties abutting wild land is included.

"Napa and Solano appear to have large numbers of well-maintained urban
properties, but due to their proximity to wild land, the risk of damage from
wild fires is increased," CoreLogic's chief hazard scientist and study author
Tom Jeffery said. "The Wild Land/Urban Interface Area -- where the city meets
wild land vegetation -- is where risk increases because embers can travel up to
a half-mile or more."

In Napa County, nearly 1,800 properties worth about $650 million are at high or
very high risk, increasing to nearly 3,000 properties worth about $917 million
when proximity to wild land is considered, the report reveals.

Data specific to Vallejo, American Canyon, Benicia and Suisun are not included
in the report because there are no "very high" wildfire risk properties there, a
CoreLogic spokeswoman said. But this does not mean Solano and Napa counties are
out of the proverbial woods with respect to wildfire danger, Jeffery said.

"Based on our data, the danger is more obvious in Napa than in Solano County,
but both are affected by this phenomenon," Jefferey said. "Geography -- how
urban properties butt up against wild land -- can have an impact. Are there
areas of long fingers of wild land surrounded jutting out, surrounded by homes,
that kind of thing?"

Jeffery said that while the number of homes at high risk for wildfire damage
locally may seem small, the actual risk is really much higher and includes many
more structures because of the nature of fire itself.

The report was developed to provide the insurance industry, financial services
companies, homeowners and others impacted by wildfire outbreaks with a better
understanding of wildfire risk, company officials said.

The report states that between 1990 and 2008, nearly 10 million of the 17
million new homes built in the U.S., (58 percent), were near high wildfire risk
zones.

About 40 percent of homes in the U.S. are in such zones, and wind-blown embers
are capable of igniting homes located hundreds, or even thousands of feet away
from an actual fire, company officials said.

"There isn't much a homeowner can do about property that doesn't belong to
them," Jeffery said. "The state of California has information for people on what
they can do to mitigate the danger, and the National Interagency Fire Center
does, as well."

Contact staff writer Rachel Raskin-Zrihen at (707) 553-6824 or
rzrihen@timesheraldonline.com Follow her on Twitter at RachelVTH.

Key findings in the CoreLogic Wildfire Report include:

* The states most commonly associated with wildfires -- California, Colorado and
Texas -- contain the most properties at risk, with a combined high-risk property
value exceeding $20 billion. That rises to more than $62 billion when proximity
is considered.

* California contains 49,258 homes at Very High Risk, with another 48,901 and
28,490 in Colorado and Texas, respectively.

* Of the six cities analyzed, Los Angeles has the most single-family residences
exposed to wildfire risk, with more than 29,000 properties in the High or Very
High Risk categories. These are estimated to be worth nearly $10 billion, with
Malibu topping the ZIP Code list with more than $900 million in potential
residential property exposure to wildfire risk.

Source: CoreLogic

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 The Times-Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              968 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Valley Morning Star

               Distributed by Knight/Ridder Tribune News Service

                            March 30, 2006 Thursday

Cities hoping to recover costs of wildfires: San Benito, Harlingen submitting
costs for responding to calls

BYLINE: Amy D. Lynch, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 395 words


Mar. 30--Intense summer heat and the dry brush most of Texas is known for has
led to many counties, including Cameron County, to be labeled as a high risk for
wildfires by the Texas Forest Service.

Because of the dry vegetation, those wildfires that seem to spring up as the
temperature rises can tax local fire departments' budgets.

"Because of the area's lack of rain, the county has been labeled as prone to
wildfires," San Benito Public Safety Director Orlando Garcia said.

Both Harlingen and San Benito fire departments are submitting call-by-call
breakdowns of costs incurred while responding to wildfires outside city limits.

They are hoping to recover about 75 percent of costs associated with those
responses.

"Through the Texas Forest Service and FEMA (Federal Emergency Management
Agency), we could get 75 percent of our costs back for our responses to wildfire
calls," Garcia said.

"We could potentially get (compensated) for items like truck use, manpower. We
itemize the cost of everything per call and report them."

The state of Texas is operating under the FEMA wildfire disaster declaration,
which reviews and updates eligible counties each week.

Reports from the departments are submitted through the Texas Forest Service
Online Fire Department Fire Reporting System.

The system is also set up to report wildfire causes, which could possibly help
develop prevention programs and fire statistics, according to the Texas Forest
Service Web site.

Although neither department has seen any returns yet, they believe the
reimbursements will help.

"Any kind of reimbursement or grants are always a plus," Harlingen Fire
Department Assistant Fire Chief Michael Rinaldi said. "Our budgets can only go
so far."

Garcia said the money would be used for department upgrades and more supplies
and equipment.

"We don't know how much we will get back or how this will work yet," he said.

"So we are not budgeting anything. But we hope to make purchases toward gear,
bunker equipment, new hoses, replacement foam and even a small fire truck. We
would like to get a brush truck that is used to fight the wildfires."

Copyright (c) 2006, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen, Texas Distributed by Knight
Ridder/Tribune Business News. For information on republishing this content,
contact us at (800) 661-2511 (U.S.), (213) 237-4914 (worldwide), fax (213)
237-6515, or e-mail reprints@krtinfo.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20060330-HR-0330-Cities-hoping-to-recover-costs-of-wildfires

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HR


                       Copyright 2006 Valley Morning Star


                              969 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                               Summerland Review

                            July 12, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

EDITORIAL: The risk of wildfires

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 267 words


After a wet spring and flooding along the lakeshore, the region, along with the
rest of the province, is dealing with dry conditions and an extreme forest fire
risk.

The extreme conditions are something few would have predicted a month or two
ago, as residents living close to Okanagan Lake were coping with some of the
worst lake flooding on record.

Fires are burning near Princeton and farther north. Communities have been
evacuated because of the danger from wildfires.

At present, a province-wide state of emergency has been declared as more than
200 wildfires are burning throughout British Columbia.

The last time such a state of emergency was in 2003, during another serious
wildfire season.

While there have not been significant wildfires in or near Summerland, the smoke
from fires elsewhere in the province is affecting the area.

In past years, Summerland has had wildfires in and near the community.

The most noticeable was the Giant's Head Mountain fire in August, 1996. That
fire, which reached a size of 60 hectares, came within 15 metres of some of the
homes on Milne Road.

Much more recently, firefighters have had to cope with smaller wildfires in the
community, including some which have come close to homes in the Canyonview Road
area and near Logie Road.

None of these have been as large as the massive fires now burning in other parts
of the province, but they should remind us that the risk of wildfires is present
here.

This is a time to use extreme caution, especially for those using the back
country.

A careless mistake during these dry conditions could result in widespread
devastation.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              970 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           November 12, 2016 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Police: Wannabe weatherman set fire to gain Facebook views

BYLINE:  By JEFF MARTIN and REBECCA REYNOLDS YONKER Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 422 words


ATLANTA - A wannabe weatherman was jailed for arson after admitting he started a
wildfire to draw attention to his selfie videos on Facebook, his town's police
chief said Friday.

Meanwhile, a Georgia sheriff appealed for help identifying the driver of a dark
blue SUV last seen where other wildfires began. And in North Carolina,
authorities suspect arson in more than 20 wildfires burning in a national
forest.

"It's really too bad because he's not a bad kid - he's just misguided," said
James Stephens, the police chief in Jenkins, Kentucky, where Johnny Mullins, 21,
was arrested this week on a second-degree arson charge.

"He likes to do Facebook videos and have people follow him on his 'weather
forecast,' so that's pretty much why he did what he did," the chief said. "He
enjoyed the attention he got from the Facebook stuff."

"He didn't realize how much danger he was putting other people in," Stephens
added.

A teenager in Harlan County, Kentucky, also was arrested for arson this week,
and in Tennessee, authorities said Friday that Andrew Scott Lewis was charged
with setting fires and vandalism causing more than $250,000 in damage and
threatening homes outside Chattanooga.

No arrests were announced in most of the rest of the suspicious fires, which
have been torching forests in and around the southern Appalachian mountains. The
relentless drought across much of the South has removed the usual humidity and
sucked wells and streams dry, making the woods ripe for fire. Tens of thousands
of acres have burned.

Law officers in Georgia's Rabun County suspect that someone started a series of
small roadside fires Wednesday that eventually merged into the much larger
blazes firefighters were working to contain on Friday, said Justin Upchurch, the
county's assistant fire chief.

The Rabun County sheriff's office urged people to be on the look-out, saying the
SUV was last seen in the area of the fires. The office's Facebook post asked
residents to spread the word "and help us lock this criminal up!!!"

The area is less than 50 miles from North Carolina's Nantahala National Forest,
where more than 20 wildfires that have burned more than 17,000 acres are all
"being investigated for suspected arson," forestry officials announced in a
status update.

Fourteen other wildfires are burning on Cherokee Nation land in North Carolina,
all under investigation by local law enforcement. A fire managers' update noted
that the U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs is seeking information about fires on
Indian lands through an arson hotline.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  People take photos of a wildfire burning near Lake Lure, N.C.,
Thursday, Nov. 10, 2016. A state of emergency is in effect for 25 western North
Carolina counties where active wildfires are burning, caused by the drought that
began last spring. Gov. Pat McCrory said in a news release Thursday that he was
declaring the state of emergency for one-quarter of North Carolina's 100
counties. (Patrick Sullivan/The Times-News via AP)  In this Wednesday, Nov. 9,
2016 photo, firefighters work at a wildfire burning near Lake Lure, N.C. A state
of emergency is in effect for 25 western North Carolina counties where active
wildfires are burning, caused by the drought that began last spring. Gov. Pat
McCrory said in a news release Thursday that he was declaring the state of
emergency for one-quarter of North Carolina's 100 counties. (Patrick
Sullivan/The Times-News via AP)  North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory, center, speaks
at a press conference on a wildfire that is burning near Lake Lure, N.C.,
Thursday, Nov. 10, 2016. A state of emergency is in effect for 25 western North
Carolina counties where active wildfires are burning, caused by the drought that
began last spring. McCrory said in a news release Thursday that he was declaring
the state of emergency for one-quarter of North Carolina's 100 counties.
(Patrick Sullivan/The Times-News via AP)  In this Wednesday, Nov. 9, 2016 photo,
a wildfire burns near Lake Lure, N.C. A state of emergency is in effect for 25
western North Carolina counties where active wildfires are burning, caused by
the drought that began last spring. Gov. Pat McCrory said in a news release
Thursday that he was declaring the state of emergency for one-quarter of North
Carolina's 100 counties. (Patrick Sullivan/The Times-News via AP)  North
Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory, center, speaks at a press conference about a wildfire
that is burning near Lake Lure, N.C., Thursday, Nov. 10, 2016. A state of
emergency is in effect for 25 western North Carolina counties where active
wildfires are burning, caused by the drought that began last spring. McCrory
said in a news release Thursday that he was declaring the state of emergency for
one-quarter of North Carolina's 100 counties. (Patrick Sullivan/The Times-News
via AP)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              971 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 20, 2017 Monday

Regulatory update: United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission has issued Order
regarding ( NRC/ADM/DAS/RADB) Comment (1) of Anonymous Individual Regarding
Proposed Revisions to Piping Systems and Components - Inspections, Tests,
Analyses, and Acceptance Criteria.

LENGTH: 697  words



Washington: United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission has issued the following
document:
.. Page 1 of2
 - oo ~ oo o !
 As of: 11/6/17 11 :22 AM
 Received: October 31, 2017
 Status: Pending_Po.st PlJBLIC SUBMISSION Tracking No. lkl-8zj3-uzut
 Comments Due: November 13, 2017
 Submission Type: Web
 Docket: NRC-2017-0187
 Proposed Revisions to Piping Systems and Components - Inspections, Tests,
Analyses, and
 Acceptance Criteria
 Comment On: NRC-2017-0187-0001
 · Piping Systems and Components - Inspections, Tests, Analyses, and Acceptance
Criteria; ·
 Standard Review Plan - Draft Section Revision; Request for Comment
 Document: NRC-2017-0187-DRAFT-0001
 Comment on FR Doc # 2017-19090
 Submitter Information
 Name: Anonymous Anonymous
 General Comment
 JJ -" rr1
 eJ \,:


 r-r1
 t,,........ ...... ~ r---n....
 r._~j
 ~·-~ 'J
 :;:;·::~:
 c::::i ,_
 I
 0..
 -o
 ==s.;
 f''o?
 1---.oo )
 ~-,()
 Nearly 8 million acres have burned in 2017, such wildfires will release
thousands of tons of
 greenhouse gas emissions and other harmful air pollutants." impact of wildfires
on the
 atmosphere. After smoke from the Chetco Bar Fire forced the Ashland Shakespeare
Festival
 to cancel performances last month due to smoke and haze, Rep. Greg Wal den
declared,
 "Enough is enough." Newspaper report, 2007 said California wildfires pumped
nearly 8
 million metric tons of climate-warming carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, nov
29 201\6
 Wildfire smoke can result in significant air quality impacts to_ public health.
Then we have
 2017 wildfire again. Another report from Scientists study estimated that Fires
in US release
 millions metric tons of carbon dioxide per year. Wildfires can produce more
greenhouse gas
 (GHG) emissions then gas and oil, therefore we should manage forest better by
stopping the
 regulations against clear cutting to help prevent co2 from mass wildfires in
western states. US
 Forest service page; fuels buildup to unnatural levels and forests become
overcrowded. This
 led to forests being more susceptible to insects and disease outbreaks, but
also to unnaturally
 large fires on the landscape. Another report:, "Forest fires may produce as.
much co2 as half
 of all fossil-.fuels burned", U~ orest Service page, 2015 Pacific Northwest
wildfire season
 f>o/lJSF f?et/1~ ~ £-~~5=/7L>Jr....f-lJ3
 s (..., .o
 ~·?..~
 :::1.:;
 C.>
 :r:-
 .cr -
 f"TI
 0'.'
 1,, __
 ~!::-:"
 /:· 1
 (._ -~
 ;f-~= /la.Le-?# 3 ~:;: [#x3bc]. ~?7cf? c?Ylct()) .
 https://www.fdms.gov/fdms/
getcontent?objectld=0900006482c29aea&fonnat=xml&showorig=false 11 /06/20 I 7
 Page 2 of2
 Washington 130,000 tons Oregon 90,000 tons of fine particulate matter The
greenhouse gas
 emissions alone were equivalent to more than 8.5 million passenger vehicles
driven for a year
 or heating 3. 7 million homes. government charge or fine califomia for Co2
wildfire
 pollutants? US forest service page wildfire report on 2015 year reported on
greatest threat to
 many endangered species and their habitat is catastrophic WILDFIRE leads to
susceptible to
 insects and disease outbreaks ... MUST do thinning forest to protect habitat
and more resistant
 to insect predation. concentration of trees and underbrush amounts to 45 tons
of dry fuel per
 acre, potential for catastrophic fire ...... Currently, even utility crews must
receive
 Congressional approval before preforming regular maintenance or the repairing
of damaged
 power lines. When a right-of-way is not properly maintained, a tree can grow
into or fall on to
 a power line, causing fires . 201 7 Mr Secretary Zinke accumulation and
thickening of
 vegetation exacerbates fuel conditions and often leads to larger and
higher-intensity fires," .. ·
 ... 2015 USFS Chief Dave Bosworth Said, "We Do Not Have A Fire Problem On Our
Nation's
 . Forests; We Have A Land Management Problem" LITIGATION has had a profound
impact
 on mismanagement of our national forests, Need to update or repeal the Equal
Access to
 Justice Act (EAJA) of 1980, subsection ofEAJA, codified at 28 U.S.C. 2412(d)
section 2412
 (b).
https://www.fdms.gov/fdms/getcontent?objectld=0900006482c29aea&format=xml&showor
ig=false 11/06/2017
In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              972 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             August 2, 2015 Sunday

Just as many wildfires start with humans, so can prevention, experts say

BYLINE: BY SILAS ALLEN Staff Writer sallen@oklahoman.com

SECTION:

LENGTH: 656 words


Wildfires have burned more than 800,000 acres of Oklahoma forest and prairie
over the past 15 years, and records show the overwhelming majority of the blazes
were set deliberately.Most of those fires are started not by arsonists, but by
people burning off brush or setting fires for other reasons, state forestry
officials say.Since 1999, 63 percent of the state's wildfires have been
classified as incendiary, according to data from the Oklahoma Forestry Services.
That's a nebulous category that includes any fire that was set deliberately
under circumstances in which the person knew the fire shouldn't be lit, such as
during a burn ban.Another 20 percent of wildfires were started by a person who
was burning debris and lost control of the fire. Another 7 percent were sparked
by equipment use. Other causes, including campfires, smoking and children
playing, made up smaller percentages.Mark Goeller, assistant director and fire
management chief for the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food and Forestry,
said people across the state intentionally set fires for a number of reasons -
most of them non-malicious.

Some people think burning off fields controls ticks and chiggers, he said, and
others think it helps huckleberries grow. Still others light fires to keep brush
down."We have a lot of fires that are set across the state for various reasons,"
he said.Depending on the circumstances, those fires might be categorized as
incendiary, Goeller said. In those cases, he said, investigators generally have
a hard time tracking the fire back to its source. Investigators in some states,
including Georgia, use bloodhounds to track down people who start fires, he
said, but no such program exists in Oklahoma.The number of human-caused fires
isn't unique to Oklahoma, Goeller said. Across most of the southeastern United
States, most wildfires are started by humans. Farther west, natural causes like
lightning are more common, he said.Forestry officials are working to help people
understand how to prevent wildfires. When officials identify an area where
human-caused wildfires are becoming common, teams go into that area to talk to
school groups about the difference between good fires and bad fires, Goeller
said.Hot timesOklahoma is in the middle of what is typically one of its busiest
seasons for wildfires, state climatologist Gary McManus said.In late July and
early August, vegetation typically begins to dry out and turn brown after weeks
of heat and little rain, McManus said. Dry grass and vegetation ignite easily,
so when a fire begins, it can spread out of control quickly, McManus said.
Wildfires are somewhat less of a concern this year, since heavy rains in the
spring and a relatively wet June and July have kept vegetation green later into
the summer."This is definitely not a normal year," McManus said.The state's
primary wildfire season is in early spring, when vegetation is still dead or
dormant. Spring weather patterns often bring high winds, creating the perfect
combination of conditions for fire to spread, McManus said.After a wildfire
occurs, investigators usually try to determine a cause through a process of
elimination, said Jerry Flowers, chief agent of the state Agriculture
Department's law enforcement division. They're usually able to determine quickly
if it was caused by factors like lightning or an electrical line being knocked
down, he said.In a few cases each year, wildfires are started by arsonists,
Flowers said. Although it's often difficult to track a single fire to a single
individual, an arsonist may set 100 or more fires if given the opportunity,
Flowers said. Eventually, serial arsonists usually leave some trace behind that
investigators can use to track them down."In nearly all arson investigations,
there is physical evidence left behind," Flowers said. "These guys know what to
look for, how to collect it, how to find it and preserve that for criminal
prosecution."

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2015 The Daily Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                              973 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             August 2, 2015 Sunday

Just as many wildfires start with humans, so can prevention, experts say

BYLINE: BY SILAS ALLEN Staff Writer sallen@oklahoman.com

SECTION:

LENGTH: 656 words


Wildfires have burned more than 800,000 acres of Oklahoma forest and prairie
over the past 15 years, and records show the overwhelming majority of the blazes
were set deliberately.Most of those fires are started not by arsonists, but by
people burning off brush or setting fires for other reasons, state forestry
officials say.Since 1999, 63 percent of the state's wildfires have been
classified as incendiary, according to data from the Oklahoma Forestry Services.
That's a nebulous category that includes any fire that was set deliberately
under circumstances in which the person knew the fire shouldn't be lit, such as
during a burn ban.Another 20 percent of wildfires were started by a person who
was burning debris and lost control of the fire. Another 7 percent were sparked
by equipment use. Other causes, including campfires, smoking and children
playing, made up smaller percentages.Mark Goeller, assistant director and fire
management chief for the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food and Forestry,
said people across the state intentionally set fires for a number of reasons -
most of them non-malicious.

Some people think burning off fields controls ticks and chiggers, he said, and
others think it helps huckleberries grow. Still others light fires to keep brush
down."We have a lot of fires that are set across the state for various reasons,"
he said.Depending on the circumstances, those fires might be categorized as
incendiary, Goeller said. In those cases, he said, investigators generally have
a hard time tracking the fire back to its source. Investigators in some states,
including Georgia, use bloodhounds to track down people who start fires, he
said, but no such program exists in Oklahoma.The number of human-caused fires
isn't unique to Oklahoma, Goeller said. Across most of the southeastern United
States, most wildfires are started by humans. Farther west, natural causes like
lightning are more common, he said.Forestry officials are working to help people
understand how to prevent wildfires. When officials identify an area where
human-caused wildfires are becoming common, teams go into that area to talk to
school groups about the difference between good fires and bad fires, Goeller
said.Hot timesOklahoma is in the middle of what is typically one of its busiest
seasons for wildfires, state climatologist Gary McManus said.In late July and
early August, vegetation typically begins to dry out and turn brown after weeks
of heat and little rain, McManus said. Dry grass and vegetation ignite easily,
so when a fire begins, it can spread out of control quickly, McManus said.
Wildfires are somewhat less of a concern this year, since heavy rains in the
spring and a relatively wet June and July have kept vegetation green later into
the summer."This is definitely not a normal year," McManus said.The state's
primary wildfire season is in early spring, when vegetation is still dead or
dormant. Spring weather patterns often bring high winds, creating the perfect
combination of conditions for fire to spread, McManus said.After a wildfire
occurs, investigators usually try to determine a cause through a process of
elimination, said Jerry Flowers, chief agent of the state Agriculture
Department's law enforcement division. They're usually able to determine quickly
if it was caused by factors like lightning or an electrical line being knocked
down, he said.In a few cases each year, wildfires are started by arsonists,
Flowers said. Although it's often difficult to track a single fire to a single
individual, an arsonist may set 100 or more fires if given the opportunity,
Flowers said. Eventually, serial arsonists usually leave some trace behind that
investigators can use to track them down."In nearly all arson investigations,
there is physical evidence left behind," Flowers said. "These guys know what to
look for, how to collect it, how to find it and preserve that for criminal
prosecution."

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2015 The Daily Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                              974 of 987 DOCUMENTS



               The Montmorency County Tribune (Atlanta, Michigan)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                  July 4, 2012

Wildfire Hazards in Michigan

BYLINE: The Montmorency County Tribune staff

LENGTH: 628  words


Recent large wildfires over the Memorial Day weekend in the Upper Peninsula of
Michigan demonstrate that parts of our well-forested Lake States remain
vulnerable. Human activities increase the chances of igniting wildfires,
although the Duck Lake and Seney Fires in the Eastern UP were of lightning
origin.

As human populations encroach upon natural woodlands, the risk of property loss
increases. So does the difficulty in fighting these fires. Lack of forest
management and build-up of dead woody material add to conditions that lead to
more severe fires.

The worst-case scenario, perhaps, is a large expanse of mature jack pine within
which houses, cottages and camps are scattered. Should the fire get into the
crowns of these forests, the force is nearly unstoppable by human efforts. At
that point, the weather has to change before firefighters can become effective.

This is the case with the Duck Lake wildfire, which grew to well over 20,000
acres by the first of June. That's over 30 square miles. Property damage has
been significant. Michigan has not seen a larger fire since 1976. During the
years of low fire danger, the tendency to become complacent grows. However, this
is the time to reduce the risk of fire and to reduce the risk of property damage
should a fire occur.

Employing the concepts of the Fire wise Program will help protect property.
Michigan State University maintains a program and information base for Michigan
citizens. Cutting back vegetation, removing hazards and building modifications
will help protect property in case of wildfire. The basic idea is to create a
more defensible space.

Forest management can be used to reduce the risk of wild land fire and minimize
its spread when a fire erupts. Firebreaks, age class differentiation, thinning
and forest type diversification are some of the tools available. Each of these
tools has non-fire protection benefits, as well.

Wildfire has been a natural element of forest ecosystems since the glaciers
retreated from the Great Lakes region. Jack pine and red pine are classic
examples of habitats adapted to, and driven by, wildfire. As humans build into
these landscapes, they assume a degree of risk, whether they know it or not. The
extensive fires of natural history are no longer a viable option, although the
need for those ecological benefits in these forested systems remains. Forest
management that includes clear cutting and thinning can mimic wildfire effects,
but these techniques are at the discretion of the landowners.

A landscape occupied largely by single-age jack pine is at high risk of
catastrophic fire, especially as the jack pine matures and fuel loads build.
Forest management can parse the landscape into blocks of different aged jack
pine. Reducing the risk and potential impacts of a crown fire is essential.
Should a fire escape into the crowns of mature jack pine, the fire will drop to
the ground in younger age classes. Once on the ground, fire-fighting efforts are
possible.

Mature jack pine also becomes a target for jack pine budworm, which can damage
and kill large areas of pine forest. The dead, dry material becomes ripe for
wildfire. These are all natural forest dynamics that foresters work with to
modify and reduce fire risk.

Of course, human behavior to avoid wildfire is critical as well, especially
during periods of high risk. Campfires, sparks from ATVs and other equipment,
smoking, fireworks and other human-origin ignition sources cause most of the
wildfires across the Lake States.

Wildfire will always be a part of forests as long as forests exist. However,
through forest management and careful development the risks can be minimized.
Assuming an inactive approach to forest ecology and development carries negative
consequences, sooner or later.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Guest Opinion

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MUY

                      Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                 Copyright 2012 The Montmorency County Tribune


                              975 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                                 Castlegar News

                              July 24, 2017 Monday
                                 Final Edition

BC Wildfire Service monitoring fire over 4,000 hectares

BYLINE: Chelsea Novak

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 375 words


BC Wildfire Service is monitoring a 4,126-hectare fire in Mount Assiniboine
Provincial Park, in the east of the Southeast Fire Centre.

"It's burning in both Kootenay National Park and Mount Assiniboine Provincial
Park, so as of Saturday, in order to protect public safety, B.C. Parks, in
coordination with the BC Wildfire Service, closed Mount Assiniboine Park to
inbound traffic," said Karlie Shaughnessy, fire information officer for
Southeast Fire Centre.

The closure will be in effect until further notice.

The fire was discovered on July 15 and was caused by lightning. Shaughnessy
explained that BC Wildfire Service does not have any personnel fighting the
fire, but it is being closely monitored.

"The park has a fire management plan, which allows for fire on the landscape as
part of a healthy ecosystem, so at this point it's not threatening any of the
main park values or infrastructures or cabins or anything like that," explained
Shaughnessy. "So we're just monitoring it closely."

Closer to home, the fire near Deer Creek that was discovered on Thursday, July
20 is 100 per cent contained.

That fire was lightning-caused and is approximately 35 kilometers northwest of
Castlegar, but was never threatening any structures or communities.

There are 30 active wildfires in the Southeast Fire Centre.

To date, 166 fires have burned 4,702 hectares this year, 121 of which were
lightning-caused. The other 45 were caused by people.

The BC Wildfire Services wishes to remind the public that there is a campfire
ban throughout the Southeast Fire Centre and urges the public to follow the ban
so that human-caused wildfires don't "divert critical resources from naturally
occurring wildfire."

The West Kootenay was under a Smoky Skies advisory for approximately a week, but
on Monday the Ministry of Environment announced that it had reduced the areas
covered by the Smoky Skies Bulletin issued on Monday, July 17, and the areas now
covered by the bulletin are North Thompson, 100 Mile, Cariboo (North and South)
and Chilcotin.

To report a wildfire or an open burning violation, call *5555 on a cell phone or
1-800-663-5555.

Visit bcwildfire.ca for more information on B.C. wildfires, fire bans and
restrictions, and how to prepare for a potential evacuation.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Black Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              976 of 987 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 27, 2015 Friday

Simpson Discusses Wildfires, Sage Grouse and Expresses Support for PILT with DOI
Secretary

LENGTH: 503  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of House of Representative Mike Simpson, U.S Government has issued the
following news release:

Idaho Congressman Mike Simpson, vice-chairman of the House Interior
Appropriations Subcommittee, discussed the need to change the budget process for
wildfires during Secretary of Interior Sally Jewell's testimony to the
subcommittee on Wednesday. Simpson is the lead sponsor of H.R. 167, the Wildfire
Disaster Funding Act, which would end the destructive cycle of fire borrowing
and would treat catastrophic wildfires like other natural disasters such as
hurricanes and floods.

"Like many of my Western colleagues, I have seen the impacts of catastrophic
wildfires first hand as they rage across Idaho each summer, threatening the
lives and property of my constituents.  In order to manage our federal lands, we
need to stop using funding intended for land management to fight fires. This is
a devastating cycle and it is destroying our forests," said Simpson. "Until we
address this issue, anything we do to increase needed management activities in
the forests, like hazardous fuels removal, timber harvest, conservation, or
trail maintenance, will continue to be decimated during wildfire season. Fixing
the wildfire budget is the critical first step in making our forests healthier
and, ultimately, reducing the cost of wildfires in the future."

Secretary Jewell included similar language in her fiscal year 2016 budget
request and commended Congressman Simpson for his work on H.R. 167, which has
bipartisan support in the House of Representatives and U.S. Senate.

Congressmen Simpson and Congressman Schrader (D-OR) introduced legislation
earlier this year to make common sense changes to the federal wildfire budget.
Last Congress, H.R. 167 was cosponsored by 140 Members of Congress and was
supported by a broad coalition of over 300 organizations.

"We're either going to pay for fires by taking the money from other budgets and
try to repay them later, which doesn't work, or we are going to find a better
way to manage this account," said Simpson. "I'm pleased to see Secretary Jewell
address this vital change in wildfire funding in her budget proposal and I look
forward to working with my colleagues in Congress to advance this much needed
change."

Congressman Simpson also raised concerns regarding a potential listing of the
sage grouse which has a court ordered listing deadline in September of this
year.

"I have long said that the Department needs to fully engage the states in order
to ensure we are doing everything possible to prevent a listing," said Simpson
after the hearing. "I am concerned that if the Department doesn't honor the
language which prevents the agency from writing a rule, stakeholders may not
have adequate time to finish their management plans that are essential to
preventing the listing. I will continue to advocate for the states involvement
in this process."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              977 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                    Alberni Valley Times (British Columbia)

                             June 5, 2013 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Cariboo-area man appeals $860K fine for starting wildfire

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 479 words


A Cariboo-area man who was fined more than $860,000 for starting a wildfire
while camping on his own property is appealing the penalty.

According to documents filed with the provincial Forest Appeals Commission,
Robert Unger was determined to be responsible for a wildfire that began on his
property and spread to Crown land.

"...Mr. Unger lit a campfire on land he owned, when it was unsafe to do so, and
he failed to establish a fuel break around the fire," the documents said.

"The fire escaped and caused a wildfire, and the ministry responded to the
wildfire."

Unger's land was not in an area covered by a fire department, the decision
noted.

In May 2011, Darrell Orosz, the manager of the Cariboo Fire Centre, issued a
decision ordering Unger to pay the costs of fighting the fire.

Orosz noted that he did not order Unger to pay compensation to the province for
damage to public property, which is possible under provincial laws.

Unger asked for a review and the same fire centre manager determined, again,
that Unger should pay.

Orosz acknowledged that Unger did not wilfully cause the fire, but said that
alone does not preclude payment of costs.

The ability to pay is not a factor in a decision, he wrote.

"I have considered ability to pay but conclude that the legislature could not
have intended ability to pay to be a valid consideration, since in many cases,
and certainly in the most serious cases, the government's fire control costs
will be beyond the ability of most persons to pay, in the absence of adequate
insurance coverage," he wrote in the original decision.

Patrick Vert, a spokesman for the Ministry of Forest, Lands and Natural Resource
Operations, which includes the B.C.

Wildfire Management Branch, said the ministry is limited in what it can say
about an individual case, but that humans cause almost half the wildfires in
B.C. every year.

"When a wildfire is caused by a human, there may be an investigation of the
fire," Vert said in an e-mail response.

The Wildfire Act allows the province to recover wildfire suppression costs or
damages from people deemed responsible, he said.

"The circumstances of each human-caused fire are unique as are the area affected
and the associated costs and damages and the amounts can vary widely depending
on the specific circumstances of the fire, from zero to millions of dollars,"
Vert said.

"For example, in March 2012, the province recovered $2.1 million from a fire
caused by Telus."

Colleen Smith, executive director of the Forest Appeals Commission, said the
commission cannot comment on individual cases.

She said decisions of the commission can be appealed, if there are reasonable
grounds, to B.C.

Supreme Court. Unger's appeal to the commission is scheduled to be heard later
this month.

" We want to hear from you. Send comments on this story to news@avtimes.net
Letters must include daytime phone number and hometown.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 Alberni Valley Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              978 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                               Chatham Daily News

                           August 23, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Southeastern B.C. residents to return home as wildfire conditions ease

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 201  words

DATELINE: KAMLOOPS, B.C.


Conditions have eased around a wildfire sparked nearly two weeks ago in
southeastern British Columbia, prompting the Regional District of Central
Kootenay to rescind evacuation orders and alerts.

Officials said residents would be allowed to return early Tuesday evening to
nearly 40 properties that were evacuated Aug. 12 as an aggressive wildfire
flared 20 km southwest of Salmo.

The fire closed Highway 6 leading to the Canada-U.S. border crossing at Nelway,
and the regional district says both the highway and the border crossing were
also scheduled to reopen Tuesday evening.

The B.C. Wildfire Service website shows the blaze had scorched about four square
kilometres of bush and was 50-per-cent contained.

Wildfire officials reported 135 fires around B.C. on Monday and Wildfire Service
spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said calmer and cooler conditions helped firefighters.

There was concern about an approaching storm forecast to bring gusty winds and
lightning to the central Interior by Thursday, challenging crews trying to
contain a nearly 4,700-square-kilometre wildfire that formed last week when 19
smaller fires grew together west of Quesnel. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media
Group Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Leah Hennel, Postmedia; Aerial view of the Verdant Creek Wildfire in
Kootenay National Park on Tuesday. The fire was caused by lightning on July 15.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2017 Chatham Daily News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              979 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          Cornwall Standard Freeholder

                           August 23, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Southeastern B.C. residents to return home as wildfire conditions ease

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 201  words

DATELINE: KAMLOOPS, B.C.


Conditions have eased around a wildfire sparked nearly two weeks ago in
southeastern British Columbia, prompting the Regional District of Central
Kootenay to rescind evacuation orders and alerts.

Officials said residents would be allowed to return early Tuesday evening to
nearly 40 properties that were evacuated Aug. 12 as an aggressive wildfire
flared 20 km southwest of Salmo.

The fire closed Highway 6 leading to the Canada-U.S. border crossing at Nelway,
and the regional district says both the highway and the border crossing were
also scheduled to reopen Tuesday evening.

The B.C. Wildfire Service website shows the blaze had scorched about four square
kilometres of bush and was 50-per-cent contained.

Wildfire officials reported 135 fires around B.C. on Monday and Wildfire Service
spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said calmer and cooler conditions helped firefighters.

There was concern about an approaching storm forecast to bring gusty winds and
lightning to the central Interior by Thursday, challenging crews trying to
contain a nearly 4,700-square-kilometre wildfire that formed last week when 19
smaller fires grew together west of Quesnel. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media
Group Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Leah Hennel, Postmedia; Aerial view of the Verdant Creek Wildfire in
Kootenay National Park on Tuesday. The fire was caused by lightning on July 15.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 Cornwall Standard Freeholder
                              All Rights Reserved


                              980 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                              Niagara Falls Review

                           August 23, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Southeastern B.C. residents to return home as wildfire conditions ease

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 201  words

DATELINE: KAMLOOPS, B.C.


Conditions have eased around a wildfire sparked nearly two weeks ago in
southeastern British Columbia, prompting the Regional District of Central
Kootenay to rescind evacuation orders and alerts.

Officials said residents would be allowed to return early Tuesday evening to
nearly 40 properties that were evacuated Aug. 12 as an aggressive wildfire
flared 20 km southwest of Salmo.

The fire closed Highway 6 leading to the Canada-U.S. border crossing at Nelway,
and the regional district says both the highway and the border crossing were
also scheduled to reopen Tuesday evening.

The B.C. Wildfire Service website shows the blaze had scorched about four square
kilometres of bush and was 50-per-cent contained.

Wildfire officials reported 135 fires around B.C. on Monday and Wildfire Service
spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said calmer and cooler conditions helped firefighters.

There was concern about an approaching storm forecast to bring gusty winds and
lightning to the central Interior by Thursday, challenging crews trying to
contain a nearly 4,700-square-kilometre wildfire that formed last week when 19
smaller fires grew together west of Quesnel. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media
Group Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Leah Hennel, Postmedia; Aerial view of the Verdant Creek Wildfire in
Kootenay National Park on Tuesday. The fire was caused by lightning on July 15.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 Niagara Falls Review
                              All Rights Reserved


                              981 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                      Northern Daily News (Kirkland Lake)

                           August 23, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Southeastern B.C. residents to return home as wildfire conditions ease

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 190  words

DATELINE: KAMLOOPS, B.C.


Conditions have eased around a wildfire sparked nearly two weeks ago in
southeastern British Columbia, prompting the Regional District of Central
Kootenay to rescind evacuation orders and alerts.

Officials said residents would be allowed to return early Tuesday evening to
nearly 40 properties that were evacuated Aug. 12 as an aggressive wildfire
flared 20 km southwest of Salmo.

The fire closed Highway 6 leading to the Canada-U.S. border crossing at Nelway,
and the regional district says both the highway and the border crossing were
also scheduled to reopen Tuesday evening.

The B.C. Wildfire Service website shows the blaze had scorched about four square
kilometres of bush and was 50-per-cent contained.

Wildfire officials reported 135 fires around B.C. on Monday and Wildfire Service
spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said calmer and cooler conditions helped firefighters.

There was concern about an approaching storm forecast to bring gusty winds and
lightning to the central Interior by Thursday, challenging crews trying to
contain a nearly 4,700-square-kilometre wildfire that formed last week when 19
smaller fires grew together west of Quesnel.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Leah Hennel, Postmedia; Aerial view of the Verdant Creek Wildfire in
Kootenay National Park on Tuesday. The fire was caused by lightning on July 15.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2017 Northern Daily News (Kirkland Lake)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              982 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                            Northumberland Today.com

                           August 23, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Southeastern B.C. residents to return home as wildfire conditions ease

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 190  words

DATELINE: KAMLOOPS, B.C.


Conditions have eased around a wildfire sparked nearly two weeks ago in
southeastern British Columbia, prompting the Regional District of Central
Kootenay to rescind evacuation orders and alerts.

Officials said residents would be allowed to return early Tuesday evening to
nearly 40 properties that were evacuated Aug. 12 as an aggressive wildfire
flared 20 km southwest of Salmo.

The fire closed Highway 6 leading to the Canada-U.S. border crossing at Nelway,
and the regional district says both the highway and the border crossing were
also scheduled to reopen Tuesday evening.

The B.C. Wildfire Service website shows the blaze had scorched about four square
kilometres of bush and was 50-per-cent contained.

Wildfire officials reported 135 fires around B.C. on Monday and Wildfire Service
spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said calmer and cooler conditions helped firefighters.

There was concern about an approaching storm forecast to bring gusty winds and
lightning to the central Interior by Thursday, challenging crews trying to
contain a nearly 4,700-square-kilometre wildfire that formed last week when 19
smaller fires grew together west of Quesnel.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Leah Hennel, Postmedia; Aerial view of the Verdant Creek Wildfire in
Kootenay National Park on Tuesday. The fire was caused by lightning on July 15.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 Northumberland Today.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              983 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                          The Packet & Times (Orillia)

                           August 23, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Southeastern B.C. residents to return home as wildfire conditions ease

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 201  words

DATELINE: KAMLOOPS, B.C.


Conditions have eased around a wildfire sparked nearly two weeks ago in
southeastern British Columbia, prompting the Regional District of Central
Kootenay to rescind evacuation orders and alerts.

Officials said residents would be allowed to return early Tuesday evening to
nearly 40 properties that were evacuated Aug. 12 as an aggressive wildfire
flared 20 km southwest of Salmo.

The fire closed Highway 6 leading to the Canada-U.S. border crossing at Nelway,
and the regional district says both the highway and the border crossing were
also scheduled to reopen Tuesday evening.

The B.C. Wildfire Service website shows the blaze had scorched about four square
kilometres of bush and was 50-per-cent contained.

Wildfire officials reported 135 fires around B.C. on Monday and Wildfire Service
spokesman Kevin Skrepnek said calmer and cooler conditions helped firefighters.

There was concern about an approaching storm forecast to bring gusty winds and
lightning to the central Interior by Thursday, challenging crews trying to
contain a nearly 4,700-square-kilometre wildfire that formed last week when 19
smaller fires grew together west of Quesnel. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Osprey Media
Group Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Leah Hennel, Postmedia; Aerial view of the Verdant Creek Wildfire in
Kootenay National Park on Tuesday. The fire was caused by lightning on July 15.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 The Packet & Times (Orillia)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              984 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Woodstock Sentinel-Review

                           August 23, 2017 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

southeastern B.C. residents to return home as wildfire conditions ease

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 201  words

DATELINE: KaMlOOPs, B.C


Conditions have eased around a wildfire sparked nearly two weeks ago in
southeastern British Columbia, prompting the Regional district of Central
Kootenay to rescind evacuation orders and alerts.

Officials said residents would be allowed to return early tuesday evening to
nearly 40 properties that were evacuated aug. 12 as an aggressive wildfire
flared 20 km southwest of salmo. the fire closed Highway 6 leading to the
Canada-u.s. border crossing at nelway, and the regional district says both the
highway and the border crossing were also scheduled to reopen tuesday evening.
the B.C. Wildfire service website shows the blaze had scorched about four square
kilometres of bush and was 50-per-cent contained.

Wildfire officials reported 135 fires around B.C. on Monday and Wildfire service
spokesman Kevin skrepnek said calmer and cooler conditions helped firefighters.

there was concern about an approaching storm forecast to bring gusty winds and
lightning to the central interior by thursday, challenging crews trying to
contain a nearly 4,700-square-kilometre wildfire that formed last week when 19
smaller fires grew together west of Quesnel. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017 Sun Media
Corporation. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Leah Hennel, Postmedia; Aerial view of the Verdant Creek Wildfire in
Kootenay National Park on Tuesday. The fire was caused by lightning on July 15.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 Woodstock Sentinel-Review
                              All Rights Reserved


                              985 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                              May 9, 2017 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

320 wildfires linked to arson; 5 in county;
County's 18 wildfires this year surpass the 3 at this time in 2016.

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 554 words


Wildfires continued to rage in Florida on Monday with smoky plumes visible from
space and new numbers showing an estimated 320 blazes were intentionally set,
including five in Palm Beach County.

Florida Agriculture Commissioner Adam Putnam released the arson information to
promote National Arson Awareness Week, and draw attention to the 2,015 wildfires
that have burned on state and federally managed lands in Florida since Jan. 1.

Palm Beach County has had 18 wildfires, five of which were intentionally set. Of
54 Treasure Coast wildfires, eight were intentional, said Scott Peterich,
Florida Forest Service wildfire mitigation specialist.

This past year at this time, Palm Beach County had just three wildfires, none of
which were arson related. The Treasure Coast had 17, two of which were started
intentionally.

Dry conditions have made Florida more susceptible to wildfires this year
compared with 2016, when record rainfall was measured during winter months.

Despite recent showers, Peterich said there is still a fire danger statewide.
About half of the counties in the state, including Palm Beach County, are under
burn bans, and the Storm Prediction Center has most of the Florida Peninsula at
an elevated risk of fire.

The National Weather Service had areas of Miami-Dade County and Southwest
Florida under a red-flag fire warning Sunday and Monday because of low humidity
levels.

"Until the skies open up and just pour, and pour, and pour, we are vulnerable,"
Peterich said. "I know fire activity in the district has slowed, but it started
again (Sunday.)"

A 28-acre wildfire in Martin County burned Sunday, but was contained Monday. The
Florida Forest Service said the fire started when a spark from a stuck vehicle
ignited dry grass.

As of Monday, there were 129 active wildfires in Florida, burning tens of
thousands of acres.

One of the largest fires, dubbed the West Mims Fire, is in the Okefenokee
Wildlife Refuge on the border of Florida and Georgia.

According to a federal report, it was caused by lightning in early April and has
since burned more than 130,000 acres.

During the weekend, the fire burned a tractor that became disabled on a stump,
and was making an "aggressive" push to the south ahead of gusty northwest winds.

The fire is so large, it was clearly seen in images taken by the new GOES-16
weather satellite.

Lightning was the cause of 88 fires this year, up from 48 during the same time
period in 2016.

Peterich said lightning-ignited fires could worsen as Florida's thunderstorm
season approaches with the onset of summer.

"If you go three or four days without rain and this kind of low humidity, the
dryness comes right back," Peterich said. "Remember, this dryness dates back to
October or November."

While Palm Beach County was nearly drought-free in Thursday's report from the
U.S. Drought Monitor, areas north of Lake Okeechobee escalated to severe
drought. The Upper Kissimmee basin is down more than 9 inches of rain for the
year, according to the South Florida Water Management District.

In the 16-county region managed by the district, the average seasonal rain
deficit is 6.23 inches.

To report suspicious wildfire activity, contact the department's Arson Alert
Hotline at (800) 342-5869. Callers can remain anonymous and could earn up to a
$5,000 reward.

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  A Florida Forest Service worker (background right) positions a  water
truck behind a burning stand of brush as the Anclote Branch  fire continues to
burn Monday in the Starkey Wilderness Preserve in  Pasco County.  Doulgas R.
Clifford / Tampa Bay Times

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2017 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              986 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                             

                           December 1, 2016 Thursday

Giant Gatlinburg-Sized Wildfires May Be the New Normal

BYLINE: Michael Sainato and Chelsea Skojec

LENGTH: 550 words


Wildfires at the edge of Great Smoky Mountains National Park in Tennessee have
forced thousands to evacuate the area. More than 15,000 acres in the park and
neighboring Gatlinburg, Tennessee, have been scorched by the historically
unprecedented fire. Extremely dry conditions due to drought, and high-gust winds
contributed to the large scale of the wildfire. Several hundred buildings in the
area have been destroyed, with several injuries reported, including at least
four deaths so far.

"I've been in federal service for 25 years, and I've fought fires on the West
Coast and the East Coast and been with the Forest Service as well," Great Smoky
Mountains National Park Superintendent Cassius Cash told Fox News in an
interview. "Nothing that we've experienced in the 24 hours has prepared for what
we've experienced here in the last 24 hours. [It's] been just unbelievable what
we've experienced here."

Since the 1980s, wildfires in the United States have exponentially increased in
frequency and duration. According to a 2006 study published in Science journal,
wildfire season has increased by nearly two months, with fires occurring nearly
four times more often on a land area scale six times large, and lasting nearly
five times as long.

Though natural cycles, human activities, and land use contribute to wildfires,
these recent increases in wildfires across the United States pose the question
as to what influence climate change has on these trends.

"We are seeing the answer to this writ large in the American west: drier,
longer, hotter summers, combined with warmer winters (which allow infestations
like pine bark beetle to invade and weaken trees) have already led to a
threefold increase in the extent of wildfire in the American west over the past
few decades," said Dr. Michael Mann, director of the Earth System Science Center
at Penn State, in an interview with the Observer. Mann recently appeared in
Before the Flood, Leonardo DiCaprio's documentary on climate change. "We can
expect far worse in the future if we do not act to reduce carbon emissions."

Tennessee is currently experiencing its third warmest year on record, with areas
in the vicinity of the fire facing rainfall deficits of up to 20 inches. More
than 80,000 acres burned in early November due to drought conditions in Georgia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Alabama and Kentucky.

The 2015 wildfire season in the United States broke records, with more than 10
million acres burned-about 4 million acres more than the annual average.
Researchers from Columbia University and the University of Idaho published a
study this year in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
that directly linked climate change to increases in intensity and frequency of
wildfires in the western United States. "We demonstrate that human-caused
climate change caused over half of the documented increases in fuel aridity
since the 1970s and doubled the cumulative forest fire area since 1984," the
researchers noted.

By releasing more carbon into the atmosphere, the intense wildfires further
accelerate climate change. If carbon emissions aren't reduced in the long-term
to mitigate the impacts of climate change, big wildfires like the one
Gatlinburg, Tennessee, are going to become a more common occurrence.


LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   
                              All Rights Reserved


                              987 of 987 DOCUMENTS


                        Santa Cruz Sentinel (California)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             July 23, 2016 Saturday

Rural Santa Cruz County residents warned of wildfire

BYLINE: Stephen Baxter, Santa Cruz Sentinel, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 524 words


July 23--FELTON -- Cal Fire leaders in Santa Cruz County say they want rural
residents to help prevent wildfires by clearing defensible space around their
homes, but they want people to be wary of starting fires with landscaping
equipment.

Rich Sampson, division chief of Cal Fire's Santa Cruz-San Mateo Unit, said three
small wildfires were started in the past two weeks by residents on riding lawn
mowers who cut dry grass on rocky soil in the late afternoon. Sparks started the
blazes, Sampson said.

"While the department is supportive of landowners maintaining defensible space,
the time for equipment operations is during the cooler part of the day," Sampson
said. He advised residents and landscaping crews to mow before 10 a.m. and
"preferably during wet or foggy conditions with lower temperatures and higher
relative humidity."

Cal Fire leaders said that because Santa Cruz County had an "average" winter of
rain after five years of drought, there is more vegetation prone to wildfire in
the Santa Cruz Mountains. Friday afternoon, Cal firefighters in Big Sur battled
a wildfire that grew to more than 180 acres about 5 miles south of Garrapata
State Park. Firefighters have not yet said what started that blaze Friday
morning.

Another wildfire in Wilder Ranch State Park burned 1.6 acres on Wednesday.

Dry conditions this summer prompted Cal Fire to ban backyard burns June 27 in
Santa Cruz and San Mateo counties.

"As conditions across California are drying out further we must take every step
to prevent new wildfires from sparking," said Cal Fire director Ken Pimlott.
"Residents must ensure they have defensible space by removing dead trees and
overgrown vegetation from around their homes, but do so safely."

Firefighters advised residents to clear all dead and dying leaves and other
vegetation 100 feet from buildings. Residents also should consider plants that
resist ignition such as rockrose, ice plant and aloe, according to Cal Fire.
Less flammable shrubs include hedging roses, bush honeysuckles, currant. Maple,
poplar and cherry trees also are less flammable than pine, fir and other
conifers, according to Cal Fire.

Wood chipping, rather than burning, also is a good way to get rid of dead
branches and wood debris. The Resource Conservation District of Santa Cruz
County has a wood chipping program where residents can get technical support and
apply for reimbursements for chipping services, Sampson said.

The Resource Conservation District's website is at Rcdsantacruz.org.

More information about preparing for wildfire is on Cal Fire's
ReadyForWildfire.org.

Prepare for wildfire

Create: A 30-foot 'lean, clean and green' area should be maintained around homes
with 100 feet of defensible space around it.

Clear: Vegetation should be cleared around address markers, water standpipes and
other water sources on roads.

Map: Plan a wildfire exit route and keep a checklist of items to pack.

More information: Visit Readyforwildfire.org.

Source: Cal Fire

___ (c)2016 the Santa Cruz Sentinel (Scotts Valley, Calif.) Visit the Santa Cruz
Sentinel (Scotts Valley, Calif.) at www.santacruzsentinel.com Distributed by
Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160723-QC-Rural-Santa-Cruz-County-residents-warned-of-wildfire
-0723-20160723

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QC


                       Copyright 2016 Santa Cruz Sentinel
