
                          FOCUS - 442 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                    Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Massachesetts)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 3, 2011 Tuesday

Hurricane-hunting turboprop touches down for tours on Cape

BYLINE: Cynthia McCormick, Cape Cod Times, Hyannis, Mass.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 555 words


May 03--AIR STATION CAPE COD -- If the Eastern Seaboard has a guardian angel, it
might well be the aircraft with a 100-foot wingspan and Doppler radar tail
parked on the tarmac at Air Station Cape Cod on Monday.

The turboprop Lockheed Orion is one of three hurricane hunters operated by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and it touched down on Cape Cod
as part of a NOAA hurricane awareness tour.

Hundreds of schoolchildren and scores of local residents toured the four-engine
aircraft that normally crisscrosses hurricanes and winter storms to uncover the
secrets of their paths, formation and intensities.

Even in this age of satellite technology, "You've got to get a plane in the
storm," said James D. McFadden, programs chief for NOAA's aircraft operations
center at MacDill Air Force Base outside Tampa, Fla.

"There's no alternative," he said.

Cloud shields that typically form over the tops of hurricanes make it hard for
satellites to pinpoint the exact center of a storm, and such pinpointing is
essential for tracking purposes, he said.

Within the past 10 years, hurricane hunters have improved their forecasting
skills immensely by dropping data-collecting cylinders called dropsondes from
the planes, said McFadden, who has traversed hurricanes 563 times.

Attached to little parachutes, the devices radio back such information as
temperature, air pressure and wind speed.

If scientists had used only satellites and not dropsondes, the predicted path of
Hurricane Katrina, the 2005 storm that devastated Louisiana and other
Southeastern states, would have been 150 to 200 miles off the mark, NOAA
researchers said.

Major hurricanes are rare in New England, but when they hit they strike fast,
racing up on the jet stream, said Rebecca Gould of the National Weather Service
in Taunton. "It'll be from the Bahamas to here in 24 to 48 hours," she said.

Predictions about the 2011 hurricane season will be ready in three weeks, NOAA
National Hurricane Center Director Bill Read said.

He said last year was the third most active hurricane season on record, with 11
hurricanes, five of which were Category 3 or higher.

The good news was they didn't make landfall, Read said. "They stayed at sea," he
said.

NOAA's three hurricane hunters -- two turboprops and one high-altitude Gulf
Stream -- are used mainly for research purposes. But Read said that during
particularly busy hurricane seasons they also help out the Air Force's
hurricane-hunting jets.

Other agencies, including the Coast Guard, Salvation Army and American Red
Cross, participated in NOAA's hurricane awareness tour, which hasn't visited
Cape Cod since 1999, Gould said.

Unlike such low-lying places as the Florida Keys, Cape Cod would not require a
massive evacuation during a hurricane, said Peter Judge, spokesman for the
Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency. Public safety crews would help direct
day-trippers, tourists and other people who wanted to leave around rotaries and
over the bridges, he said.

To see more of the Cape Cod Times, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.capecodonline.com. Copyright (c) 2011, Cape Cod Times, Hyannis, Mass.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20110503-CA-Hurricane-hunting-turboprop-touches-down-for-tours-on-Cape-0503-2011
0503

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CA


                         Copyright 2011 Cape Code Times


                          FOCUS - 443 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              June 14, 2015 Sunday

Hurricane hunters eye past to see future;
Goal is to make storm database more accurate

BYLINE: Ken Kaye; Sun Sentinel

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 630 words

DATELINE: MIAMI



HIGHLIGHT: Added.


 It's tedious detective work that calls for scrutinizing dusty old weather
records, oceangoing ship reports and hand-drawn maps.

But the National Hurricane Center's reanalysis of all storms and hurricanes
since 1851 is rewriting tropical history. So far, all the seasons through 1955
have been studied.

The result: 333 new systems have been discovered, and the tracks and strengths
of more than 450 more revised.

It's all in the name of making the hurricane database as accurate as possible.

It's exciting when we discover a new tropical storm or hurricane that somehow
slipped through the cracks previously, said Chris Landsea, the hurricane
center's science and operations officer.

With help from local university students, Landsea began the reanalysis project
in 2000. By the time he's done, he will have restudied more than 1,000 systems.

The work requires applying modern-day storm analysis techniques to old data. It
occasionally results in revising modern-day history.

For instance, in the past week, he discovered that last month's Tropical Storm
Ana became the earliest system on record to hit the U.S. coastline when it made
landfall in South Carolina on May 10.

That was after he determined the Groundhog Day Tropical Storm of 1952, the
previous record holder, wasn't a bona-fide tropical system when it moved across
South Florida that year.

It was apparent that system was really a hybrid, so we changed history, Landsea
said.

Another recent change: Hurricane King, which struck Miami in 1950, was upgraded
from Category 3 to Category 4 at landfall.

Last year, Landsea found the Great Labor Day Hurricane of 1935 was the strongest
storm to hit the U.S. coastline, not Hurricane Camille, as previously thought -
for 45 years.

James Franklin, the center's top hurricane specialist, noted that the database
must be as accurate as possible because it's used to improve forecasting
techniques.

The National Hurricane Center takes its role as caretaker of the historical
record very seriously, and we appreciate the work Chris and others have done to
get the record as correct as we can make it, Franklin said.

In its technical format, the Atlantic hurricane database resembles a sea of
numbers difficult to decipher.

However, on its website, nhc.noaa.gov, under the icon Data archive, the
hurricane center translates the database into various easy-to-view components,
including a series of maps that display the storm tracks.

After restudying old data, Landsea submits his findings to the hurricane
center's six-member Best Track Committee, composed of seasoned forecasters. If
they approve, the hurricane database is updated with the new tropical
information.

Most recently, Landsea updated the 1951-1955 era, when nine hurricanes struck
the U.S. coast. Among his findings: Hazel hit the Carolinas in 1954 as a
Category 4 hurricane, not a tropical storm as previously thought. He also found
two systems, Carol in 1953 and Diane in 1955, hit the U.S. coast as tropical
storms, not hurricanes, as initially reported.

Because that era was so active, the U.S. government launched Storm Fury, an
unsuccessful attempt to weaken hurricanes by seeding them with silver iodide
crystals, Landsea said.

The idea back in the '50s was that mankind could make beneficial changes to the
environment and modify weather, he said. What we now know is that hurricanes are
a lot more powerful than we ever thought.

Landsea and his research team next plan to reanalyze storms between 1964 and
1969. He likely won't discover as many new storms during that period because it
was the advent of routine satellite pictures.

Potentially, at some point in the future, Landsea's work will be updated.

We're trying to make the database as good as we can, he said. But we're not
under any illusion that it's going to be perfect.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 444 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

When Hurricane Ripped Charleston, It Rated as 10th Strongest to Hit U.S.

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 22


The hurricane that last night ravaged Charleston, S.C., surprised forecasters by
gathering strength almost at the last moment to become the 10th most intense of
the 137 hurricanes that have hit the United States coast in this century.

While forecasters accurately predicted where Hurricane Hugo would come ashore,
the storm further confounded meteorologists by moving hundreds of miles farther
inland than had been predicted. This spared the Northeast Corridor serious
flooding but dumped 4 to 8 inches of rain on the Appalachians on a track that
took the storm northward through West Virginia, eastern Ohio and western
Pennsylvania toward Canada.

Hurricane Hugo lost strength as it moved north. In the afternoon it was
downgraded to a tropical storm and at 6 P.M. meteorologists at the National
Hurricane Center in Coral Gables, Fla., declared the storm's official end as a
tropical system. ''It's not a major weather event anymore,'' said Mark Zimmer, a
meteorologist at the center. ''It's just a low-pressure system.'' At that point,
the remains of the hurricane were centered just west of Pittsburgh and moving
northeast, with moderate rain and maximum winds of about 35 miles per hour.

Forecast Enabled Escape

The prediction that the storm would hit land near Charleston, S.C., apparently
enabled coastal residents to evacuate in time to keep the death toll relatively
low.

After its 140-mile-per-hour winds caused widespread destruction on the islands
of Montserrat, Gaudeloupe, St. Croix, St. Thomas and Puerto Rico earlier in the
week, the hurricane lost strength. For about three days its strongest winds were
a little more than 100 m.p.h., which was dangerous but made it only a Category 2
storm, on a rating scale of atmospheric pressure in which 1 is the weakest
hurricane and 5 the most powerful.

At noon Thursday, as the hurricane approached the Atlantic coast, the low
pressure at its center had intensifed enough to nudge it up to a Category 3 and
its peak winds had risen to 115 m.p.h. By 3 P.M., it was a very strong Category
4, and its winds were up to 125 m.p.h. By 6 P.M., it was still in Category 4 on
the basis of atmospheric pressure, but the winds had risen to 135 m.p.h., making
it what the experts termed an ''extremely dangerous'' Category 4 hurricane. That
was its condition when its center crossed the coast around midnight.

The most intense hurricanes, those in Category 5, have winds higher than 155
m.p.h. Only two of those, a 1935 storm that killed more than 400 people in
Florida and Hurricane Camille, whose winds of more than 200 m.p.h. killed 256
people on the Gulf Coast in 1969, have hit the United States this century. The
most intense hurricane recorded since 1899 was last year's Gilbert, a Category 5
storm that struck Jamaica and Mexico but not the United States.

Measuring the Intensity

The intensity of a hurricane is measured by a barometer in millibars, a unit of
atmospheric pressure. The lower the pressure in a storm compared with the
pressure outside, the higher the winds. The 1935 Category 5 hurricane in Florida
had a very low pressure of 892 millibars. And in Hurricane Gilbert last year,
the pressure was even lower: 888 millibars.

When Hurricane Hugo hit the coast, its pressure was 934 millibars, three
millibars higher than that of Hurricane Carla, a destructive storm that struck
the Texas Gulf Coast in 1961. Hugo thus took its place behind Carla as the 10th
most intense to hit the United States.

This surprised forecasters, who had predicted after each escalation that the
storm would not intensify any further.

Bob Sheets, the director of the hurricane center, had no ready explanation for
why the storm got stronger. ''We don't know all the dynamics,'' he said. ''The
eye tightened up, and when that happens the strength increases. We don't
understand those mechanisms.''

Possible Explanations

Other meteorologists did advance possible explanations.

First, Tropical Storm Iris, which had been the trailing the hurricane,
dissipated, said Paul G. Knight, a meteorologist with the Weather Communications
Group at Pennsylvania State University. By competing with the bigger storm for
energy and moisture, that system had helped retard the hurricane.

Second, as the hurricane neared the coast it crossed the Gulf Stream, where
warmer water might have supplied more energy. ''This was a factor that wasn't
being studied,'' Mr. Knight said. ''The track of the storm was more of a
concern.''

Third - perhaps the strongest factor, in Mr. Knight's view - the hurricane's
strength might have been restrained because it was being squeezed between a big
area of high atmospheric pressure over the Atlantic to the northeast and a
low-pressure area to the southwest. These two systems created an air current
that guided the storm to Charleston.

The two areas also blocked the hurricane from pumping as much air as it might
have out its top, said Mr. Knight. A hurricane takes in air from the bottom and
vents it aloft. The faster it vents the air, the lower the atmospheric pressure
at the center and the stronger the storm.

As Hurricane Hugo neared the coast, it moved away from the two big systems and
had more room in which to vent air. The pressure at its center, in this theory,
then began dropping and its winds started rising.

The explanation of why the remains of the storm moved farther inland than had
been predicted is simpler. Dr. Sheets and Mr. Knight agreed that the big
high-pressure area in the Atlantic, which had been growing in size, expanded
farther to the west and pushed the dwindling hurricane into the Appalachians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 445 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         The Gazette (Montreal, Quebec)

                    October 30, 1995, Monday, FINAL EDITION

Hurricanes aplenty: It's Tanya time: after Wendy, they'll go to Greek letters

BYLINE: KIRK SAVILLE; FORT LAUDERDALE SUN-SENTINEL

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 481 words

DATELINE: FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla.


For the first time in months, it looks as if we could run out of storms before
we run out of names - but it'll be close.

The seemingly endless 1995 hurricane season, one of the busiest years on record,
ends on Nov. 30.

Fortunately, November is a month in which hurricanes are relatively rare. During
this century, only four hurricanes have struck the United States in November.

Unfortunately, all four of those hurricanes struck Florida.

"In this crazy season, we'll be watching to see what develops," said Mike
Rucker, state meteorologist. "I'm suspicious that we'll have at least one more
named storm."

A few weeks ago, the National Hurricane Centre made a plan in case the number of
storms exceeded 21, the number of official names. With only two remaining names,
Van and Wendy, the hurricane centre intends to name storms after the letters of
the Greek alphabet.

If there is a 22nd storm, it would be called Alpha. No. 23, should it come to
that, would be Beta.

Nineteen named storms have already formed this season, which started June 1,
ranking 1995 as the second-busiest on record. The record for tropical storms and
hurricanes in a single year was set in 1933, with 21 storms.

When Hurricane Tanya formed yesterday, it also put 1995 in second place on the
list of most hurricanes in a season, with 11. The record is 12 hurricanes, set
in 1969.

Even though November hurricanes are relatively rare, meteorologists and
emergency managers urge residents to remain prepared for the worst. "I never
relax," said Art St. Amand, emergency-management director for Broward County,
Fla. "I wouldn't let down my guard at all. If anything, plan a party for
December 1."

Anybody prone to relax needs only to think back to last year, when Tropical
Storm Gordon formed on Nov. 10 and tormented South Florida with torrential rains
for almost two weeks. After heading out to sea, Gordon turned into a hurricane
briefly and made a run back toward the East Coast before dying at sea.

And Hurricane Kate hit the Port St. Joe area in the Florida Panhandle on Nov.
21, 1985.

At least the season for monster storms is pretty much over. Since 1900, not a
single November storm has reached major-hurricane status - storms with winds
greater than 110 mph.

The main reason for the drop in storm activity in November is the cooling of the
ocean waters. Hurricanes are fueled by warm water. The most powerful storms
typically form near the coast of Africa, gaining strength as they cross the warm
waters of the Atlantic.

But during the autumn months, as the days have grown shorter, the Atlantic has
cooled down, making it hard for hurricanes to form. The Gulf of Mexico still has
waters warm enough to fuel hurricanes, but gulf storms usually don't become
major storms before hitting land.

One disadvantage of gulf storms is that they can form and strike quickly.


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright 1995 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 446 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                     September 17, 2004 Friday Home Edition

HURRICANE IVAN: IN THE EYE OF THE STORM CENTER: Parade of hurricanes hard on
forecasters

BYLINE: CHARLES SEABROOK

SOURCE: AJC

SECTION: News; Pg. 7C

LENGTH: 577 words


Miami --- First there was Charley. Next came Frances. Then it was Ivan. Now it's
Jeanne.

One after the other, the hurricanes keep coming as the men and women of the
National Hurricane Center fight exhaustion. Fatigue wrinkles the forecasters'
faces as they toil around the clock at their bunker-like building on the campus
of Florida International University.

For more than a month they've predicted the paths of three destructive
hurricanes. Jeanne, fluctuating between hurricane and tropical storm intensity
as it menaces the Dominican Republic, now fills their computer screens, knocking
on the East Coast's door. The break room offers brief respites; the Red Bull
energy drink is often the beverage of choice.

"We've been going nonstop since early August [when Hurricane Charley formed],"
said Frank Lapore, the center's spokesman who fielded media inquiries about Ivan
on Thursday.

He took questions from nearby West Palm Beach as well as faraway Beijing and
Moscow.

When Hurricane Ivan turned into a tropical storm Thursday morning on its route
through Alabama, the forecasters relinquished ownership of the brute to their
counterparts with the National Weather Service in Maryland.

Their respite, though, proved short-lived. Jeanne, a less potent storm, was
moving over the island of Hispaniola. It could restrengthen as it moves away
from the Dominican Republic.

The phone rang relentlessly. The forecasters' lunch, like so many other meals of
late, was spent hunkered over maps and computers, trying to divine Jeanne's
path.

Many employees haven't had a full day off since mid-August, when Hurricane
Charley rampaged across Florida. Most refuse down time and show up in the
morning for yet another 12-hour shift.

Center Director Max Mayfield says storm shutters on his home have been in place
since Frances came calling.

"They're probably down everywhere in Dade County except my neighborhood because
my neighbors are watching me," he said.

The Hurricane Center, a critical agency of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, tracks hurricanes largely until they make landfall. Since 1955,
it has tracked tropical depressions, tropical storms and hurricanes. The
forecasts help millions of people decide whether to flee the storm or hunker
down and ride it out.

The center's experts rely on real-time data transmitted from satellites, sea
buoys and special aircraft, including the famed Hurricane Hunters squadron out
of Keesler Air Force Base, Miss.

Their work is roundly appreciated. President Bush and his brother, Florida Gov.
Jeb Bush, stopped by last week to thank the workers for their ceaseless toil.

The hurricane center moved into this pillbox-type building in 1995, three years
after Hurricane Andrew destroyed the center's headquarters in Coral Gables.

"You would be safe in a Category 5 hurricane in this building," Miller said.

It's unlikely Mayfield's shutters will come down anytime soon. Hurricane season
doesn't end until Nov. 30.

"The prediction was that we would have 12 to 15 named storms this year," said
Lapore. "So far, we've had 10, including Jeanne. I think we'll get 15 before the
season is over."

Sure enough, shortly after Lapore spoke, the computer screens blinked with new
life: Tropical Depression 12 formed about 670 miles west-southwest of the Cape
Verde Islands, with maximum sustained winds of 35 mph.

It officially became Tropical Storm Karl late Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: National Hurricane Center meteorologist Eric Blake watches radar
screens Thursday morning showing the cores of what then were Hurricane Ivan
(left) and Tropical Storm Jeanne. (METRO) / ANDY NEWMAN / Associated Press;
Photo: National Hurricane Center Director Max Mayfield (left) keeps an eye on
Hurricane Ivan on Thursday at the Miami facility. Behind him is an infrared view
of the storm. / ANDY NEWMAN / Associated Press; Photo: Above, a satellite image
taken at 4:15 p.m Thursday shows hurricanes Ivan (upper left) and Jeanne (lower
right). Off the chart is tropical depression 12, which late Thursday became
Tropical Storm Karl. / NOAA

                Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 447 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                           September 7, 2017 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

Weather Eye

BYLINE: Paul Simons

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 67

LENGTH: 321 words


It seems unbelievable that so soon after the catastrophe of Hurricane Harvey
that yet another spectacular storm has erupted. Hurricane Irma is more powerful,
with sustained winds reaching 185mph and gusting to 225mph when it hit the
Leeward Islands in the Caribbean. Based on these wind speeds, at present this is
the second-equal most powerful hurricane in records going back to 1851. It is
the strongest hurricane recorded in the open Atlantic Ocean - the other intense
hurricanes were in the warmer seas of the Caribbean or Gulf of Mexico.

Hurricanes feed on warm waters for energy. The tropical seas of the Atlantic are
at present very warm and Irma is expected to sweep across warmer waters, up to
30C, in the Caribbean. However, the storm may lose some power if it passes over
land, such as the Dominican Republic, Haiti or Cuba.

Category 5 hurricanes are rare, but also surprisingly fragile because winds high
in the atmosphere can shear off their tops. However, Irma has encountered weak
winds at a high level, enabling it to develop unchecked. Even powerful
hurricanes are easily pushed around by nearby weather systems. Irma would have
turned northwards out of harm's way had its path not been blocked by an area of
high pressure spanning much of the North Atlantic. Instead, the hurricane has
been pushed westwards to the Caribbean and it is expected to make a sharp
right-hand turn towards Florida this weekend.

There are few historical parallels to this unfolding disaster. Perhaps the
closest was Hurricane Andrew 25 years ago, another Category 5 hurricane. In
August 1992, Andrew devastated the Bahamas, before tearing through southern
Florida and heading into Louisiana, leaving 65 people dead and damage estimated
at about $26.5 billion. It was the second-costliest US hurricane, although that
does not take into account Hurricane Harvey last month, which may set a record
for the most expensive hurricane damage.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2017 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 448 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     June 1, 1989, Thursday, State Edition

Tamer storms predicted

BYLINE: STEPHEN KOFF

SECTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 704 words



The six-month hurricane season that starts today will bring tamer    storms, and
fewer of them, predicts a top researcher. Ordinarily, that    might be welcome
news in Florida.

     But think of it as the calm before the storm, warned William M.    Gray in
his annual hurricane forecast Wednesday. Gray's prediction is    awaited by
hurricane watchers each year because he has been largely    accurate.

     A relatively quiet hurricane season in the Atlantic this year could    be a
prelude to more-normal patterns, carrying the potential for    large-scale
coastal destruction. Climatic trends show "an eventual    return to seasons with
both more hurricanes and more intense    hurricanes," the Colorado State
University researcher said in his    forecast.

     For the near term, chances are that Floridians will not have to    board up
the windows and flee, scientists say. Gray predicts fewer    hurricanes and
tropical storms in 1989 than in recent years. Further,    the so-called
"hurricane destruction potential," Gray said, "this    year should be much lower
than last season or in 1985."

     His figures may change on Aug. 1, when his forecast will be updated    to
make use of more-reliable summer data. In the meantime, Gray    predicts, during
the next six months there will be:         Seven storms of tropical storm
intensity.

      Four hurricanes growing out of those storms.

      Fifteen hurricane days.

     "This means," Gray said, "that the 1989 Atlantic hurricane    season will
likely be a below-average hurricane season."

     "But then again," said Chris Landsea, a graduate student who    works with
Gray in Fort Collins, Colo., "if two or three of those    storms hit Miami or
somewhere, it's not going to be an unactive season    for Miami."

     Last year, Gray predicted seven hurricanes and 11 tropical storms.  t t His
tropical-storm forecast was on the money, although only five of    those storms
grew into hurricanes.

     Gray primarily uses four factors to make his predictions,    essentially
wind speed and direction, atmospheric pressure and    sea-water temperatures.

     One of those factors - easterly equatorial winds about 10 miles    above
the earth's surface - will tend to shear the tops off the big    Atlantic
storms. The winds shift direction every 13 months, and when    the winds blow
from the west, Atlantic hurricane activity is about    twice as likely as when
the winds are from the east, Gray said.

     "This season's stratospheric winds are expected to be stronger    from the
east," Gray said in his prediction.

     Gray also noted that atmospheric pressures in the Caribbean basin    have
been high so far this year. Those high pressures tend to deflect    hurricanes,
which feed on low barometer readings for their strength.

 April and May pressures have been high, "so it's a suppressing factor    for
hurricanes," said Landsea.

     Long-term, the outlook is not so optimistic. Scientists have been
reviewing rain conditions in West Africa and their effects on    hurricanes. The
most intense hurricanes usually form at low latitudes    from disturbances
moving west from Africa, Gray noted. The relatively    inactive hurricane period
between 1970 and 1987 coincides with extended    West African drought during
those years.

     Combined with other atmospheric data from the Caribbean basin,    recent
African rainfall levels - near average in 1988 - could signal a    return to
fiercer storms, researchers say.

     "With the large increases of coastal populations and building
construction which has taken place along the U.S. southeast and Gulf    coasts
since 1970, and the increase that will likely occur in the    future, we may
well be in store for many more future hurricane problems    than we have had in
the recent past," Gray said. "Coastal    populations, real estate, insurance
interests, etc., should be made    aware of this likely future increase in
Atlantic hurricane activity."



LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; William Gray

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 449 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    August 25, 1992, Tuesday, Final Edition

'Immature' Storm Didn't Pack Punch Experts Expected

Tom Kenworthy, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 1019 words


It may come as cold comfort to hundreds of thousands of South Florida residents,
but Hurricane Andrew -- for all its fierce wind and rain -- was a relatively
compact storm that under slightly different circumstances could have dealt a far
more catastrophic blow.

Hurricane experts, while cautioning that Andrew has the potential to develop
over the Gulf of Mexico into an epic storm that could devastate communities
along a broad area from Alabama to Texas, said the season's first hurricane
apparently caused less damage than many had feared from a storm packing gusts
exceeding 160 mph. The storm surge, or wall of water typically pushed ashore,
was considerably lower than anticipated, said the experts.

Because it developed quickly, traveled fast and hit a coastline with relatively
deep offshore waters, Andrew was an "immature" storm that "was not as severe as
what you would expect from a Category 4 hurricane," said Robert Simpson, a
former director of the National Hurricane Center who co-developed the scale for
measuring potential hurricane damage.

Simpson said Andrew might have affected a larger area had it not hit land so
quickly after developing into a full-fledged hurricane.

The radius of hurricane-force winds carried by Andrew was only about 30 or 40
miles, about half of the size of Hurricane Hugo, which devastated the Carolinas
and several Caribbean islands in 1989, said Jerry Jarrell, deputy director of
the National Hurricane Center.

Simpson attributed Andrew's storm surge of about eight feet -- well below some
predictions -- to the speed with which the storm traveled and to the deep waters
off the east coast of Florida. A slower storm, or one traveling over shallower
water, he said, would have "a better chance of stacking water higher at the
coastline."

Nonetheless, Andrew was the most powerful storm to hit southern Florida since
Hurricane Betsy killed 75 people and caused billions of dollars in property
damage in 1965. And it has at least the potential to inflict catastrophic damage
on the Gulf Coast, as did Hurricane Camille, the 1969 killer storm that was one
of only two Category 5 hurricanes to hit the United States since the start of
damage record-keeping a century ago. Camille, packing gusts up to 200 mph,
killed 256 people in Mississippi and Louisiana.

The category system used to describe these storms, called the Saffir-Simpson
scale, is based on wind speed, barometric pressure and magnitude of storm surge
-- the heavy seas pushed ashore by hurricane-force winds and the extremely low
air pressures that accompany hurricanes. A Category 1 storm, for example, has
winds of 74 to 95 mph, a barometric pressure of 28.94 inches or more, and a
storm surge of four to five feet. A Category 5 storm has sustained wind of more
than 155 mph, barometric pressure of less than 27.17 inches, and a storm surge
of more than 18 feet.

As a Category 4 storm, Andrew ranks in the same class as Hurricane Hugo, which
three years ago roared through the Caribbean and slammed into the Carolinas,
leaving 85 people dead and almost $ 6 billion in property damage.

Like many hurricanes that hit the United States, Andrew developed off the coast
of Africa as a tropical depression and built into a hurricane as the very low
pressure area at its center fed on the moist air over the Atlantic.

As warm, moist air moves toward the low-pressure zone, it is nudged slightly to
the right (left in the Southern Hemisphere) by the Coriolis force produced by
the Earth's rotation. Gradually this motion coalesces into the characteristic
counterclockwise cyclonic swirl, causing moisture-laden surface air to spiral
upward around the hurricane's eye. As it rises, the moisture condenses out,
freeing latent heat, which increases wind force. The stronger the wind, the more
uplift of moisture, which in turn releases more energy.

Because a hurricane's "heat pump" depends on warm, moist air, it tends to lose
energy over dry land; at the same time, wind speed is slowed by friction from
irregular terrain.

Typically, Andrew lost some of its power as it crossed Florida. But as of
yesterday afternoon, it had regained sustained winds of 140 mph as it headed
across the warmer waters of the gulf, according to Frank Lepore, a spokesman for
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Early this morning, Andrew
was traveling at 18 mph and was expected to hit the Gulf Coast perhaps as early
as tonight.

Though Jarrell said he was "astonished" at the amount of damage Andrew caused,
particularly south of Miami, he said "we've got a lot to be thankful for" with
the smaller than expected storm surge.

"It could have been worse," agreed Herbert Saffir, a consulting structural
engineer who developed the hurricane scale with Simpson and who lives just a few
miles from where the center of Hurricane Andrew hit.

Saffir, who was responsible for development of Miami's tough building codes
following a series of hurricanes in the 1940s, is still making recommendations
to mitigate the impact of storms like Andrew.

Just three weeks ago, he wrote the National Hurricane Center advising agency
officials that some of their rooftop equipment might be susceptible to hurricane
damage. Early yesterday morning, Andrew roared over the center in Coral Gables,
damaging a radar disk on the roof of the building.

Some of South Florida's palm trees are likely to have been killed by the storm,
even if they were not blown over. Horticulturalists say palms are unusually
vulnerable to wind damage because they grow and sprout fronds only from the
uppermost tip, or crown, of the trunk. If winds rip off enough fronds to
dislodge the crown, the tree will die. But if fronds are torn off or broken
without damaging the crown, it can sprout new fronds.

Coconut palms with curving trunks, once the trademark of South Florida before a
disease killed off most of them, are the products of hurricanes. High winds and
storm-caused erosion can tip them into positions from which the crown gradually
curves skyward again.

Staff writer Boyce Rensberger contributed to this report.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

GRAPHIC: MAP, ANDREW'S SWATH ACROSS FLORIDA, LARRY FOGEL; ILLUSTRATION, DAVE
COOK; ILLUSTRATION, TWP; ILLUSTRATION, JOHNSTONE QUINAN

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS, LIST

                       Copyright 1992 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 450 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 23, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

METEOROLOGIST PREDICTED PATTERN OF HURRICANES

BYLINE: By WALTER SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 690 words


Last June a meteorologist at Colorado State University, using statistical
analyses of several global weather patterns, made a relatively accurate
prediction of hurricanes and tropical storms that originated over the Atlantic
Ocean this year.

The meteorologist, Dr. William M. Gray, predicted that this season 11 storms
sufficiently intense to be assigned names would form in the Atlantic and that
eight would evolve into full-fledged hurricanes.

Although his unusual effort to make a long-term forecast of hurricanes is
experimental, its outcome is encouraging to meterologists.

His analysis differed from established approaches in its reliance on such global
influences as a hypothetical effect that El Nino, the vast climatic disturbance
that periodically affects the eastern tropical Pacific, would have on hurricane
probabilities.

Close to Fulfillment

With the appearance of Hurricane Kate, which swept across the northwest Florida
coast Thursday, his original forecast, made at the start of the hurricane season
in June, has come close to fulfillment. Eleven tropical storms have been
identified with names in the hurricane season, and seven have been designated
hurricanes.

Of those seven, all but one hit the mainland, four in the Gulf of Mexico and two
on the East Coast. Last year only one did so: Hurricane Diana, which struck
North Carolina.

Two months after his initial prediction, which concerned the total number of
storms rather than those that might reach land, Dr. Gray revised it downward to
10 named storms and seven hurricanes.

According to Mark Ziller, meteorologist on duty at the National Hurricane Center
in Coral Gables, Fla., only in 1909 and 1916 have as many as eight such storms
reached the mainland.

However, this year's total number of tropical storms and hurricanes, including
those that never reached land, was not much higher than usual. Based on a
century of weather records, the average number of storms forming in the Atlantic
is 10 full-fledged tropical storms, of which six become hurricanes.

Effect of the Atmosphere

For reasons not fully understood, Mr. Ziller said, the general circulation of
the atmosphere sometimes keeps the storms off shore and, at other times, draws
them toward land.

Both the number of storms and their paths vary considerably from year to year,
he pointed out. The totals in 1982 and 1983 were only half normal. In 1984 names
were assigned to 12 of them, although only one reached the mainland. In only two
years, 1909 and 1916, was the mainland hit by eight hurricanes or tropical
storms.

In the 1950's and 1960's hurricanes tended to reach the East Coast, whereas in
the previous two decades they traveled farther west.

Dr. Gray was in Thailand yesterday and could not be reached for comment but Dr.
Robert T. Merrill, a National Research Council fellow who worked with him on the
forecasts, said they were based on several independent criteria.

One is an tendency of hurricanes to occur less frequently when there is an El
Nino, or radical shift in tropical ocean and air currents that leads to warming
of surface waters in the eastern Pacific Ocean.

Winds Above Equator

Another criterion is the status of winds 65,000 to 100,000 feet above the
Equator, whose direction alternates between easterly and westerly in a 26-month
cycle. Hurricanes are apparently more frequent when the direction is westward.

The same is thought to be true of periods when average sea level air pressure
over the Gulf of Mexico and Mediterranean Sea is low. Another factor thought to
favor hurricanes is when westerly winds near the top of the lower atmosphere, or
troposphere, become unusually weak.

While the underlying factors that determine atmospheric circulation, and hence
storm paths, are not understood, hurricane specialists said yesterday that the
immediate control is exerted by the wavelike pattern of air flow across the
United States, like a great, meandering river. If it lies farther west than
normal it will entice storms toward the Gulf. If it lies sufficiently far to the
east, it will keep the storms entirely clear of the continent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map showing paths of hurricanes that passed through Gulf of Mexico this
season (NYT/Nov. 23, 1985)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 451 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 16, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hurricane Batters Virgin Islands With Nearly 100 M.P.H. Winds

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 7;   Column 3;   National Desk

LENGTH: 485 words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTE AMALIE, V.I., Sept. 15


Hurricane Marilyn, the third major storm to batter the Caribbean in less than a
month, hit the Virgin Islands today, bringing heavy rain and winds of almost 100
miles an hour.

Residents huddled in shelters after preparing all day for the arrival of the
storm, which closely followed the deadly Hurricane Luis. Forecasters said they
expected the storm to continue to move northwest toward the 3.7 million
residents of Puerto Rico and to gain strength.

The storm became a Category 2 hurricane during the night on Thursday and could
become a Category 3 storm, with winds of 111 to 130 m.p.h., by Saturday, the
National Hurricane Center said.

Forecasters said it was too soon to tell whether the hurricane would affect the
United States mainland, although a weather system off the East Coast could steer
it out to sea, a pattern that has been repeated several times this year during
an unusually active hurricane season.

At 5 P.M. Eastern daylight time, the center of the storm was near St. Croix and
moving northwest at about 12 m.p.h.

Hurricane warnings -- indications that forecasters expect the arrival of a
hurricane within 24 hours -- were posted for much of the northeastern Caribbean,
including Puerto Rico. A hurricane watch, a less urgent warning, was in effect
for the eastern Dominican Republic.

In Puerto Rico, Gov. Pedro J. Rossello activated the island's emergency plan
this morning. The Luis Munoz Marin International Airport in San Juan was closed
at noon.

The Governor signed an executive order prohibiting restaurants and bars from
selling alcohol through midnight on Sunday after receiving reports of drinking
in public and in some emergency shelters.

The police reported that some people were swimming in the Atlantic Ocean late
Friday and vehicle traffic continued despite the government's continued warnings
that the hurricane could be more serious than the powerful Hurricane Hugo in
1989.

The Governor said some in Puerto Rico were dismissing Hurricane Marilyn after a
false alarm last week about Hurricane Luis. More than 1,200 people in the north
and southeast have been evacuated to emergency shelters, compared with 18,000
evacuees during Hurricane Luis, which only nicked Puerto Rico.

In the Virgin Islands, Government offices, businesses and schools were closed,
and boats were in hurricane holes and sheltered harbors as residents prepared
for the worst.

Hurricane Iris had threatened the eastern Caribbean at the end of August, but it
caused little damage as it brushed through as a tropical storm. But 10 days ago,
one of the most powerful storms of the century, Hurricane Luis, surged through
the eastern Caribbean. With 140 m.p.h. winds, the storm smashed Antigua,
Barbuda, Anguilla and St. Martin, killing at least 16 people.

In Puerto Rico today, lines formed outside grocery stores, some of which had not
had a chance to stock up since Hurricane Luis.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 452 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 13, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Storms Expose Florida's Vulnerability

BYLINE: By MIREYA NAVARRO

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1658 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Oct. 12


This year's Atlantic hurricane season, on its way to becoming the most active on
record, has pounded Florida with wind, rain and the realization that despite
what the state learned from Hurricane Andrew, it is still no match for Mother
Nature.

Hurricane Andrew, the most expensive natural disaster in the nation's history,
landed a single knockout punch on South Florida in August 1992, destroying
85,000 homes, displacing 250,000 people and causing more than $30 billion in
property damage. After the storm, Florida officials revamped their statewide
disaster response strategy, improved emergency communications and made each
county come up with its own hurricane preparedness and mutual aid plan.

Then came this year's hurricane season -- with 17 storms so far, 10 of them
hurricanes. And the succession of storms has exposed the state's most vulnerable
spots: an insurance market in crisis, inadequate construction, population growth
in coastal areas that hampers evacuations and increases the insurance risk and,
despite significant improvements, some weaknesses in disaster planning.

The 1995 season, which has also caused destruction in Alabama, the Carolinas,
Georgia and Texas and has hit Mexico and small Caribbean islands even harder,
has prompted renewed calls for a national disaster fund. In addition, it has
called attention to the differences between Federal financing for hurricane
research and aid, and that for earthquakes. While most earthquakes have
historically been less destructive, according to research by the National
Hurricane Center here, more money is spent to study and prepare for them than
for hurricanes.

"This hurricane season has, probably better than any other, shown that we can no
longer treat hurricanes and insurance and issues of development and zoning as if
they're acute problems" to be dealt with after each disaster, said Walter G.
Peacock, an associate sociology professor at Florida International University
here.

"These are long-term, chronic issues that can't sit on the back burner without
dire consequences," said Mr. Peacock, who heads the faculty committee for the
university's new Center for Hurricane Damage Research and Mitigation.

The 1995 season began with Hurricane Allison, the earliest such storm to come
ashore in the United States in more than a century. That storm hit Florida's
Gulf Coast in June, only five days into the season, and caught many residents
without supplies or an escape plan.

In August, Hurricane Erin spared South Florida but threatened it long enough to
uncover flawed preparation plans in Dade County shelters, causing the downfall
of an emergency manager who had been regarded as a hero in Hurricane Andrew.

And Hurricane Opal, which intensified in a matter of a few hours on Oct. 4,
prompted a huge traffic jam in the Florida Panhandle as thousands of people
tried to flee.

Not since 1933, when 21 storms occurred, has the northwestern coast of Africa
lobbed so many storms into the Atlantic. Last year was so calm, with only four
storms and three hurricanes, that 32,000 Cubans set out to cross the Straits of
Florida on rafts and small boats.

But officials at the National Hurricane Center say the last two decades have
been abnormally quiet. Meteorologists expect more hurricane activity, and its
associated problems, over the next 25 years.

The improvements that Florida made after Hurricane Andrew generally served the
state well this year. Hurricane Opal, the worst of the season so far here,
caused only 2 deaths out of 20 that occurred in other parts of the Southeast and
10 in Mexico.

But the season also exposed Florida's remaining weaknesses. With few exceptions,
Mr. Peacock said, building codes have not been strengthened or residential
development scrutinized more to respond to the threat of hurricanes. State
insurance department officials say the storms showed that much of the
construction does not even meet current standards.

After Hurricane Andrew, half a dozen insurance companies went bankrupt, rates
increased 63 percent and the state stepped in as the insurer of last resort to
become Florida's third-largest home insurer. And the market remains in crisis.

In August, State Farm, the largest insurer in Florida, announced that it would
not write new homeowner policies. The decision resulted from the busy hurricane
season, said Steve Vogel, a company spokesman, who added, "This series of storms
reminds us how at risk Florida is."

Even at the National Hurricane Center, there was soul-searching after Hurricane
Erin hit the Florida Panhandle and killed 11 people. Residents accused
forecasters of letting them go to bed thinking the storm was headed for
Gulfport, Miss., only to wake up and find it so close that there was no time to
evacuate.

Robert Burpee, director of the hurricane center, said the forecasts were
accurate and gave "a fairly good lead time" to prepare. But Mr. Burpee added
that since that experience, state and Federal emergency officials now report to
the center whenever a storm approaches "to try to insure there's no
communication gap between us and emergency managers" who order evacuations.

The biggest concern for state officials is complacency and late public reaction
to a hurricane warning, which is the highest level of alert and is issued 24
hours before a storm is expected to hit land.

With Hurricane Opal, state emergency officials said, tens of thousands of people
between Panama City and Pensacola left at the same time, only after the winds
ofthe approaching hurricane reached 150 miles an hour. Those fleeing created
such gridlock on Interstate 10, the principal east-west highway, that many went
back or pulled off to seek other shelter.

Generally, only those living on the coast, in mobile homes or low-lying areas
are supposed to evacuate. But many others leave, too.

The season also highlighted the vulnerability of the Florida peninsula. More
than three-fourths of Florida's residents live on a coastline; in the last
decade, their numbers rose to 10.1 million from 7.9 million, out of a total
state population of 12.9 million. Recent demographic studies estimate that
Florida now has 14 million residents.

"People don't move to Florida to live in the middle of the pine trees," said Jo
Miglino, a spokeswoman for the State Division of Emergency Management.

In densely populated South Florida, the early warnings of Hurricane Erin sent
residents home from work and rushing to grocery and hardware stores. The storm
bypassed populous Dade County but exposed flaws in disaster planning,
particularly a lack of emergency food and supplies in shelters for the elderly
and those with special needs.

In the controversy that ensued, Kate Hale, the Dade County emergency management
director, lost her job. Ms. Hale had gained national attention shortly after
Hurricane Andrew when she went on television and demanded Federal relief,
asking, "Where in the hell is the cavalry on this one?"

After Hurricane Erin, she said it was difficult to deal with a large elderly
population during a hurricane when money for emergency programs has been
dwindling. "There were no resources to address the need," Ms. Hale said. "It's a
problem in all of Florida."

But state officials say most problems can be addressed with adequate planning.
This year's season, which ends on Nov. 30, has sent officials back to the
drawing boards to study ways to alleviate traffic congestion during evacuations.

State insurance officials, who said insured losses for Hurricane Erin were
estimated at $350 million and for Hurricane Opal at $1.8 billion, plan to draft
legislation based on recently released recommendations of a task force that
focused on how to avoid an economic catastrophe if another storm like Hurricane
Andrew should hit.

But some Floridians are rethinking their decision to live in one of the nation's
fastest-growing states.

"About half my clients want to leave," said Elaine Bell, a clinical social
worker in Homestead, which took the brunt of Hurricane Andrew three years ago.
"They are not only scared, but tired of having to keep an eye on the weather all
the time."



HOW IT WORKS: Beyond Jennifer and Jason

The Atlantic region hurricane season, which runs from June 1 through November
30, has been so active this year that for the first time it risks running out of
names for storms.

Storms are named in alphabetical order -- this season is currently up to Roxanne
-- but names beginning with Q, U, X, Y and Z are excluded because of their
scarcity. That means this year's list only has four names left: Sebastien,
Tanya, Van and Wendy. National Hurricane Center officials say any subsequent
storm would be named after the Greek alphabet, starting with Alpha.

Hurricanes were first named in 1950 but since 1979 the World Metereological
Organization has used six lists of names that alternate gender and are recycled
every six years. The 1995 season's list was last used in 1989. Only if a
hurricane is particularly devastating, like Hugo in 1989 and Andrew in 1992, a
name is retired for at least ten years to avoid confusion in legal actions,
insurance claims, studies and other documents that may arise in their aftermath.

The name lists reflect regional and language differences. In the Atlantic
region, which includes the United States, the Caribbean, Central America and
parts of South America, English, Spanish and French are spoken, so its storms go
by "Allison," "Pablo" and "Gabrielle." In the Central Pacific region, which
includes the Hawaiian islands, people brace for "Akoni," "Lala" and "Halola."

Names, which are given at the point a tropical disturbance intensifies into a
tropical storm with winds of more than 39 miles per hour, must be easy to
pronounce and politically and culturally sensitive, said Frank C. Lepore, a
spokesman for the hurricane center.

"You wouldn't want a storm named after Idi Amin," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The 1995 hurricane season has shown just how at risk Florida is
to such storms. In Navarre Beach, Fla., after Hurricane Opal tore off a side of
his house on Oct. 4, Ernie Heinrich tried to recover some of his possessions.
(Steve Mawyer/Pensacola News Journal)

Chart: "Retired Names"
Names of the most damaging or deadly Atlantic storms are not used again. A name
is retired to avoid confusion in legal actions, insurance claims, studies and
other documents that arise in the storm's aftermath. Chart lists the names that
have been retired and the year of the storm. (Source: Pennsylvania State
University, National Hurricane Center, National Weather Service)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 453 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Property and Casualty 360

                                 April 7, 2010

'Above Average' Hurricane Season Predicted For 2010

BYLINE: NU ONLINE NEWS SERVICE

LENGTH: 505  words



HIGHLIGHT: The Atlantic basin could be in for an above-average hurricane season
this year with four major hurricanes forecast to develop in the region,
according to forecasters at Colorado State University.


NU Online News Service, April 7, 11:40 a.m. EDT

The Atlantic basin could be in for an above-average hurricane season this year
with four major hurricanes forecast to develop in the region, according to
forecasters at Colorado State University.

The forecast team of William Gray, who has led the forecast team for 27 years,
and Phil Klotzbach, lead forecaster on the university hurricane forecast team,
released their predictions for the 2010 hurricane season, running June 1 to Nov.
30.

The team predicts 15 named storms will form in the Atlantic. Eight are expected
to become hurricanes, and four will develop into major hurricanes-Category 3, 4,
or 5 on the Saffir-Simpson scale, with sustained winds of 111 mph or more.

Long-term averages are 9.6 named storms, 5.9 hurricanes and 2.3 major hurricanes
per year, the team said.

"We expect current moderate El Nino conditions to transition to neutral
conditions by this year's hurricane season," Mr. Klotzbach said in a statement.
"The dissipating El Nino, along with the expected anomalously warm Atlantic
ocean sea surface temperatures, will lead to favorable dynamic and thermodynamic
conditions for hurricane formation and intensification."

Mr. Gray said the probability of a major hurricane making landfall along the
U.S. coastline "is 69 percent compared with the last-century average of 52
percent. While patterns may change before the start of hurricane season, we
believe current conditions warrant concern for an above-average season."

The team said current weather conditions have a number of similarities to early
April conditions that preceded the hurricane years of 1958, 1966, 1969, 1998 and
2005. All five of these seasons had above-average activity, especially the
seasons of 1969, 1998 and 2005, the team said.

According to the Insurance Information Institute, Hurricane Katrina, which
occurred in 2005, was listed as the most expensive catastrophe loss in the
United States in terms of insured loss at more than $45 billion in 2008 dollars.

Both Mr. Klotzbach and Mr. Gray predict the 2010 season will have slightly less
activity than the average of these five earlier years.

The team predicts tropical cyclone activity in 2010 will be 160 percent of the
average season. By comparison, 2009 witnessed tropical cyclone activity that was
about 70 percent of the average season.

The hurricane forecast team's probabilities for a major hurricane making
landfall on U.S. soil are as follows:

· A 45 percent chance that a major hurricane will make landfall on the U.S. East
Coast, including the Florida Peninsula (the long-term average is 31 percent).

· A 44 percent chance that a major hurricane will make landfall on the Gulf
Coast from the Florida Panhandle west to Brownsville (the long-term average is
30 percent).

· A 58 percent chance of a major hurricane tracking into the Caribbean (the
long-term average is 42 percent).

The team said it will issue forecast updates on June 2 and Aug. 4.

Detailed information about the forecast is available at
www.e-transit.org/hurricane.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2010 The National Underwriter Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 454 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                The Berkshire Eagle (Pittsfield, Massachusetts)

                            March 17, 2016 Thursday

The Most Destructive Hurricanes Since 1950

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 2270 words


Those who have survived a powerful hurricane know the storms have an enormous
human toll. CNN producer Kim Segal reported seeing extreme conditions when she
entered the New Orleans Morial Convention Center in the wake of Hurricane
Katrina in 2005. "It was chaos. There was nobody there, nobody in charge. And
there was nobody giving even water...We saw...people dying in front of you,"
Segal said.

Although hurricanes hit U.S. soil nearly every year (with as many as eight
within a calendar year ), those who do not experience their wrath may be unaware
of exactly how terrifyingly powerful and destructive a hurricane can be.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) defines a hurricane
as "an intense tropical weather system with a well defined circulation and
maximum sustained winds of 74 mph (64 knots) or higher." In 1950, NOAA began the
now-famous naming convention of tropical cyclones; and in 1971 the National
Hurricane Center developed the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale to classify
hurricanes based on wind speed, as a way to estimate likely property damage.
Hurricanes range from Category 1 (at least 74 mph) to Category 5 (at least 156
mph).

FindTheData found looked at every hurricane that made landfall in the U.S. since
the naming convention began in 1950. The FindTheData team then found the total
cost of damages for each hurricane, as reported by NOAA. The cost of damages was
then adjusted for inflation to 2015 USD and sorted to find the 30 most
destructive hurricanes. Hurricanes are a serious force of nature that cause
billions of dollars of damage annually. Some may think living along the
southeast coast of the U.S. is full of sunshine and leisure, but the rewards do
not come without their risks.#30. Hurricane Allen - August, 1980

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $3,566,000,000
Total Deaths: 269
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

According to NOAA's National Hurricane Center , Hurricane Allen is the only
Atlantic Basin hurricane to achieve sustained winds of 190 mph. These incredibly
high winds destroyed over 500 homes in the Caribbean, and damaged buildings
throughout Texas and Louisiana. Because Hurricane Allen was so destructive, the
name was retired from the Atlantic tropic storms list by the World
Meteorological Organization in 1981. #29. Hurricane Carol - August, 1954

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $4,069,000,000
Total Deaths: 72
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

On Aug. 25, 1954, Hurricane Carol developed from a tropical wave near the
Bahamas and slowly gained power as it headed for the northeast coast of the
United States. On Aug. 31, Carol made landfall on Long Island and in Connecticut
at peak intensity, before continuing toward Canada. Throughout New England,
150,000 people were left without electricity, while 1,500 homes were destroyed
and another 10,000 damaged.
#28. Hurricane Dennis - July, 2005

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $4,853,000,000
Total Deaths: 88
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

Hurricane Dennis waned slightly to a Category 3 hurricane when it reached the
U.S. in 2005, but it struck Cuba with Category 4 force and caused major flooding
and landslides throughout the Caribbean. In Cuba alone, Dennis caused over $1.4
billion in damages.
#27. Hurricane David - September, 1979

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $5,026,000,000
Total Deaths: 2,068
Category at U.S. Landfall: 2

Hurricane David was one of the most fatal hurricanes of the last century. The
storm hit the Dominican Republic with full-force, Category 5 winds. Entire
villages were wiped out, and over 70 percent of all crops were destroyed. Of the
2,068 deaths caused by Hurricane David, 2,000 occurred in the Dominican
Republic. #26. Hurricane Celia - August, 1970

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $5,679,000,000
Total Deaths: 28
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

Hurricane Celia hit the Caribbean and Florida, but Texas got the brunt of the
storm. Nearly 9,000 homes were destroyed, and, because of extensive damages, the
University of Corpus Christi had to permanently shut down. #25. Hurricane Alicia
- August, 1983

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $6,185,000,000
Total Deaths: 21
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

Another hurricane that mainly impacted Texas, Hurricane Alicia hit the Galveston
area with a vengeance. Alicia was an incredibly costly storm, causing an oil
spill near Texas City and displacing five feet of sand around Galveston's beach
neighborhoods. #24. Hurricane Fran - September, 1996

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $6,282,000,000
Total Deaths: 27
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

North Carolina was severely damaged by Hurricane Fran in 1996. 1.3 million
people lost power as the state was deluged with over 16 inches of water. Massive
flooding caused numerous automobile accidents and 13 people in North Carolina
were killed.#23. Hurricane Isabel - September, 2003

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $6,915,000,000
Total Deaths: 51
Category at U.S. Landfall: 2

Hurricane Isabel originated in the Caribbean, but the southeastern U.S. took the
worst of the storm. According to NOAA , the James River in Virginia rose nine
feet and numerous structures, including Virginia Commonwealth University, were
severely damaged by heavy flooding. #22. Hurricane Beulah - September, 1967

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $7,094,000,000
Total Deaths: 688
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

Hurricane Beulah gained Category 5 status in the Yucatan Peninsula, and reached
the U.S. at Category 3 strength. Padre Island, Texas, was hit with 18- to
20-foot waves, and over 100 tornadoes whipped across Texas as a result of
Hurricane Beulah. #21. Hurricane Donna - September, 1960

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $7,204,000,000
Total Deaths: 364
Category at U.S. Landfall: 4

Hurricane Donna swept through Turks and Caicos and the Bahamas before pounding
the southern tip of Florida. Parts of the coral reef near Key Largo, as well as
mangrove forests in Everglades National Park were destroyed. President
Eisenhower issued a state of emergency for Florida and North Carolina. Hurricane
Donna remains one of the costliest hurricanes to hit the southeastern U.S.
#20. Hurricane Gustav - September, 2008

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $7,274,000,000
Total Deaths: 153
Category at U.S. Landfall: 2

Hurricane Gustav hit Cuba with Category 4 strength, but inflicted the most
damage upon Haiti. According to Relief Web , 7,200 people in Haiti lost their
homes and 76 died due to flooding and mudslides. #19. Hurricane Frederic -
September, 1979

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $7,507,000,000
Total Deaths: 12
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

Fortunately, Hurricane Frederic did not cause a large number of fatalities
because many people heeded evacuation warnings. However, property destruction
was widespread. Over 80 percent of the buildings along Gulf Shores, Ala., were
completely destroyed.
#18. Hurricane Opal - October, 1995

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $8,411,000,000
Total Deaths: 63
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

In the fall of 1995, Hurricane Opal sprung up in the Yucatan Peninsula. Before
Opal was even classified as a hurricane, heavy rains and flooding caused over 50
deaths in Mexico and Guatemala.
#17. Hurricane Camille - August, 1969

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $9,168,000,000
Total Deaths: 259
Category at U.S. Landfall: 5

Hurricane Camille landed on the shores of Mississippi with violent, 175 mph
winds and a 24-foot storm surge. Over $6 billion worth of damage was inflicted
on the beach towns of Mississippi alone. #16. Hurricane Jeanne - September, 2004

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $9,608,000,000
Total Deaths: 3,035
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

Hurricane Jeanne is the 12th deadliest Atlantic hurricane to hit the U.S.
Fatalities were almost entirely isolated to a small region in Haiti. Over 13
inches of rain fell in the northern mountains of Haiti, and disastrous mudslides
ensued. Nearly all of the deaths inflicted by Hurricane Jeanne (over 3,000) were
in Haiti. #15. Hurricane Floyd - September, 1999

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $9,813,000,000
Total Deaths: 87
Category at U.S. Landfall: 2

Hurricane Floyd struck the Bahamas as a Category 4 storm. The winds died down as
Floyd hit Florida, but the torrential rains soaked the entire southeastern U.S.
Entire towns in North Carolina went underwater, and 51 people died in that state
alone.#14. Hurricane Betsy - September, 1965

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $10,681,000,000
Total Deaths: 81
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

Hurricane Betsy was one of the largest hurricanes ever to hit the U.S. According
to Hurricane Science , "Hurricane Betsy was the first hurricane to accrue
damages over $1 billion, and was thus nicknamed "Billion Dollar Betsy.'"#13.
Hurricane Agnes - June, 1972

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $11,904,000,000
Total Deaths: 128
Category at U.S. Landfall: 1

Although Hurricane Agnes was only a Category 1 storm when it hit Panama City,
Fla., heavy flooding in N.Y. and Pa., destroyed numerous buildings and crops.
Hurricane Agnes was the first Category 1 hurricane to have its name retired.
#12. Hurricane Frances - September, 2004

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $12,355,000,000
Total Deaths: 50
Category at U.S. Landfall: 2

Hurricane Frances occurred in September 2004, just before Hurricane Jeanne
touched down in Haiti. Florida felt the worst effects from Frances. Gov. Jeb
Bush declared a state of emergency and Kennedy Space Center, as well as Disney
World, shut down. Millions of acres of citrus crops were ruined, resulting in
billions of dollars worth of damage.#11. Hurricane Georges - September, 1998

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $14,129,000,000
Total Deaths: 604
Category at U.S. Landfall: 2

Hurricane Georges hit seven different countries: Antigua and Barbuda, St. Kitts
and Nevis, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Cuba, the United States and Puerto
Rico. The Dominican Republic suffered the most damage as thousands of crops were
destroyed and 380 Dominicans lost their lives.#10. Hurricane Rita - September,
2005

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $14,559,000,000
Total Deaths: 125
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

At the heels of Hurricane Katrina, Hurricane Rita ripped through the already
devastated area. The entire southeast was barraged with heavy rains and 100 mph
winds. Hurricane Rita was responsible for one of the largest evacuations in U.S.
history; over 3 million people were forced to evacuate their homes in Louisiana
and Texas. #9. Hurricane Irene - August, 2011

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $17,486,000,000
Total Deaths: 61
Category at U.S. Landfall: 1

Hurricane Irene's path of destruction stretched from Puerto Rico to Nova Scotia,
Canada. Irene is ranked as the seventh costliest hurricane in U.S. history,
causing $15.8 billion dollars worth of damage in the U.S. alone. #8. Hurricane
Hugo - September, 1989

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $19,108,000,000
Total Deaths: 107
Category at U.S. Landfall: 4

Hurricane Hugo destroyed 28 species of trees in Puerto Rico, as well as over 70
percent of the trees in an area of Frances Marion National Forest in South
Carolina.#7. Hurricane Charley - August, 2004

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $20,446,000,000
Total Deaths: 35
Category at U.S. Landfall: 4

The summer of 2004 was incredibly rough for Floridians. Tropical Storm Bonnie
hit the coast of South Florida just 24 hours before Charley, a Category 4
hurricane, slammed into the Florida Keys. This was the first time two different
tropical storms made landfall in the same state, on the same day. #6. Hurricane
Ivan - September, 2004#5. Hurricane Wilma - October, 2005

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $35,548,000,000
Total Deaths: 87
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

2005 was reportedly the busiest Atlantic hurricane season ever recorded. One of
the costliest hurricanes of 2005, Hurricane Wilma reached Category 5 status in
the Yucatan Peninsula and caused $7.5 billion worth of damage in Mexico. While
Wilma was not as strong when it entered the U.S., it did take out massive power
grids, as well as water and sewer systems, in the Palm Beach, Fla. area. #4.
Hurricane Ike - September, 2008

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $41,269,000,000
Total Deaths: 195
Category at Landfall: 2

Hurricane Ike was the most intense hurricane of the 2008 Atlantic storm season.
Ike proved to be a costly storm in terms of damages because it flooded giant
swaths of farmland in Texas. #3. Hurricane Andrew - August, 1992

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $44,754,000,000
Total Deaths: 65
Category at U.S. Landfall: 5

Hurricane Andrew was the worst hurricane in Florida's history. Andrew hit
Florida with winds of up to 175 mph and nearly 14 inches of rain fell in the
Miami-Dade area.#2. Hurricane Sandy - October, 2012

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $73,686,000,000
Total Deaths: 233
Category at U.S. Landfall: 1

Although Hurricane Sandy fell to a Category 1 storm when it hit the East Coast,
the results were catastrophic. Sandy touched down upon 24 U.S. states, and left
nearly 3 million Americans without power. Hurricane Sandy also put New Jersey
Gov. Chris Christie on the map, and in 2015, he claimed that Hurricane Sandy
prepared him to be president. #1. Hurricane Katrina - August, 2005

Inflation-Adjusted Cost of Damages: $151,655,000,000
Total Deaths: 1,836
Category at U.S. Landfall: 3

Hurricane Katrina is known for the extreme damage it caused in New Orleans when
the levees broke and over 80 percent of the city flooded. Most of the deaths
caused by Hurricane Katrina occurred after the storm passed, when the city
flooded and emergency support failed to reach thousands of people. FEMA and
President George Bush were heavily criticized for their perceived lackadaisical
approach.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2016 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 455 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The News Herald (Panama City, Florida)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              June 1, 2012 Friday

Hurricane season starts early

BYLINE: Jessica Mccarthy, The News Herald, Panama City, Fla.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 509 words


June 01--PANAMA CITY -- Mother Nature got a head start on the Atlantic hurricane
season, which officially begins Friday, as she spun out tropical storms Alberto
and Beryl.

But, those early storms do not mean this will be a busy season.

Dennis Feltgen, spokesman and meteorologist at the National Hurricane Center
(NHC) in Miami, said having two named storms before the official beginning of
the Atlantic hurricane season is uncommon.

"Having two storms before the official start is unusual but not unprecedented,"
Feltgen said. "Records go back to 1851, and the first time this happened was in
1887 and the second was in 1908. That is in no way an indicator for the rest of
the season, though."

Though neither storm this year reached hurricane status, residents still need to
get ready for the season, which ends Nov. 30, according to Mark Bowen, chief of
emergency services in Bay County.

A hurricane is a tropical system with sustained winds of 74 miles per hour or
greater, but the wind and rain aren't the only issues to be concerned about.
Storm surge, flash flooding and tornadoes can accompany hurricanes and cause a
lot of damage -- and storm surges can be especially deadly.

The National Hurricane Center said surges are often the greatest threat to
people in the path of a hurricane. Many of the deaths during Hurricane Katrina
occurred directly or indirectly from surges.

"The rule is run from water, hide from wind," Bowen said. "It's an old Red Cross
adage. You run from water because you can't survive a wall of water. Your home
is not built to withstand that. That's why none of our shelters are in surge
zones."

NHC defines storm surge as "an abnormal rise of water generated by a storm, over
and above the predicted astronomical tides." Bowen said there will be storm
surge with every tropical storm and hurricane; the real question is a matter of
where it is and how much water is involved. The peak of the storm surge is not
always located where the hurricane lands; it can be miles away.

Bowen said forecasting methods and technologies have gotten better; five-day
forecasts are possible now, whereas in the past, only three days were possible.
He said Bay County organizations such as the school district, emergency
management, the Sheriff's Office and others work with each other to prepare for
all possibilities.

But, Bowen said residents have to pay attention to the information sent out by
emergency services. He said they do everything they can to prepare the community
and help residents avoid disasters, but they should be prepared, no matter what
the season.

"I don't think people realize how delicate the fabric is we skate on every day,"
Bowen said. "People need to be prepared, hurricane season or not."

RELATED STORY: Public's misperceptions another hurricane hazard

RELATED LINKS

Bay County Emergency Services

National Hurricane Center

More storm supply information

Hurricane tracking chart

___ (c)2012 The News Herald (Panama City, Fla.) Visit The News Herald (Panama
City, Fla.) at www.newsherald.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120601-PY-Hurricane-season-starts-early-0601-20120601

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PY


                         Copyright 2012 The News Herald


                          FOCUS - 456 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                  thespec.com

                            April 21, 2011 Thursday
                                 First Edition

Laziness could spell hurricane disaster in Florida Lucky streak may just be the
calm before the storms

BYLINE: New York Times News Service

SECTION: CANADA / WORLD; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 534  words

DATELINE: ATLANTA


Behind Bill Read, on a slide showing the tracks of hundreds of tropical storms
and hurricanes through the decades, Florida was nearly hidden.

Last year was a blessing and a curse, the National Hurricane Center's director
told the National Hurricane Conference.

Even though the season's 19 named storms, tied for third-most of all time,
marked up the 2010 map like strands of spaghetti, not one hurricane struck the
U.S. mainland for the second consecutive year.

Why? A strong trough on the East Coast helped create an alley in the central
Atlantic into which one storm after another shot north and stayed harmlessly off
the North American coast.

Move things a little to the west, and "how much different the story would be,"
Read told the annual conference of scientists, planners and emergency managers
Tuesday.

Later, in a Palm Beach Post interview, Read said it's too early - and well nigh
impossible - to predict whether a similar high pressure system will sit in
essentially the same place day after day, as it did for much of last year, or
whether "somewhere in the middle of August, a slight weakening of it, will send
a big hurricane right over Florida."

Since Wilma struck in 2005, no hurricane has had a Florida landfall. In the same
five years, no major hurricane of Category 3 or higher on the Saffir-Simpson
scale, with top sustained winds of at least 180 km/h, has struck the United
States. That streak's never gone six years, according to records that date to
1851.

After that long a stretch, surveys show one in three Floridians has no hurricane
plan at all. And one state study said population turnover, short memories,
contentedness and laziness all add up to potential "dire consequences" should a
substantial hurricane threaten Palm Beach County and the Treasure Coast.

Federal Emergency Management Agency Administrator Craig Fugate called out people
who have the means to prepare and just don't, saying they harm more than
themselves.

"It's about responsibility. All of us that can have a responsibility to prepare
to the best of our abilities so we don't make the most vulnerable of our
community get in line behind us," he said.

And with the hurricane season's June 1 start just six weeks away, he said, "Is
the forecast for no hurricanes? We've got to get ready and the clock's ticking."

Colorado State University hurricane prognosticator William Gray noted there's
been a surge in major hurricanes, Category 3 or higher, in the past 16 years,
but that, except for 2004-2005, no major storm has struck the East Coast.

"We've been lucky," he said.

The hurricane region now is in a decades-long cycle of high hurricane activity.

"If the future's like the past, we probably have another 10, 15 years" of high
numbers of major storms, Gray said.

For hurricane centre director Read, "my No. 1 concern is the same one I had last
year": Haiti.

"Virtually nothing has changed from last year as far as the condition of the
people devastated by the (January 2010) earthquake. They're still living under
tarps," Read said.

"If we have a major hurricane come at Haiti this year, that's going to be my
biggest gut check. I don't know how that many people can be dealt with in a
crisis of that magnitude," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: National Hurricane Center Director Bill Read warns it's impossible to
predict hurricane paths. Andy Newman, The Associated Press

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2011 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 457 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Canberra Times (Australia)

                           September 2, 2008 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Terrifying force of nature unleashed

BYLINE: Steve Connor; in New York

SECTION: A; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 573  words


Hurricanes are one of the most destructively powerful forces of nature and their
existence depends on the surface temperature of the ocean reaching at least 26
degrees. An obvious question is whether Gustav is the result of rising sea
temperatures associated with global warming. The simple answer is that it is
virtually impossible to link any one weather event with climate change, yet
there is mounting evidence that global warming could be causing hurricanes to
increase in both frequency and intensity. Ray Nagin, the mayor of New Orleans,
said yesterday that the temperature of the sea surface in parts of the Gulf of
Mexicowas 32 degrees. This means that, as Gustav crosses the Gulf to the
southern US coast, it is likely to become much stronger than the category three
it was for most of Sunday.

Scientists have warned Mr Nagin that Gustav could easily reach category-five
status the highest on the Saffir-Simpson scale by the time the hurricane hits
expected landfall to the west of New Orleans . Hurricanes in this region at this
time of the year are not unusual. They form when the sea warms up during the
summer. All hurricanes begin life as a cluster of thunderstorms which gather to
form columns of warm, moist air rising above the sea. When the thunderstorms
become concentrated they create pillars of humid air extending from the sea
surface to the boundary of the atmosphere. At the base of the pillar, low
pressure sucks in more air and moisture.

Meanwhile, air at the top of the pillar cools rapidly, falling into a central
well that becomes the eye of the storm as the structure begins to spin under the
influence of the Earth's rotation. Tropical cyclones possess immense amounts of
energy which is taken in as heat and humidity from the ocean and released again
as the moisture condenses and cools. As a hurricane begins to move across a warm
ocean it can gather more energy, which is dissipated as soon as it hits land.
The energy of a hurricane is unleashed in two ways. One is high wind speeds more
than 250km/h in a category-five hurricane and the other is the high waves caused
by a storm surge a result of the low pressure that forms over the sea beneath
the storm. There is little doubt now that hurricanes in the North Atlantic have
become more frequent over the past few decades.

Although the past two years have been normal, 2005 the year of hurricane Katrina
was the most active on record, with 27 named storms, of which 15 were big enough
to be classified as hurricanes.

Of these, seven were Category 3 or higher on the five-point scale five more
major hurricanes than for a typical Atlantic season.

Indeed, Hurricane Wilma in October 2005 became the strongest Atlantic storm
recorded, breaking the previous record set in 1988. So far, 2008 has been
relatively active. There have been seven named storms, including three
hurricanes.

This time last year there had been five named storms and one was a hurricane.
Because of the generally chaotic nature of hurricanes, it was once generally
thought that their frequency or intensity had little to do with climate change.
Differences in annual activity were more likely due to local conditions. It may
be common sense to suggest that rising sea temperatures are likely to trigger
more hurricanes, but it does not necessarily follow.

A warmer atmosphere, for instance, may make hurricanes less intense by
diminishing the temperature difference with the sea. Independent

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2008 The Federal Capital Press of Australia PTY Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 458 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                         The Evening Standard (London)

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday

Lloyd's insurers weigh up warning of six big storms

BYLINE: BILL CONDIE

SECTION: A MERGE; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 446 words


LLOYD'S insurance market is assessing a new warning that the hurricane season
starting next month could pound the southern US with six major storms.

With 16 hurricanes predicted overall, the outcome would not be as bad as the
disastrous 2005 season but the threat is higher than usual. The new forecasts
from the National Hurricane Centre are based on temperatures in the Atlantic.

While meteorologists say the water is not as warm as it was this time last year,
making it less likely that tropical storms will develop into hurricanes, the
threat remains higher than average. US energy infrastructure is still recovering
from damage caused by last year's storms when the Gulf Coast was smashed by
Hurricane Katrina, the worst of last year's record 28 named storms, 15 of which
were hurricanes.

That led to a difficult year for Lloyd's, which has been hit for claims
totalling more than Pounds 4.5 billion in the past two years, with Pounds 3.3
billion of that in 2005. Although predictions of hurricanes have become much
more accurate in recent years, meteorologists are unable to say just where or
when storms may strike the coast.

Predictions for the Atlantic Basin, which includes the Caribbean and Gulf of
Mexico, are the total number of storms that could hit land anywhere between the
Outer Banks of North Carolina, the Florida Keys and the oil industry's heartland
of the Gulf Coast.

Lloyd's would face its biggest bills should a major hurricane hit the densely
populated Miami area or the rigs and refineries in the Gulf of Mexico. It has
said it is already working out its own loss-modelling probabilities and predicts
"an active Atlantic hurricane season".

The latest predictions pushed US crude prices back over $70 a barrel in Asian
trade today. They back up research last month by Colorado State University.
Forecasters there said there could be nine hurricanes in the coming season, five
of them intense, and 17 named storms. They also predicted a 47% chance that a
major hurricane would hit the Gulf Coast between north-west Florida and
Brownsville, Texas - the heart of the Gulf 's oil-producing zone.

Historical trends show hurricane seasons worsening. They were relatively mild
from the 1970s to 1994 but since then all but two years have been above normal
as the Atlantic goes through the part of a 20-year cycle that brings the
strongest risk of storms.

Between 1995 and 2005, the Atlantic season has averaged 15 named storms, just
over eight named hurricanes and four major hurricanes a year. From 1971 to 1994,
there were an average of 8.5 named storms, five hurricanes and just over one
major hurricane. The Atlantic hurricane season runs from 1 June to 30 November.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 459 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            The Independent (London)

                           December 7, 2005 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

Science & Technology: The gathering storm;
This year's hurricane season shattered records for frequency and ferocity. And
it's going to get worse, some scientists say. But others aren't so sure.

BYLINE: Steve Connor reports

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 42, 43

LENGTH: 1319 words


It was the year of the hurricane. It was also the year when scientists said that
global warming can increase the intensity of hurricanes. But it was not the year
when everyone could agree that hurricane Katrina, which devastated New Orleans
in August, was at least in part the result of global warming brought on by
emissions of man-made greenhouse gases.

The 2005 hurricane season is now officially rated as the busiest on record by
the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The 2005 season
included 26 named storms, of which 13 grew big enough to be classified as
hurricanes. Of these, seven turned out to be major hurricanes of category three
or higher on the five-point Saffir-Simpson scale. This was five more major
hurricanes than average for a typical Atlantic season. Hurricane Wilma in
October became the strongest Atlantic storm ever recorded, breaking the previous
record set in 1988.

It wasn't just strength, it was frequency. For the first time since 1953, when
scientists started to name tropical Atlantic storms, letters of the Greek
alphabet had to be used because meteorologists had exhausted the original list
of 21 alphabetically ordered names. The final tropical storm, Epsilon, formed
over the central Atlantic Ocean on the penultimate day of the hurricane season.

'This hurricane season shattered records that have stood for decades " most
named storms, most hurricanes and most category-five storms,' says NOAA
administrator Conrad Lautenbacher. 'Arguably, it was the most devastating
hurricane season the country has experienced in modern times. I'd like to
foretell that next year will be calmer, but I can't. Historical trends say the
atmosphere patterns and water temperatures are likely to force another active
season upon us.'

The real record-breaker was Katrina, the most destructive hurricane to strike
the United States in living memory. More than 1,000 people died and some
estimates put the cost of repairing New Orleans and its flood defences as high
as $200bn (pounds 117bn).

Some environmentalists were quick to point the finger of guilt at global
warming, but not all scientists were convinced " not until some of them began to
look at the data more carefully, that was. Until recently there was a fairly
broad consensus among meteorologists that global warming could not explain the
general upsurge in hurricanes recorded over the past couple of decades. People
thought this current increase was just part of the normal long-term cycle driven
by changes to the Atlantic circulation system. Few believed that it was directly
related to an increase in sea- surface temperatures caused by climate change.

But then came a study by Kerry Emanuel of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in Cambridge who, in a letter published in the journal Nature,
described how he had formulated a new measure of hurricane destructiveness. He
compared changes in this measure of destructiveness, called 'total dissipation
of power', with the rise in sea-surface temperatures recorded in the Atlantic
over the past 30 years.

Emanuel found that he could link an increase in hurricane activity with rises in
ocean temperature caused by global warming and climate change. 'My results
suggest that future warming may lead to an upward trend in tropical cyclone
destructive potential, and " taking into account an increasing coastal
population " a substantial increase in hurricane-related losses in the 21st
century,' he says.

The study concluded that tropical storms are lasting 60 per cent longer and
their wind speeds are up to 15 per cent higher. 'This work implies that global
tropical cyclone activity is responding in a rather large way to global
warming,' Emanuel says.

It is not unreasonable to pose a link between hurricanes and global warming
given that sea-surface temperatures play a critical role in their formation. A
hurricane is a tropical cyclone, an area of intense low pressure in the tropics
surrounded by a violent, rotating storm. In the Atlantic, such phenomena are
called hurricanes, in the eastern Pacific they are known as typhoons, and in the
Indian Ocean they are known as cyclones.

'On the face of it, global warming can only make things worse,' says science
author Fred Pearce in the latest issue of New Scientist. 'The initial pillar of
humid air generally forms only when the temperature of the sea surface exceeds
26C. As the oceans warm, larger areas will exceed the threshold. And every
degree above the threshold seems to encourage stronger hurricanes,' he says.

When Katrina formed, the temperature of the Gulf of Mexico was about 30C, which
encouraged the view that in a warmer world we can expect more violent
hurricanes. Real life is more complex, however. A warmer world could also lead
to a warmer atmosphere and this could diminish the critical difference in the
temperatures between air and ocean that helps hurricanes to form.

Another way global warming could kill hurricanes is by generating stronger
winds, which could stir up the sea, thereby cooling surface temperatures.
Stronger winds could also disrupt the tall pillar of humid air needed for
hurricane formation. 'With all these uncertainties and contradictions, it is not
surprising that different computer models have predicted everything from fewer
hurricanes to more hurricanes as global warming kicks in,' Pearce says.

More fuel was added to the fire of the debate in September when meteorologist
Peter Webster of the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta and his
colleagues published data showing that the frequency of category four and five
cyclones " the two strongest types of hurricanes " had increased significantly
over the past 35 years. Globally, category four and five storms climbed 57 per
cent from the first half of the period to the second, they found. With the
characteristic understatement of scientists treading in a controversial area,
they conclude: 'This trend is not inconsistent with recent climate model
simulations that a doubling of carbon dioxide may increase the frequency of the
most intense cyclones, although attribution of the 30-year trend to global
warming would require a longer global data record and, especially, a deeper
understanding of the role of hurricanes in the general circulation of the
atmosphere and ocean, even in the present climate state.'

In other words, the evidence is mounting that global warming can indeed affect
the formation of hurricanes but as yet no one can say for sure whether this is
happening now. And equally no one can say for sure that Katrina was made worse
by greenhouse emissions. Previous hurricanes have after all killed far more
people " the East Pakistan hurricane of 1970 probably killed half a million.

Most climate scientists believe that it will take far longer to assess whether
global warming is having a real impact on the frequency or intensity of
hurricanes. Emanuel, for example, estimates that it could take a further 50
years to detect an unambiguous trend in the intensity of hurricanes hitting the
US. But whatever the long-term trend, it is clear that more hurricanes than
usual are expected next year. In the words of one NOAA scientist: 'We are in an
active hurricane era.'

How hurricanes form

All types of hurricanes start out as a cluster of thunderstorms which form as
columns of warm, moist air rise above the surface of a tropical ocean where the
temperature of the sea surface is above a critical threshold of 26C. If the
thunderstorms become concentrated they can form a tall pillar of humid air
extending from the sea surface to the high-altitude boundary of the
stratosphere.

The low pressure at the base of the pillar of air sucks in more humid air. As
the air rises, it cools and condenses, releasing heat that drives the engine of
the tropical storm. Wind speeds pick up, and the entire weather system begins to
rotate in a violent vortex centred around the eye of the storm.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Batten down the hatches: a hurricane crosses the eastern Pacific
(above); New Orleans is battered by Hurricane Katrina (left) SCIENCE PHOTO
LIBRARY/AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2005 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 460 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                           September 2, 2010 Thursday

Hurricane Earl bears down on Outer Banks, following well-worn path;
Hurricane Earl is only the latest hurricane to put North Carolina in its path.
The state has seen billions of dollars of damage since its founding.

BYLINE: Elizabeth Fuller Contributor

LENGTH: 454 words


Hurricane Earl is projected to brush the Outer Banks of North Carolina early
Friday morning. While the path of the storm should keep the hurricane's eye
offshore, the eastern edge of the state is likely to see heavy rains and winds.

Authorities evacuated Ocracoke Island and asked vacationers to leave the
northern Outer Banks in advance of hurricane Earl.

"We're sad that they have to leave," said Gray Berryman, an Outer Banks real
estate agent in Duck, N.C., who had decided to ride out the storm. "I am hopeful
that everything is going to be A-OK."

For North Carolina residents, this is nothing new.

The state has been hit or grazed by 100 storms since its founding, and has
averaged two hurricanes a year for the past two decades. Most don't make
landfall, but a hurricane's influence extends well beyond its immediate eyewall,
so their influence has been felt.

September is the most dangerous month for North Carolinians, with 41 of the 100
recorded storms. The second worst month for hurricanes, August has seen 31
storms since 1800. If they can make it through September, North Carolina
residents can start to relax; October has seen only 14 hurricanes, and November
only one.

The most recent heavy hit to North Carolina came from hurricane Floyd, which
made landfall just after midnight, Sept. 16, 1999. Hurricane Floyd was the
deadliest storm of the century for North Carolina, claiming 35 lives, mostly
from the flooding. The National Guard and the Coast Guard rescued nearly 1,700
people trapped by the rapidly rising flood waters.

Floyd was also the costliest hurricane of the century for North Carolina,
hurricane Floyd caused about $1.4 billion in damage to insured property (about
$1.8 billion in 2010 dollars), according to the Insurance Information Institute.
Hurricane Fran, in 1996, ran a close second, causing $1.3 billion of damage
(only about $25 million less than Floyd, in constant dollars).

That's just the insured property. Hurricanes Floyd and Fran also caused almost
$700 million in flooding damage (not all in North Carolina), paid by the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).

A big factor behind the rising cost of hurricanes is the rising number and value
of housing along the coast. In Dare County, for example, which encompasses most
of the Outer Banks, the number homes is up 21 percent and the median value of
homes in the county has more than doubled since Floyd hit in 1999.

North Carolina's coastal residents have taken steps to protect themselves. As of
June 30, North Carolina residents collectively held almost 180,000 "beach and
windstorm" insurance policies, worth $69.0 billion, according to the Insurance
Information Institute.

That's double the insured value residents held in 2004.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2010 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 461 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                             August 29, 2016 Monday

A hurricane and twin tropical depressions form in Atlantic: Why now?;
No major hurricane has struck Florida in nearly 11 years. Could that streak soon
end?

BYLINE: Gretel Kauffman Staff

SECTION: USA

LENGTH: 493 words


Hurricane Gaston strengthened into the first major Atlantic hurricane of the
season this weekend, as two tropical depressions also formed around the coast of
the US.

Tropical Depression 9, which formed in the Florida Straits on Sunday, moved
Monday into the southeastern Gulf of Mexico, with forecasters warning that it
could turn into a tropical storm later in Monday or Monday night.

Meanwhile, Tropical Depression 8, which formed west of Bermuda, is moving toward
the coast of North Carolina. That depression is expected to strengthen into a
tropical storm overnight, threatening to bring rain and high winds to eastern
North Carolina.

Hurricane Gaston, which reached category 3 status around the same time on Sunday
afternoon that Tropical Depression 9 formed, has moved northwestward into the
Atlantic, posing no threat to any land mass, forecasters say. On Sunday, the
hurricane reached maximum sustained winds of 120 mph, but is expected to slowly
weaken over the next two days.

The hurricane and tropical depressions come at the peak of the Atlantic
hurricane season during a particularly active year.

"We've had six named storms so far, that includes Alex, but [no] major
hurricanes yet," said Dennis Feltgen, with the National Hurricane Center, to
Florida Today. "For the number of named storms and the number of hurricanes, we
are running a little bit faster than an average year."

Florida has not been hit by a hurricane in eleven years, since Hurricane Wilma
in 2005.

"That was not only the last major hurricane to hit Florida but the last
hurricane," Mr. Feltgen said. "But that remarkable streak is going to end."

Though the Atlantic hurricane season technically began on June 1st, we're now in
the midst of the "season within the season," a period lasting about eight weeks,
from mid-August to mid-October, which is the most active - and dangerous - time
for tropical cyclones. This period accounts for 78 percent of tropical storm
days, 87 percent of category 1 and 2 hurricane days, and 96 percent of the major
hurricane days.

Why now?

"There certainly is no lack of disturbances throughout the entire six-month
hurricane season. Tropical waves are coming off of the coast of Africa roughly
every three days, and the very early and late parts of the year provide
additional types of potential seedlings," writes the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). "What's different, though, is the environment
that these potential tropical cyclones tend to encounter. Both dynamics (wind
factors) and thermodynamics (temperature and moisture) play a role."

If it looks like a hurricane may be headed your way, the NOAA recommends
familiarizing yourself with The Family Disaster Plan, available on the National
Weather Service or the American Red Cross websites, putting together a supply
kit filled with the essentials, and keeping track of storm and hurricane
activity.

This report contains material from Reuters and the Associated Press.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2016 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 462 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                           October 5, 2016 Wednesday

Hurricane Matthew: Florida preps for its first big hurricane in 11 years;
Hurricane Matthew is forecast to hit Florida by Thursday. What has the state
learned about emergency preparedness in the wake of hurricanes Wilma and Katrina
in 2005?

BYLINE: Zhai Yun Tan Staff

SECTION: Energy/Environment

LENGTH: 779 words


After tearing its way through Haiti and Cuba on Wednesday, the category 3
hurricane Matthew is predicted to land close to Florida Thursday evening,
becoming the first major hurricane to hit the state in 11 years.

The lull in major hurricanes is an anomaly for Florida, according to some
scientists. The longest time it has previously gone without experiencing a
hurricane was five years, between 1980 and 1984.

Governors in Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina have declared
states of emergency. South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley issued an evacuation order
ahead of the storm Tuesday to give 1 million people ample time to leave the
coast. The Florida governor also signaled possible evacuation orders ahead of
the storm.

"Don't take a chance. Leave before it's too late," Florida Gov. Rick Scott said,
warning residents to be prepared to take a direct hit. "We have to be prepared
to be hit by a catastrophic hurricane."

The National Hurricane Center forecast for the path of hurricane Matthew is
still in flux as of early Wednesday morning:

When a hurricane is forecast to take a track roughly parallel to a coastline, as
Matthew is forecast to do from Florida through South Carolina, it becomes very
difficult to estimate impacts this far in advance.  For example, only a small
deviation of the track to the left of the NHC forecast could bring the core of a
major hurricane onshore, while a small deviation to the right could keep all of
the hurricane-force winds offshore.  It will likely take another day or so for
the potential impacts of Matthew in the United States to clarify.Tropical storm
or hurricane conditions could affect Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina
later this week or this weekend, even if the center of Matthew remains offshore.

  It is too soon to specify what, if any, direct impacts Matthew might have on
the remainder of the U.S. east coast farther to the north.  At a minimum,
dangerous beach and boating conditions are likely along much of the U.S. east
coast later this week and weekend.

Lessons learned from previous hurricanes across the Southeast United States have
placed officials and residents on high alert. Recovery in the wakes of
hurricanes Katrina, which caused the biggest displacement of Americans in 150
years, and Wilma proved difficult and due to power outages and fuel shortages,
and, as The Christian Science Monitor reported in 2005, posed health emergencies
from backed-up sewers.

Governor Haley announced that state officials will reverse lanes on major
evacuation routes in South Carolina to provide cleared routes for residents to
leave. It was a lesson learned from hurricane Floyd in 1999 when the lanes
weren't reversed - and traffic on Interstate 26 became stagnant, delaying a
typical two-hour drive from Charleston to Columbia to a 24-hour nightmare.

Some airlines are allowing passengers to change travel plans if their trips will
be affected by hurricane Matthew without penalty.

To prepare for the storm, many residents emptied hardware and grocery stores of
propane for gas barbecues, batteries, plywood to cover windows, tarps to cover
outdoor furniture, and coolers for food storage. Since Tuesday, some gas
stations have been seeing long lines.

The hurricane has already claimed casualties: Torrential rain and severe
flooding killed at least five people in Dominican Republic and Haiti.

Even though the last hurricanes occurred a decade ago, Florida residents who
remember the devastation those storms wrought are scrambling to prepare for the
worst.

"I got scared because all that was left at Publix was just the pricey water,"
Simone Corrado, a resident in South Florida who lived through 1992's
catastrophic hurricane Andrew, a category 5 storm, told the Associated Press.
The hurricane practically leveled the nearby city of Homestead. "They really put
the fear into you here. On the television screen every few minutes is the 'beep,
beep, beep' storm alert."

Hurricane Matthew was downgraded from category 4 to 3 on Wednesday. But the
National Hurricane Center in Miami said the hurricane could regain strength into
a category 5, and it will remain a powerful storm at least through Thursday
night. It now has sustained winds of 125 miles per hour and was bearing down on
southern Bahamas early Wednesday, pummeling the island with high winds, heavy
rain, and a dangerous storm surge.

Early in September, Florida got a hint of what is to come as hurricane Hermine,
a category 1 storm with 80 m.p.h. winds landed onshore. It triggered a state of
emergency in some counties, but was downgraded to a tropical storm as it moved
inland.

This report uses material from Associated Press and Reuters.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2016 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 463 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            April 4, 2007 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Tropical forecast is fierce -- again;
Difference in 2007: ElNioo islonggone

BYLINE: Patrick O'Driscoll

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 507 words


DENVER -- This year's first predictions for the hurricane season, issued Tuesday
by a research team in Colorado, are identical to the "very active" outlook for
2006 that most forecasters got very wrong.

This time, however, tropical storm prognosticators say the El Nioo climate
pattern that blunted last season is gone. In its place, says veteran hurricane
scientist William Gray, are conditions much more conducive to a busy 2007 for
tropical storms in the Atlantic, Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico.

"Everybody busted last year," says Gray, whose Tropical Meteorology Project at
Colorado State University forecasts 17 tropical storms this year, nine of them
hurricanes and five of those of "major" force -- Category 3, 4 or 5, with winds
of 111 mph or more. "You turn over every stone and do the best you can. This El
Nioo came in and nobody caught it, it came in so fast."

El Nioo, a periodic warming of Pacific Ocean waters off the coast of South
America, affects global weather and can send more wind and storms across the
lower third of the USA and the Gulf. Its sudden and unexpected arrival last
August short-circuited what most hurricane scientists thought would be an
above-average year.

After the violent and deadly hurricane seasons of 2004 and 2005, residents along
the USA's east and gulf coasts were braced for more. But only 10 tropical
storms, five of them hurricanes, formed in the Atlantic in 2006. None of the
hurricanes reached the USA, and only two weaker storms touched the mainland.

El Nioo made a quick exit over the winter, however, and Gray and other
forecasters say an opposite phenomenon, La Nioa, appears to be setting up. That
could mean far less wind from the west to "shear" or knock down tropical systems
before they can turn into storms or hurricanes.

The Colorado team, led by Gray and researcher Phil Klotzbach, also forecasts a
74% chance that at least one major hurricane will hit somewhere on the U.S.
coast. Hurricane season  runs from June 1 to Nov. 30; the busiest period is
normally in late summer and early autumn.

Gray isn't saying this year will match 2005's record-breaker. That year, 27
"named" tropical storms, 15 of them hurricanes, including Katrina and Rita,
arose in the Atlantic. In 2004, four hurricanes raked across Florida.

Tuesday's forecast was issued as hundreds gathered in New Orleans for this
week's National Hurricane Conference, an annual meeting on emergency
preparedness, response, recovery and mitigation issues. One of their biggest
challenges: getting the millions of Americans who live on coasts vulnerable to
hurricanes to not let down their guard after last year's quiet season.

"Preparation through education is less costly than learning through tragedy,"
the new director of the National Hurricane Center, William Proenza, says on the
center's Web page promoting a national week of hurricane awareness next month.
Proenza is scheduled to present an overview of the 2007 season today at the
hurricane conference. The center will issue its own hurricane season forecast
next month.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Robert W. Ahrens, USA TODAY, Sources: Tropical
Meteorology Project, Colorado State University, National Hurricane Center (Map,
bar graph)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 464 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            August 5, 2009 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

El Nioo's quick emergence reduces hurricane forecast

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 407 words


The Atlantic hurricane season has gotten off to such a slow start that
scientists at Colorado State University, the nation's premier hurricane
forecasting team, revised their forecast Tuesday, bringing the number of
predicted hurricanes down to four.

The team now expects that 10 named tropical storms will form in the Atlantic
basin (which also includes the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico), with four
predicted to become hurricanes and two expected to develop into major
hurricanes, with sustained winds of 111 mph or greater.

"The main reason why we reduced our forecast is that El Nioo has come on pretty
quickly," says Phil Klotzbach, the lead author of the forecasts. El Nioo is a
warming of tropical Pacific Ocean water that can affect weather patterns around
the globe.

"El Nioo events tend to be associated with increased levels of vertical wind
shear and decreased levels of Atlantic hurricane activity," says Colorado
State's William Gray, who is in his 26th year of forecasting hurricanes. Wind
shear weakens or destroys tropical storms before they can form into hurricanes.

The previous forecast, issued in June, predicted that 11 named storms, five
hurricanes and two major hurricanes would form. A typical season sees 10 named
storms, of which six are hurricanes.

So far this year, no tropical storms or hurricanes have developed in the
Atlantic. Only an unnamed tropical depression formed in late May, which stayed
off the Eastern Seaboard, according to the National Hurricane Center in Miami.

This calm season so far isn't unusual. Although the "official" start to the
Atlantic hurricane season was June 1, the average date of the first hurricane is
Aug. 14, reports Dennis Feltgen of the hurricane center. He says that since the
naming of storms began in 1953, the latest the first hurricane formed was Anita
on Aug. 29, 1977.

So far this year, six named storms have formed in the Pacific, including
Hurricane Felicia, which reached hurricane status late Tuesday. Eastern Pacific
hurricanes seldom affect the USA.

Colorado State forecasters say the chance of a major Atlantic hurricane making
landfall this year along the U.S. coastline is 46%, compared with the
20th-century average of 52%.

"We will certainly see some activity this year," says Klotzbach, noting that
tropical Atlantic Ocean sea-surface temperatures have warmed since June.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will revise its forecast
Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 465 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            August 18, 2009 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Experts: U.S. not in Hurricane Bill's sights

BYLINE: Donna Leinwand

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 321 words


The first hurricane of the Atlantic season showed signs of muscling into a major
storm Monday as it churned northwest toward Bermuda, but it posed no immediate
threat to the USA.

Forecasters at the National Hurricane Center predicted that Hurricane Bill would
become a Category 3 hurricane by Wednesday with wind speeds between 111 mph and
130 mph. By late Monday, Bill was a Category 2 hurricane with 100 mph winds.

"If you're in Bermuda, you need to keep an eye on this thing," said Chris Dolce,
lead meteorologist for The Weather Channel in Atlanta. The storm is unlikely to
hit the East Coast of the USA, but "stranger things have happened," he said.

The Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30 and peaks from
mid-August to mid-October. The average date of the first hurricane is Aug. 14,
said Dennis Feltgen, spokesman for the National Hurricane Center in Miami.
Hurricane Andrew, the first named storm of 1992, ravaged South Florida when it
struck on Aug. 24.

No tropical storms or hurricanes developed in the first 21/2 months of this
year's Atlantic hurricane season. "Just because we had a quiet June and July is
absolutely no harbinger of what's to come," Feltgen said. "We've had three
storms that popped up over the last couple of days. Think of today as the first
day of hurricane season. If you don't have a hurricane plan, now is the time to
get one."

In Bermuda, "everyone's scrambling at the moment. When we hear Category 3, it
definitely gets our attention," said Beverle Lottimore, spokeswoman for
Bermuda's government. Hurricane Fabian, a Category 3 hurricane killed four
people in Bermuda in 2003, Lottimore said.

Ana and Claudette, the two other tropical storms that developed over the
weekend, dissipated Monday.

Ana became a big rainstorm that drenched Puerto Rico, Haiti and the Dominican
Republic. Claudette dropped 4 inches of rain on Florida's Panhandle before
moving into Alabama on Monday.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Mari Darr Welch, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 466 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            October 23, 2009 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricane alleys see bit of lull

BYLINE: Donna Leinwand and Doyle Rice

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 829 words


Although the Atlantic storm season has had some calm, experts say it's not over
yet

When a hurricane hits South Florida, the employees at Beach Ace Hardware, two
blocks from the ocean in Lauderdale-By-The-Sea, work until the sheriff's
department warns it is shutting the bridge that connects the beachfront town to
the mainland.

"Literally, within hours of the storm, that's when we close the store," general
manager Ed Huss says. "Until then, we're helping people get ready."

This year, Huss had plenty of hurricane supplies, but few takers.

"Nobody thinks about a storm unless it's here," says Huss, who has lived in
Florida for 35 years. "I don't even worry about it until we see something
coming. It's just another part of life in Florida."

Residents of the country's hurricane hot zone are experiencing their biggest
break from serious storms in more than two decades as the 2009 Atlantic
hurricane season winds down.

Two hurricanes have formed since the season began June 1, the fewest since 1982,
National Hurricane Center records show. Eight tropical storms grew strong enough
to get names, the lowest number of such storms since 1997.

No hurricanes and just one of this year's tropical storms, Claudette, came
ashore in the USA. Claudette formed suddenly in the Gulf of Mexico and moved
through the Florida Panhandle Aug. 16 and 17.

"It's not over yet. Do not let your guard down," says Dennis Feltgen, spokesman
for the National Hurricane Center in Miami. "Do not start raiding your hurricane
supplies."

Hurricane season ends Nov. 30, but peaks from late August until mid-October. A
tropical storm is an organized system of strong thunderstorms and wind 39 mph to
73 mph. To be a hurricane, winds must exceed 73 mph.

Meteorologists are watching one disturbance off the Central American coast and
another near the Bahamas. Both have less than a 30% chance of becoming tropical
storms.

"It's been pretty quiet," says Phil Klotzbach, a research atmospheric scientist
at Colorado State University. "The primary thing to thank is the El Nioo."

Storms have fiscal impact

The "El Nioo" climate phenomenon -- warmer-than-normal water in the tropical
Pacific Ocean -- produces a weather pattern that creates wind shear over the
Atlantic Ocean, Klotzbach says.

The wind shear -- strong winds blowing from different directions at varying
heights -- can tear apart the 60 to 70 developing tropical waves that come off
the African coast in an average year and can strengthen into hurricanes, Feltgen
says. In an average year, the Atlantic has 10 tropical storms and six
hurricanes, he says.

This year, Hurricane Bill whipped by Bermuda on Aug. 22 before moving north off
the Atlantic coast. Hurricane Fred died Sept. 12 over the Atlantic Ocean.

Last year, eight hurricanes formed and three struck the USA. Hurricane Ike,
which drowned Galveston, Texas, caused more than $24 billion in damage in the
USA.

In 2005, one of the most active seasons in recent years, the National Hurricane
Center exhausted the alphabet as it named 28 tropical storms.

That year, on Oct. 24, Wilma hit South Florida, and Beach Ace Hardware lost
power for 10 days. The store reopened on generator power, Huss says. A caterer
down the street cooked meals for his employees, who filled orders by flashlight
in the un-air-conditioned store, he says. Customers clamored for generators,
oil, propane, batteries and lanterns, he says.

Huss says he's grateful for the break this year.

"Even though there's a little boost for us during a hurricane, it's so
detrimental to the economy as a whole in South Florida, it's just not what we
need," Huss says.

Still had other disasters

Insurers will use the respite to rebuild their reserves after paying out more
than $90 billion in hurricane claims over the past decade, says Marguerite
Tortorello, spokeswoman for the Property Casualty Insurers Association of
America, a trade association.

Consumers might see a slight drop in rates or smaller rate increases than in
past years, says Don Griffin, a vice president of the association.

Craig Fugate, director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, said Pacific
storms, including a tsunami that hit American Samoa, wildfires, flooding and
tornadoes kept FEMA's disaster experts busy even as the hurricanes gave them a
breather.

He urged Americans to use their downtime to devise family plans that could take
them through any emergency. In Florida, he says, hurricanes get all the
attention, but it was a tornado that killed 21 people in Lake County in Central
Florida on Feb. 2, 2007.

People should plan how they will contact family members, decide where to meet if
they are separated, review their insurance and ensure they have emergency
supplies of food, water, medication, batteries and other essentials on hand, he
says.

"The things you do to get prepared for a big disaster are the things that would
save lives in another situation -- a house fire, a tornado, a flood," Fugate
says. "What happens to you and your family? Are you ready?"

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Julie Snider, USA TODAY, Sources: Atlantic Oceanographic
and Meteorological Laboratory
National Hurricane Center (Bar graph)
PHOTO, B/W, Sean M. Fitzgerald, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 467 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            November 29, 2010 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

2010 hurricanes steered clear of U.S. landfalls;
Half went 'right,' half went 'left'

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 491 words


For the first time in recorded history, 12 hurricanes formed this year in the
Atlantic basin without a single one making landfall in the United States,
according to experts at Colorado State University.

"The U.S. was extremely lucky," Colorado State meteorologist William Gray says.

The six-month hurricane season officially ends Tuesday.

"There was only a 2% or 3% chance of getting this many hurricanes and not having
one hit the U.S.," says Gray, who has been making annual forecasts since 1984.

Basically, half of them went to the "right," curving out into the Atlantic
Ocean, he says, and half went to the "left," into the Caribbean Sea.

"During the peak of the 2010 season, it turned out that the atmospheric steering
pattern was as unconducive to U.S. landfalls as it can possibly be, but other
places were hit hard," says Weather Channel meteorologist Stu Ostro.

Tropical storms and hurricanes killed more than 250 people in the Caribbean and
Central America this season,  the Associated Press reported.  The deadliest
storms were Tropical Storm Matthew, Hurricane Tomas and Hurricane Alex.

"The pattern of low-pressure troughs and high-pressure ridges deflected most of
the storms to the east of the U.S. toward Bermuda or the Canadian Maritimes or
out to sea," Ostro says, "and south of here across the Caribbean and into
Central America and Mexico."

According to the National Hurricane Center in Miami, 19 named storms -- tropical
storms (which have sustained winds of at least 39 mph) and hurricanes (74 mph)
-- formed this year, including the 12 hurricanes. Five of the hurricanes were
major, a Category 3 or higher, with wind speeds of at least 111 mph.

An average season sees 10 named storms, of which six are hurricanes and two are
major hurricanes.

Since 1944, only two other years had as many named storms: 1995 had 19 storms,
and 2005 had 28.

Just one tropical storm made U.S. landfall this year (Bonnie), according to the
hurricane center.

The USA has not had a hurricane make landfall since Hurricane Ike in 2008. The
last time that the USA went two years in a row with no hurricanes hitting land
was 2000-01. Following seven major hurricane strikes in 2004-05, including
Hurricane Katrina, the nation has not seen a major hurricane landfall in the
past five seasons.

Forecasters had predicted an extremely active hurricane season. In June,
Colorado State's team of Gray and Phil Klotzbach had predicted that 18 named
storms would form, of which 10 would be hurricanes. "This was one of our best
forecasts," Gray says.

In May, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecast 14 to 23
named storms, of which eight to 14 would be hurricanes.

Colorado State will come out with its first seasonal prediction for 2011 on Dec.
8.

"Early indications suggest odds are for an active season in 2011," Ostro says.
"But keep in mind that regardless of how many storms there are, all it takes is
one to bring disaster to a particular location."

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Julie Snider, USA TODAY, Sources: Colorado State
University, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Bar graph)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 468 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             April 7, 2011 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Warm Atlantic may fuel rough weather ahead;
Experts predict 16 big storms, 9 hurricanes

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 485 words


The Atlantic basin is facing a busier-than-average hurricane season, in part
because of unusually warm water in the ocean, according to a seasonal hurricane
forecast released Wednesday.

Colorado State University's forecast team, which has been issuing seasonal
hurricane predictions since 1984, calls for 16 named tropical storms this year
in the Atlantic basin, which includes the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico.
The team says nine of those storms will become hurricanes, with sustained winds
reaching at least 74 mph. It expects five to be major hurricanes -- Categories
3, 4 or 5 -- with sustained wind speeds of 111 mph or greater.

The average Atlantic hurricane season, dating  to 1950, has 10 named storms --
six of them hurricanes, and two of those major.

The forecasters, Phil Klotzbach and William Gray, say there's a 72% chance that
at least one major hurricane will make landfall on the U.S. coast in 2011 (the
long-term average probability is 52%).

Klotzbach says that unusually warm tropical ocean water in the Atlantic Ocean --
the fuel needed for hurricane development -- will contribute to the active
season. Also, the current La Nioa climate pattern in the Pacific Ocean, which
tends to favor busy Atlantic seasons, is still in place, although the team
expects the La Nioa pattern to weaken somewhat as summer approaches.

Insurance companies, emergency managers and the news media use the forecasts
from Colorado State to prepare Americans for the season's likely hurricane
threat. The team's annual predictions are intended to provide a best estimate of
activity to be experienced during the upcoming season, not an exact measure,
according to Colorado State.

"We remain -- since 1995 -- in a favorable ... period for enhanced Atlantic
basin hurricane activity, which is expected to continue for the next 10-15 years
or so," Gray says. "Except for the very destructive hurricane seasons of
2004-05, United States coastal residents have experienced no other major
landfalling hurricanes since 1999." He adds that this period -- when 9 of 11
years passed without a major landfall hurricane -- "should not be expected to
continue."

The Colorado State team tends to be conservative on their seasonal forecasts:
Since 2000, the team has underforecast the number of named tropical storms and
hurricanes five times, overforecast three times and been almost right -- within
two storms -- three times, a USA TODAY analysis shows. In 2010, the team
predicted 15 named storms and eight hurricanes. Nineteen named storms actually
formed, including 12 hurricanes.

Also last week, AccuWeather predicted 15 tropical storms would form this year,
of which eight will be hurricanes.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will issue its 2011
hurricane forecast in May.

Hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30. The first named storm in the
Atlantic will be called Arlene, followed by Bret and Cindy.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, Julie Snider, USA TODAY, Source: Colorado State
University (Bar graph)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 469 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              May 31, 2011 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Study: Strongest Gulf hurricanes ease near coast;
Even Katrina lost intensity, but weak storms tend to grow

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 528 words


Cool waters just below the surface of the Gulf of Mexico cause the strongest
hurricanes to almost always lose intensity before they hit that part of the U.S.
coast, according to new research. The findings could help scientists more
accurately forecast the storms during this year's hurricane season, which begins
Wednesday.

Most of the strongest hurricanes have decreased in intensity just before hitting
the Gulf Coast, where two-thirds of all hurricanes to hit land in the USA have
struck in the past 30 years, according to a study from the Journal of Weather
and Forecasting. (The other third hit the Atlantic coast.)

As disastrous as it was, "even Hurricane Katrina wasn't as bad as it could have
been," says study co-author Mark DeMaria of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. Katrina was a Category 5 hurricane with winds of 175 mph in the
Gulf but made landfall in 2005 as a Category 3 with a wind speed of 125 mph.

Overall, of the 12 most powerful hurricanes (Categories 3-5) in the Gulf between
1979 and 2008, including Katrina, 10 weakened during the 12 hours before making
landfall, DeMaria reports.

"It's something special about the Gulf of Mexico," DeMaria says. "In the center
of the Gulf, deep, warm water comes out of the tropics, but closer to the
northern Gulf Coast, warm water does not extend as deep below the surface."

Hurricanes need warm water to maintain their power, says the study's lead
author, Ed Rappaport, deputy director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami.

"When hurricanes move over that water, high surface winds tend to mix cooler
water up to the surface, which can lessen a storm's intensity," DeMaria adds.

Researchers also found another factor that causes big hurricanes to weaken:
strong upper-level winds that storms encounter while approaching the Gulf Coast.

"We looked at all the Gulf of Mexico storms that made landfall on the U.S. Gulf
Coast from 1979-2008," Rappaport says. This  included not only hurricanes but
also weaker tropical storms and tropical depressions.

The study found that although stronger hurricanes tend to weaken shortly before
making landfall, weaker Gulf hurricanes tend to strengthen before landfall. Of
the 17 weaker (Category 1-2) Gulf hurricanes researchers studied, 11
strengthened before making landfall.

DeMaria attributes that pattern to a combination of atmospheric and oceanic
conditions in the northern Gulf  such as sea-surface temperatures and
upper-level winds  that cause most hurricanes to make landfall as strong
Category 2s or weak Category 3s.

"This study confirms the perceptions that forecasters have had over the years,"
Rappaport says.

The authors emphasize that while these patterns are the most common, not every
storm follows them.  Atmospheric and oceanic conditions can combine  to allow a
strong hurricane to remain strong or even strengthen as it approaches the coast.
Their study also provides guidance to forecasters on when to expect such an
occurrence.

Results of the study should have immediate benefits: "National Hurricane Center
forecasters can begin applying these results to their forecast process for these
important storms right away," Rappaport says.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 470 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             April 12, 2013 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

'Sandy' swept from list of hurricane names

BYLINE: Cara Richardson, and Donna Leinwand Leger, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 318 words


There will never again be another Hurricane Sandy -- at least, in name.

The World Meteorological Organization has retired the name "Sandy" from the
official list of Atlantic hurricane names.

The criteria to remove a name from the list, which is reused every six years, is
that the storm had to be so deadly, or so costly, that the reuse of the name
would be "confusing or insensitive," said Dennis Feltgen, spokesman for the
National Hurricane Center in Miami.

"You'll never see that name used again," Feltgen said.

The alphabetical list, which alternates between male and female names, will use
the name "Sara" in 2018, he said.

The decision was made by a vote at a meeting of the World Meteorological
Organization's hurricane committee in Curaao. Rick Knabb, director of the
National Hurricane Center, represented the U.S. at the meeting.

Hurricane Sandy, which morphed into "Superstorm Sandy" and did much of its
damage after losing its hurricane status, made landfall as a post-tropical
cyclone near Brigantine, N.J., in October. Seventy-two U.S. deaths are
attributed to Sandy, and preliminary estimates put damage in the U.S. near $50
billion, which makes Sandy the nation's costliest storm since Katrina, according
to hurricane center records.

Hurricane Katrina hit Louisiana in 2005 -- the year the most names ever were
retired from the list, Feltgen said. "Dennis," "Katrina," "Rita," "Stan" and
"Wilma" were all taken off the list of Atlantic storm names that year.

The name Sandy, the 77th to be retired, was the only name retired for 2012. In
2011, Irene was the only name taken off the list.

The 2012 Atlantic hurricane season saw 19 named storms form, of which 10 became
hurricanes, according to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
records.

The Atlantic hurricane season starts June 1 and lasts until Nov. 30.  The
National Hurricane Center will release its yearly hurricane outlook next month.


LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: NATION

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 471 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            October 28, 2013 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricane predictions evaporate into thin air;
... or, rather, 'sinking' air, which may be why so few storms have hit

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, @USATODAYWeather, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 682 words


What happened to the hurricane season?

The predictions that were made back in the spring were quite ominous,  calling
for an above-average number of hurricanes:  Colorado State University predicted
nine,   while the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) said
seven to 11.

The Weather Channel and AccuWeather also predicted unusually active seasons.

Yet, as of late October, with only  weeks left in a season that ends Nov. 30,
just two hurricanes have formed in the Atlantic Ocean,  the fewest since 1982,
according to data from the National Hurricane Center.  For the first time since
1994, there have been no "major" hurricanes (Category 3 or above) anywhere in
the Atlantic Ocean.

"It's the biggest seasonal forecast bust we've ever had," said Colorado State
meteorologist Phil Klotzbach. "It's a huge surprise, since all  of the forecasts
were calling for an active season."

And while the number of named tropical storms and hurricanes -- 12 -- is about
average, the number of hurricanes and major hurricanes is well below average. A
typical season sees about six hurricanes,  three  major.

Dry air got in the way

So what happened? The top explanation is  an increased amount of dry, dusty air
from the Sahara Desert, as well as "sinking" air over the Atlantic, both of
which worked to suppress hurricane activity, Klotzbach said.

Sinking air, caused by high atmospheric pressure areas that force air down,
prevents storms from forming by making  air drier and thus more "stable," which
stops thunderstorms.

Wind shear -- a difference in wind speed and direction at various levels of the
atmosphere -- also worked to tear apart storms before they could  strengthen,
said hurricane center spokesman Dennis Feltgen.

"There were plenty of positive factors for above-average activity," added
Feltgen. "What was not anticipated was all the sinking motion and resulting
dryness -- factors that occasionally disrupt what would otherwise be an active
season, but which are impossible to predict."

"Nobody saw this coming," agreed Klotzbach. "No one understands why there was so
much sinking motion this year." He admitted  it's a huge forecasting problem
that he and his colleagues will be working to solve.

Feltgen said  two areas that were somewhat favorable for development this year
were the southwest Gulf of Mexico and the gulf's Bay of Campeche. "These areas
produced Tropical Storm Andrea, which made landfall onto the U.S. in early June,
along with Tropical Storm Barry, Tropical Storm Fernand and Hurricane Ingrid --
all of which impacted Mexico."

Indeed, Mexico has been hard hit by hurricanes this year, as the country has
been pelted  by storms from the Atlantic and the eastern Pacific.

Additionally, Tropical Storm Karen formed over the Gulf of Mexico in early
October, Feltgen said, but was torn apart by wind shear and dry air, and
dissipated.

The long-term drought of major hurricanes hitting the U.S. also continues: It's
been eight years since a Category 3 or stronger hurricane has made landfall on
U.S. shores, according to the hurricane center. The last was Hurricane Wilma,
which battered Florida in October 2005.

However, this is one example of why a fixation on hurricane categories may not
be practical, as powerhouse storms like Superstorm  Sandy last year or Hurricane
Ike in 2008 still caused catastrophic destruction, despite their lack of "major"
status.

Storms still possible

"It's too soon to know what the season's final levels of activity will be,"
noted Feltgen. "However, the odds that the season will produce the expected
numbers of hurricanes and especially major hurricanes are rapidly decreasing.

"While the below-normal activity thus far is welcomed, we hope everyone will
continue to be vigilant"  during the endof the season, he said.

"It only takes one storm hitting your area to make it a bad year."

Though the worst of the season is likely over, "it is possible we see a couple
of weak systems come and go over the next couple of weeks over the southwestern
Gulf of Mexico and the western Caribbean," said AccuWeather meteorologist Dan
Kottlowski.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphic NASA via Getty Images

DOCUMENT-TYPE: NATION

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 472 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             April 11, 2014 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Few hurricanes predicted, but keep fingers crossed;
3 hurricanes forecast for 2014 -- but past 2 forecasts were wrong

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 384 words


Top forecasters from Colorado State University predict a quiet 2014 Atlantic
hurricane season, suggesting that nine tropical storms will form, but only three
will become hurricanes.

The forecast published Thursday follows two consecutive poor forecasts: In 2012,
when more than twice as many hurricanes formed as had been predicted, and in
2013, when only two hurricanes formed after a spring prediction of nine.

A typical year, based on weather records dating to 1950, has 12 tropical storms,
of which seven become hurricanes. A tropical storm has sustained winds of 39
mph; it becomes a hurricane when its winds reach 74 mph.

The forecast was released by meteorologists Philip Klotzbach and William Gray of
Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project. The Atlantic hurricane
season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30.

Klotzbach said a predicted El Niño is one factor that led to their quiet
forecast. El Niño, a climate pattern defined by warmer-than-normal water in the
tropical Pacific Ocean, tends to suppress Atlantic hurricanes. In 1997, during a
very strong El Niño, only seven named storms formed, and only three were
hurricanes.

Gray's team was the first organization to issue seasonal hurricane forecasts
back in 1984; this is the team's 31st forecast.

This forecast is for the Atlantic basin, which includes the Caribbean Sea and
the Gulf of Mexico. Klotzbach said that of the three predicted hurricanes, only
one should be a major hurricane -- Category 3, 4 or 5 -- with sustained wind
speeds of 111 mph or greater.

The Colorado State team's forecasts are a mixed bag: Since 2000, the team has
forecast fewer than the actual number of hurricanes four times, forecast more
five times and been almost right -- within two hurricanes -- five times, a USA
TODAY analysis shows. Insurance companies, emergency managers and the news media
use the forecasts to prepare Americans for the season's likely hurricane threat.

For the U.S. coastline, Klotzbach said there is a 35% chance of a major
hurricane making landfall in 2014. For the East Coast, including all of Florida,
the chance of a major hurricane strike is 20%. The chance along the Gulf Coast
from the Florida Panhandle to Brownsville, Texas, is 19%.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will issue its hurricane
forecast in May.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphic

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2014 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 473 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             June 10, 2014 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricane luck will run out;
Protect America with structural security

BYLINE: Roger Pielke Jr.

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 724 words


In 1933, Richard Gray, a U.S. government weather forecaster, noted that Florida
had been hit by at least 37 hurricanes over the 45 years ending in 1930. During
this period, the longest stretch with no  tropical storms was only two years.

When the 2014 hurricane season officially began on June 1, the Sunshine State
had gone more than eight years without being struck by a hurricane. It was back
on Oct. 24, 2005, when Hurricane Wilma emerged from the Gulf of Mexico and
caused billions of dollars in damage in South Florida. In fact, Wilma was the
last Category 3 or stronger storm to hit the USA.

The 3,151 days and counting with no Florida hurricane and no major U.S.
hurricane shatters the previous records for hurricane "droughts," at least back
to the turn of the previous century. In fact, from 1900 through 2013, the United
States experienced a decrease in hurricane landfalls of more than 20%, and the
strength of each year's landfalling storms has also decreased by more than 20%.

Seasons highly variable

Even so, I'd caution against putting too much significance on these numbers, as
North Atlantic hurricane seasons are highly variable. In fact, the choice of
time period makes a difference. For instance, starting the analysis in 1970, at
the lowest point of 20th century hurricane activity, leads to an increasing
trend.

But make no mistake:  We can say with some certainty that there is little
evidence to suggest that U.S. hurricanes have become more common or stronger.
The recent report of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change agrees: "No robust trends in annual numbers of tropical storms,
hurricanes and major hurricanes counts have been identified over the past 100
years in the North Atlantic basin."

Arguably, we are living in a lull of hurricanes, at least in the context of the
past 100 years or so.

Residents of the Northeast -- New York and New Jersey, in particular -- might
disagree. In 2012, Superstorm Sandy resulted in more than $50 billion in damage,
and debate lingers over whether it was actually a hurricane when it hit
landfall.

It would be a big mistake to conflate hurricane damage with storm frequency or
intensity. Consider that the Great Miami Hurricane of 1926 resulted in $76
million in damage  when it devastated what is today downtown Miami. Without a
doubt, a repeat of that storm would result in much more damage, but how much?

Huge potential damage

Along with colleagues, I have conducted research to explore how much damage past
hurricanes would cause were they to strike today's population and development.
We estimate, for example, that the 1926 Miami storm would result in more than
$180 billion in damage were it to hit in 2014. That is almost twice the damage
of Hurricane Katrina and nearly four times that of Sandy.

We tend to have short memories when it comes to disasters. After 2004, when four
hurricanes struck Florida, and the record 2005 season that delivered three
tropical storms and five hurricanes, insurance and reinsurance rates skyrocketed
as many thought that we had entered a "new normal."

Today, by contrast, there is strong downward pressure on rates as a shortage of
damaging hurricanes has contributed to a glut of capital available to backstop
hurricane risk.

Whether there are climatological reasons for the lengthy hurricane drought or
whether it's just the result of randomness, we can say with 100% certainty that
our luck will run out.

When it does, we will have no excuse not to be prepared. Writing in 1933,
government forecaster Gray observed, "If a building is properly constructed,
including the proper type of roof and roofing material, and is securely anchored
to the proper kind of foundation, it will not sustain serious structural damage
in a hurricane of major intensity." Strong buildings matter as considerable
water damage occurs to structures that are compromised by wind damage.

The U.S. has an excellent track record with respect to preparing for hurricanes,
so much so that the exceptions stand out. But we cannot let the current lull in
landfalls lead to a letting down of our guard. The next big one is coming; it is
just a matter of time.

Will we be ready? Are you ready?

Roger Pielke Jr., professor of environmental studies at the University of
Colorado, also serves as director of its Center for Science & Technology Policy
Research.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Joe Raedle, Getty Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2014 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 474 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             June 3, 2015 Wednesday
                                 FIRST EDITION

My fear: Too much calm before the storm

BYLINE: Alan Gomez, @alangomez, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 694 words


When Bryan Norcross tells me he's worried about hurricane season, then it's time
to get nervous.

I was one of the thousands of South Floridians who were glued to our flickering
TVs in 1992 when Hurricane Andrew was barreling down on us. Norcross became a
local legend by staying on air 23 straight hours on WTVJ Channel 4 as the storm
approached. With the limited forecasting technology of the time, Norcross and
his colleagues could tell us little about where exactly the Category 5 behemoth
would strike.

"Until six hours or so before landfall, we really didn't know that it was going
to be Miami-Dade County -- it could've been Broward County, it could've been the
Keys," says Norcross, describing more than 100 miles of coastline where Andrew
could have hit.

The 2015 hurricane season started Monday. Officials at the National Hurricane
Center showed off a slew of new forecasting technology.

The center's "Cone of Predictability," which predicts where a storm's eye will
make landfall, has become 40% more refined in the past decade. Improvements in
computing and satellite observations mean the cone will become more narrow,
something we could have used to predict Andrew's eventual landfall 30 miles
south of downtown Miami.

The center is also launching a test project to issue storm surge warnings for
each storm, just as the center provides hurricane and tropical storm warnings to
prepare communities for the oncoming winds.

But Norcross says the improvements in forecasting technology actually come with
a disturbing downside.

"Now there's an expectation that we will know where it's going to go," says
Norcross, now the senior hurricane specialist at The Weather Channel.

Federal Emergency Management Agency Administrator Craig Fugate puts it more
succinctly: "Technology is not all it's cracked up to be."

I've covered hurricanes all of my professional life. I zigzagged across Florida
to cover the four major hurricanes that hit the state in 2004. I waded and
boated through Hurricane Katrina's flooding of New Orleans in 2005. I've chased
storms from the southernmost tip of Key West to the swampiest stretches of
western Louisiana.

And the only thing I've learned from all those years of chasing eye walls is
that, despite the advancements in forecasting technology, we still don't know
exactly where they're going to hit or which part of them will cause the most
damage.

Hurricane Charley was supposed to slam into downtown Tampa in 2004, but a
last-minute change of direction drove it through Port Charlotte nearly 100 miles
south. Hurricane Dennis made landfall near Pensacola in 2005, but it was
Apalachee Bay 100 miles to the east that got nearly 10 feet of storm surge.

That's why the start of each hurricane season gives me, and a slew of government
officials and emergency responders, such heartburn. With Florida and other
portions of the U.S. experiencing a historically lucky period of hurricane
misses, people are already getting more complacent about the potential damage of
hurricanes.

The South Florida Region of the American Red Cross has seen its volunteer pool
plummet from 10,000 to 4,000 since Hurricane Wilma sloshed over Miami 10 years
ago. The state has seen 1million people move to the state since then, meaning
more people have little experience with hurricanes.

And now, the technological improvements by the hurricane center threaten to give
people living outside the improved Cone of Predictablity a false sense of
security.

I'm not some Luddite decrying the value of technology. We should applaud
improvements that help our forecasters better predict where a hurricane will
hit, how strong its winds will be and how much storm surge it will bring.
Fugate, Norcross and officials at the hurricane center all welcome the
improvements.

But they  warn of the limitations. They worry that the improved technology will
lead people living outside of the predicted danger zone to tune out, to get
comfortable. Now, 23 years after Andrew put an entire region on alert, Norcross
worries that fewer  will be ready.

"The biggest challenge," he says, "is getting people motivated to pay
attention."

Gomez is a Miami-based correspondent for USA TODAY

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Alan Gomez, USA TODAY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 475 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             April 15, 2016 Friday
                                 FIRST EDITION

Average hurricane season predicted

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 332 words


Top meteorologists from Colorado State University forecast a near-average
Atlantic hurricane season this year, predicting 12 tropical storms will form,
with five becoming hurricanes.

A typical year, based on weather records dating to 1950, has 12 tropical storms,
of which seven spin into hurricanes. A tropical storm contains sustained winds
of 39 mph. It becomes a hurricane when winds reach 74 mph.

Meteorologists Philip Klotzbach and William Gray of Colorado State University's
Tropical Meteorology Project released the forecast this week. The Atlantic
hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, though storms sometimes form
outside those dates.

Although El Niño, which tends to suppress Atlantic hurricane activity, is
weakening, water in the North Atlantic Ocean is unusually cold, which could also
suppress storm development.

Klotzbach said that of the five predicted hurricanes, two should be major  --
category 3, 4 or 5 -- with sustained wind speeds of 111 mph or greater.

Insurance companies, emergency managers and the media use the forecasts to
prepare Americans for the year's hurricane threat. The  annual predictions
provide a best estimate of activity during the upcoming season, not an exact
measure, according to Colorado State.

Last year, the team predicted seven named storms, with three becoming
hurricanes. The season ended with 11 named storms, of which four were
hurricanes.

For the U.S. coastline, Klotzbach said there is a 50% chance of a major
hurricane making landfall in 2016. For the East Coast, including all of Florida,
the chance is 30%. The chance along the Gulf Coast from the Florida Panhandle to
Brownsville, Texas, is 29%.

AccuWeather, in its hurricane forecast  last week, predicted 14 named storms
would form, of which 8 will be hurricanes. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration will issue its  forecast in May. The first named storm of the
Atlantic hurricane season was Alex, an unusual January hurricane. This forecast
does not include Alex.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo 2010 AFP/Getty Images File Photo

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2016 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 476 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           September 19, 2017 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Yes, this hurricane season is unusually awful;
As Maria blusters, there are still two more months to go

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, @usatodayweather, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 551 words


The already-catastrophic 2017 hurricane season shows no signs of letting up:
Hurricane Maria is roaring through some of the same Caribbean islands ravaged by
Irma, just as Hurricane Jose stirs up trouble along the U.S. East Coast.

And we still have more than two months to go.

The ferocity of the Atlantic storm season isn't just in your imagination. Thanks
primarily to monsters such as Harvey and Irma, it's one of the worst in years by
various meteorological standards.

For example: The hurricanes that have formed this year -- seven -- are about
double the average to date, as is the energy generated by the storms. This is a
statistic known as "Accumulated Cyclone Energy," and the number in 2017 is the
highest it's been since 2005, the year Hurricane Katrina hit, according to
Colorado State University meteorologist Phil Klotzbach.

There have been 30 days this year in which hurricanes have spun in the Atlantic
-- which is also more than double the average and the most since 2004, Klotzbach
said.

Another record set in 2017: For the first year in hurricane history, which dates
to 1851, two Category 4 hurricanes (Harvey and Irma) slammed into the USA the
same year.

In fact, there have been four major (Category 3 and above) hurricanes this
season -- the first time since 2010 there have been four by Sept. 18, according
to Klotzbach.

The average as of this date is less than two.

One of the reasons for the active season is probably a lack of dust blowing
across the Atlantic from Africa, which tends to have a drying effect on
developing storms, according to AccuWeather. The lack of an El Niño -- and its
shearing winds that can tear apart nascent storms -- also plays a role.

As bad as it's been, some of this season's intensity is really just a blast from
the past.

Irma was "reminiscent of the great hurricanes that unleashed their fury on
Florida in the first seven decades of the 20th century ... and then for the most
part disappeared," Weather Channel meteorologist Bryan Norcross said before the
storm hit.

"Mother Nature's hurricane-output cycle has its ups and downs," he said, "and a
lull came along in the 1970s, '80s, and early 1990s -- Hurricanes Frederic, Hugo
and Andrew notwithstanding."

Especially in typically hurricane-prone states such as Florida, a race to build
along the shore went unfettered.

Americans became older, richer and more conspicuous consumers, Norcross said.
"The net result was exponential growth along the coastline -- a construction
frenzy, mostly without hurricanes in mind. Add in the expensive cars and gadgets
of modern life, and the damage potential has skyrocketed."

Beyond whatever destruction Maria or Jose might wreak, there are still concerns
about the rest of the season.

A large area of high pressure centered near Bermuda is forecast to continue
pumping warm, humid air northward from the Gulf of Mexico and the western
Atlantic, AccuWeather said.

Tropical storms and hurricanes that brew will get caught up in the flow around
this high-pressure area.

"When we get a pattern such as this, we usually have two to three named storms
in October and can have one in November or December," AccuWeather hurricane
expert Dan Kottlowski said.

The Atlantic hurricane season officially lasts until Nov. 30, but hurricanes
have been recorded as late as New Year's Eve.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphic

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2017 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 477 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                           Long Island Business News

                            September 8, 2017 Friday

LI lacking hurricane preparedness: LIBN readers

BYLINE: Jenna Macri

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 291  words


In light of a recent barrage of hurricanes barreling through the Atlantic Ocean,
LIBN readers largely agree that Long Island is not prepared to handle another
natural disaster.

That's according to a recent poll on libn.com. In response to the question How
well-prepared is Long Island for another hurricane? a whopping 65 percent said
not enough has been done to improve the region's hurricane readiness. Another 9
percent saw an even grimmer picture of Long Island post-hurricane, stating if
the Island is hit with a major storm, we're done for!

A full 24 percent of poll respondents said they feel Long Island is prepared for
another hurricane, explaining that if we made it through Sandy, we can face
anything. Only 2 percent called the region very prepared, and said hurricane
preparation has improved since the devastating 2012 superstorm.

LIBN readers' recent lack of confidence in the region's hurricane preparedness
is not all that surprising. In two short weeks, the nation has watched Hurricane
Harvey tear through Texas with alarming ferocity. And as if to put Harvey to
shame, Hurricane Irma has reportedly wiped the island of Barbuda off the map,
and is now poised to cause potentially catastrophic damage to Florida. And
Hurricanes Jose and Katia are currently brewing further east in the Atlantic,
certain to keep coastal areas on edge as the height of hurricane season
commences.

LIBN conducts weekly informal polls of readers on LIBN.com. The Hurricane
Readiness poll was open from Aug. 30 through Sept. 6. Click here to respond to
this week's poll question: Do you think DACA should be rescinded?



Click here for advice on how, when, and what to give to hurricane relief
efforts.



Copyright © 2018 BridgeTower Media.  All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 BridgeTower Media
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 478 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                           Long Island Business News

                            September 8, 2017 Friday

LI lacking hurricane preparedness: LIBN readers

BYLINE: Jenna Macri

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 300  words


In light of a recent barrage of hurricanes barreling through the Atlantic Ocean,
LIBN readers largely agree that Long Island is not prepared to handle another
natural disaster.

That's according to a recent poll on libn.com. In response to the question "How
well-prepared is Long Island for another hurricane?" a whopping 65 percent said
not enough has been done to improve the region's hurricane readiness. Another 9
percent saw an even grimmer picture of Long Island post-hurricane, stating if
the Island is hit with a major storm, "we're done for!"

A full 24 percent of poll respondents said they feel Long Island is prepared for
another hurricane, explaining that "if we made it through Sandy, we can face
anything. " Only 2 percent called the region "very prepared," and said hurricane
preparation has improved since the devastating 2012 superstorm.

LIBN readers' recent lack of confidence in the region's hurricane preparedness
is not all that surprising. In two short weeks, the nation has watched Hurricane
Harvey tear through Texas with alarming ferocity. And as if to put Harvey to
shame, Hurricane Irma has reportedly wiped the island of Barbuda off the map,
and is now poised to cause potentially catastrophic damage to Florida. And
Hurricanes Jose and Katia are currently brewing further east in the Atlantic,
certain to keep coastal areas on edge as the height of hurricane season
commences.

LIBN conducts weekly informal polls of readers on LIBN.com. The "Hurricane
Readiness" poll was open from Aug. 30 through Sept. 6. Click here to respond to
this week's poll question: Do you think DACA should be rescinded?



Click here for advice on how, when, and what to give to hurricane relief
efforts.



Click here for more from this resource.

Copyright © 2017 BridgeTower Media.  All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 479 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        Florida Keys Keynoter (Marathon)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune News Service

                            August 5, 2006 Saturday

Storm outlook improves: Forecast expert now calling for fewer hurricanes

BYLINE: Kevin Wadlow, Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 11965 words


Aug. 5--Hurricane season could be calmer than originally predicted, but that
doesn't mean quiet.

Researchers at Colorado State University have cut the number of storms they
expect this hurricane season, lowering the number of likely hurricanes to seven
from nine.

Three of the hurricanes could become major storms, down from the forecast team's
earlier estimate of five major hurricanes.

"The probability of another Katrina-like event is very small," said Phillip
Klotzbach, forecaster for the Colorado State University program founded by
William Gray.

However, the probability of a major hurricane making landfall somewhere on the
U.S. eastern coast, including Florida, remains at 64 percent, more than double
the probability in an average hurricane season.

"Whether they say there will be 17 storms or 15 or two, we are at the point
where it doesn't matter to us," said Irene Toner, director of Monroe County
Emergency Management. "We never let our guard down."

The 1992 hurricane season was very quiet, until a Hurricane Andrew devastated
much of Miami-Dade County. "All it takes is one," Toner said.

For Keys residents weary of hurricane threats, the Gray forecast could be a mild
relief.

Partial or full evacuations were ordered for Monroe County three times in the
hectic 2005 storm season, and Key West received its first storm-surge flooding
in decades when Hurricane Wilma came close.

"We're not reducing the number of hurricanes because we had only two named
storms through late July," said Gray, making his 23rd long-range prediction.
"It's a general erosion of a number of factors."

Those include Atlantic sea surface temperatures lower than expected, higher
barometric pressure, and stronger tropical winds.

The Colorado State center now expects four named storms during August. Three of
them could become hurricanes, with one a major storm.

During the peak month of September, two intense hurricanes could form from the
five predicted named storms. A major hurricane is considered Category 3 or
above.

"Overall, we think the 2006 Atlantic basin tropical storm season will be
somewhat active," Klotzbach said. "This year it looks like the East Coast is
more likely to be targeted by Atlantic basin hurricanes than the Gulf Coast,
although the possibility exists that any point along the U.S. coast could be
affected."

An average year sees 10 named storms, six of them becoming hurricanes. However,
the Atlantic appears in a multi-year period of more active seasons.

So far, there have been three named storms this year.

Tropical Storm Chris, which seemed aimed at the Keys earlier this week, has
largely broken apart and taken a more southerly course.

The National Hurricane Center in Miami is expected to issue its updated
hurricane-season forecast this week.

Copyright (c) 2006, Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon Distributed by
McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20060805-FK-0805-Storm-outlook-improves

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FK


                      Copyright 2006 Florida Keys Keynoter


                          FOCUS - 480 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        Florida Keys Keynoter (Marathon)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           September 2, 2006 Saturday

Storm forecast downgraded: Gray now says 5 are possible, two of them big

BYLINE: Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 361 words


Sep. 2--For the second time since May, noted hurricane forecaster William Gray
has downgraded his forecast for the remainder of the 2006 hurricane season.

Friday, Gray called for five hurricanes instead of the seven previously
forecast. Two of those could be intense, classified as Category 3 or higher
(winds of 111 mph or more).

In the spring, Gray, based at Colorado State University, had predicted nine
hurricanes, five of them major.

At the beginning of August, he downgraded that to seven hurricanes with three of
them Category 3 or higher.

So far in the six-month 2006 hurricane season that runs from June 1 to Nov. 30,
there have been five named storms. The biggest threat was this week's Tropical
Storm Ernesto, which had been a hurricane over the Atlantic before weakening.

When it passed over South Florida Tuesday night, all it really caused was rain
and wind not uncommon of a typical summer storm here.

Friday, Gray's team at Colorado State predicted a 59 percent likelihood that a
hurricane would hit the U.S. coastline in September.

Forecaster Philip Klotzbach, part of Gray's team, identified several factors for
the changed hurricane forecast, including higher levels of West African dust
over the Atlantic, a warmer eastern equatorial Pacific indicating a potential El
Nino event this fall, and dryer tropical Atlantic mid-level moisture fields.

The National Hurricane Center has also lowered its Atlantic storms forecast
since spring. In May, it predicted 13 to 16 named storms and eight to 10
hurricanes, with as many as six major ones. In early August, the hurricane
center revised that to between 12 and 15 named storms and seven to nine
hurricanes.

The 2005 Atlantic hurricane season set a record with 28 named storms and 15
hurricanes, including Katrina, which hit one year ago this week and devastated
the Louisiana and Mississippi coasts

Copyright (c) 2006, Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon Distributed by
McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20060902-FK-0902-Storm-forecast-downgraded

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FK


                      Copyright 2006 Florida Keys Keynoter


                          FOCUS - 481 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                          November 30, 2005 Wednesday

Record hurricane season ends today;
Another storm gathers strength

BYLINE: MAYA BELL, The Orlando Sentinel

SECTION: Z_NATION

LENGTH: 1796 words


After chewing up and spitting out records, the most active and destructive
hurricane season in U.S. history officially ends today -- but don't count it
over yet.

Forecasters christened the year's record-smashing 26th tropical storm Epsilon on
Tuesday, shortly before they gathered in Washington and Miami to discuss the
historic nature of the 2005 season. The previous record for tropical storms was
21, set in 1933.

Should Epsilon, which was not a threat to land, reach hurricane strength, it
would become the 14th hurricane of the six-month season. That would break the
record etched late last month by Hurricane Beta, which surpassed the previous
mark of 12 hurricanes set in 1969.

But even if Epsilon dissipates before day's end, the season will not fade away.
It smashed too many records, claimed too many lives and livelihoods, destroyed
too much property and affected too many nations to become a mere meteorological
footnote.

"Arguably, it was the most devastating hurricane season the country has
experienced in modern times," Conrad C. Lautenbacher Jr., the administrator of
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, said from Washington. "I'd
like to foretell that next year will be calmer, but I can't. Historical trends
say the atmosphere patterns and water temperatures are likely to force another
active season upon us."

But it will be hard to top this one. While shattering records for most tropical
storms and most hurricanes, the season exhausted the list of 21 alphabetical
names forecasters recycle for storms, for the first time prompting them to turn
to the letters of the Greek alphabet.

The season also produced:

 Three top-of the-chart Category 5 storms, breaking the record of two Category 5
storms set in 1960 and matched in 1961. This year, hurricanes Katrina, Rita and
Wilma all had top winds exceeding 155 mph.

The most intense hurricane ever documented in the Atlantic basin. Wilma's
central pressure briefly plummeted to 882 millibars, busting the benchmark of
888 millibars set by Hurricane Gilbert in 1988.

The highest number of major or intense storms, those classified as Category 3 or
higher, to hit the United States in a single year. Together, Dennis, Katrina,
Rita and Wilma combined to break the record for intense, land-falling storms set
by hurricanes Ivan, Charley and Jeanne last year.

The most extensive damage on record, mostly because of Hurricane Katrina, which
submerged New Orleans and devastated the Mississippi Coast. Insured losses from
the storm are expected to exceed $100 billion. When adjusted for inflation, that
more than doubles the record set in 1992, when Hurricane Andrew struck south
Miami-Dade County in Florida, and surpassed last year, when an unprecedented
four hurricanes pummeled Florida.

The third deadliest season in U.S. history, behind 1900 and 1928. In all, this
season's hurricanes claimed more than 3,000 lives, nearly half of them in the
United States, and most of those during Katrina's rampage. Hurricane Stan killed
about 1,500, most of them in Guatemala, after unleashing high winds, floods and
mudslides in Central America.

A record-breaking July. Usually a slow part of the season, this July spawned
five named storms, and two major hurricanes, the most for any July on record.

One of most unusual cyclones to ever form in the Atlantic basin. Hurricane Vince
sprouted about 150 miles northwest of the Madeira Islands, the farthest north
and farthest east of any tropical storm on record. It made landfall near Huelva,
Spain, as a tropical storm, the first on record to hit the Iberian Peninsula.

"Last year, I said this is going to be a season to tell our grandchildren about,
but this one was worse," said Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane
Center west of Miami.

Though few expected the season would pack in more than two season's worth of
storms, forecasters had predicted it would be well above average. And the
reasons are sobering, especially for what they portend for the future.

Scientists attribute the upswing in hurricane numbers and intensity to warmer
ocean temperatures, lower wind shear in the atmosphere, and favorable winds
coming off the coast of Africa -- all naturally occurring conditions that come
in long cycles that usually endure for 25 to 40 years.

In other words, when those conditions strengthen, as they do every 25 to 40
years, the Atlantic basin produces more and stronger hurricanes. When they ebb,
as they do for another 25 to 40 years, the basin produces fewer and weaker
hurricanes. And, scientists say, we've been in one of those active cycles since
1995.

However, most Floridians probably didn't notice because, until last year,
favorable steering currents kept all but one in a parade of major storms away
from the peninsula.

Last year, however, the steering currents shifted, bringing four hurricanes our
way. This year, they brought three more -- Dennis, Katrina and Wilma -- and a
fourth, Rita, just to the south of the Florida Keys.

The looming question, for next year, of course, will be whether the steering
patterns will persist. Or might they switch back to the more preferable pattern
that keeps hurricanes off shore?

Mayfield said it's too early to tell, but Stanley Goldenberg, a scientist with
NOAA's hurricane research division, said, steering patterns tend to endure, too
-- though not for nearly as long as active and inactive hurricane cycles.

"My concern is these steering currents might hang around for a while," he said.
"That's my scientific guess... and my worry."

------

------

(c) 2005, The Orlando Sentinel (Fla.).

Visit the Sentinel on the World Wide Web at http://www.orlandosentinel.com/.

Distributed by Knight Ridder/Tribune Information Services.

MIAMI (AP) -- The busiest and costliest Atlantic hurricane season on record
officially -- and mercifully -- draws to a close Wednesday, with hundreds of
thousands of Americans still dealing with the devastation wrought by Katrina,
Rita and Wilma.

Despite the end of the June 1-to-Nov. 30 season, hurricanes could still form
over the next few months. In fact, a tropical storm took shape in the Atlantic
on Tuesday. But no hurricane has been known to hit the United States between
December and May.

And that is welcome news, particularly along the Gulf Coast, where Katrina hit
three months ago, plunging New Orleans into the kind of chaos usually seen in
the Third World, exposing the gap between rich and poor, and raising serious
doubts about the country's readiness for another catastrophe, caused by man or
nature.

The relief may not last very long: Forecasters say 2006 could be another brutal
year, because the Atlantic is in a period of frenzied hurricane activity that
began in 1995 and could last at least another decade.

Government hurricane experts say the increase is due to a natural cycle of
higher sea temperatures, lower wind shear and other factors, though some
scientists blame global warming.

The 2005 season obliterated many long-standing records:

--In 154 years of record-keeping, this year had the most named storms (26,
including Tropical Storm Epsilon, which formed Tuesday), the most hurricanes
(13), the highest number of major hurricanes hitting the U.S. (4), and the most
top-scale Category 5 hurricanes (3).

--Katrina was the deadliest U.S. hurricane since 1928 (more than 1,300 dead) and
replaced 1992's Andrew as the most expensive one on record ($34.4 billion in
insured losses).

--Total insured losses from hurricanes this year were put at $47.2 billion,
above the previous record of $22.9 billion set last year when four hurricanes
also hit the U.S., according to risk-analysis firm ISO.

--Wilma was briefly the most intense Atlantic hurricane on record in terms of
minimum central pressure (882 millibars). It also was the fastest-strengthening
storm on record -- its top sustained winds increased 105 mph in 24 hours in the
Caribbean.

--Forecasters exhausted their list of 21 proper names (Arlene, Bret, Cindy and
so on) and had to use the Greek alphabet to name storms for the first time.

The worst damage, of course, was inflicted by Katrina. Miles of coastal
Mississippi towns such as Waveland and Gulfport were smashed. Eighty percent of
New Orleans was under water after its levees broke. The world saw families
stranded on roofs and hungry and thirsty refugees stuck in the Superdome and
Convention Center. Bodies lay on streets for days or floated in the fetid
floodwaters. Hundreds of thousands of people have yet to return to their homes
-- or have no homes to return to.

So far, Congress has approved $62 billion in mostly short-term relief aid, and
estimates put the cost of rebuilding at up to $200 billion.

The Bush administration was bitterly criticized for its slow response to
Katrina. Michael Brown, director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
lost his job, and the president's approval ratings sank.

Wilma, Dennis and Rita, the other hurricanes that hit the U.S., were not as
deadly or destructive, but they also exposed weaknesses: There were 14-hour
traffic jams as Houston emptied out ahead of Rita, which struck the
Texas-Louisiana coast on Sept. 24, and South Florida was crippled for days after
Wilma knocked out power to more than 6 million people on Oct. 24.

The president has ordered the Homeland Security Department to review disaster
plans for every major metropolitan area. FEMA is also pledging to manage the
flow of personnel and supplies better.

''We have to make it a much more nimble, more adaptable organization.... We've
got good people in place to make it happen,'' said R. David Paulison, FEMA's
acting director. He added: ''As long as I'm here, I can tell you, we will not
have another Superdome.''

Despite government warnings that people be prepared to survive on their own for
three days after a catastrophe, polls found that a majority of Americans are no
better prepared for a disaster than they were before Katrina.

''The biggest thing that can be done to prevent loss of life is to motivate
people to develop their own individual hurricane plan and know what to do before
the next hurricane,'' said Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane
Center, which won praise for its accurate forecasts. ''Some of these folks, take
Mississippi in Katrina, they died because they didn't have a hurricane plan.''

But some Americans have learned their lesson.

''Next time they say evacuate, I'm gone,'' said Tracy Haywood, 38, of New
Orleans, who spent three days stranded on a roof during the storm before being
rescued.

------

Associated Press writer Connie Mabin and Kevin McGill in New Orleans and Emily
Wagster Pettus in Jackson, Miss., contributed to this report.

| ------|

On the Net:

National Hurricane Center: http://www.nhc.noaa.gov

(South Florida Sun-Sentinel correspondent Ken Kaye contributed to this report.)

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2005 Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 482 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                             May 23, 2007 Wednesday

Weather agency predicts active hurricane season

BYLINE: MARTIN MERZER, McClatchy Newspaper

SECTION: Z_NATION

LENGTH: 484 words


It's time to take the hurricane season seriously again: Government forecasters
Tuesday predicted above-average storm activity this season.

They said the tropics are expected to produce 13 to 17 named storms that grow
into seven to 10 hurricanes -- including three to five that become intense, with
winds above 110 mph.

The average season produces 11 tropical storms and six hurricanes, two of them
intense. The six-month season begins June 1.

"Remember, it takes just one hurricane to make it a bad year," said Conrad C.
Lautenbacher Jr., administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.

"We are in a period of more active hurricane seasons and an active season
increases the possibility of land-falling hurricanes," he said.

Scientists have developed no real skill in predicting where hurricanes might
strike, but the outlook for this year is not promising.

"Seasons like this one typically produce two to four landfalling U.S.
hurricanes," said Gerry Bell, NOAA's lead seasonal hurricane forecaster.

With that in mind, Bill Proenza, new director of the National Hurricane Center
in West Miami-Dade County, said residents of the hurricane zone must take the
forecast seriously.

"We're asking the U.S. population in coastal areas to join us in what has been a
very effective partnership with emergency managers, government officials and the
media by preparing yourselves, your businesses and your communities," Proenza
said.

Forecasters from Colorado State University also have predicted "a very active"
season with 17 named tropical storms that grow into nine hurricanes, including
five intense hurricanes.

It should be remembered, however, that long-range, full-season forecasts tend to
be less accurate than real-time forecasts of an actual storm.

At this time last year, government forecasters predicted that 13 to 16 tropical
storms would become eight to 10 hurricanes, four to six of them intense.

Fortunately, that was wrong. In actuality, 10 named storms grew into five
hurricanes, two of which were intense.

But, even if one season proves to be relatively mild, virtually all experts
agree that we are in the middle of a decades-long period of unusually active
hurricane seasons.

In addition, scientists say that La Nina conditions in the western Pacific are
likely to support hurricane development this year. The relatively cool sea
temperatures that mark La Nina suppress crosswinds that otherwise would tear
apart developing hurricanes.

"Unfortunately, the combination of La Nina and an active hurricane era is known
to produce active hurricane seasons," Bell said.

------

(c) 2007, The Miami Herald.

Visit The Miami Herald Web edition on the World Wide Web at
http://www.herald.com/

Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services.

----------

GRAPHIC (from MCT Graphics, 202-383-6064): 20070522 HURRICANES

ARCHIVE PHOTO on MCT Direct (from MCT Photo Service, 202-383-6099): Bill Proenza

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 483 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday

HURRICANES AHEAD;
Scientists predict an unusually active season, and disaster planners are getting
ready.

BYLINE: MARTIN MERZER, Knight Ridder News Service

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 857 words


MIAMI -- Lubricate the storm shutters. Test fire the portable generator.
Inventory the batteries, bottled water and pouches of tuna.

Hurricane season returns next week, and it is likely to be another rough one --
though probably not as ferociously hyperactive as last year's record-setting
season.

Government scientists Monday predicted another unusually busy season, with 13 to
16 tropical storms that grow into eight to 10 hurricanes. Four to six of those
hurricanes could become particularly intense, with winds at or above 111 mph.

More ominously, researchers calculated that at least two -- and as many as four
-- of those could hit the United States.

"That is a troubling but very real possibility," Conrad Lautenbacher Jr.,
administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, said
during a news conference at the National Hurricane Center.

It was the last major briefing before the official six-month season begins June
1, and it attracted a standing-room-only crowd -- another reminder of the lethal
fury of recent hurricane seasons.

The only ray of sunshine in the dim outlook: Scientists called for a less active
season than last year's.

A record 28 named storms walloped the region last year. Fifteen of those storms
grew into hurricanes, the fiercest of which, Hurricane Katrina, devastated New
Orleans and much of the Gulf Coast, killing at least 1,100 people. Three others
made landfall: Dennis, which hit the Florida Panhandle on July 10; Rita, which
made landfall near the Texas-Louisiana border Sept. 24; and Wilma, which
pummeled South Florida on Oct. 24.

It should be noted, however, that last year's pre-season prediction ended up
telling only half the story: Back then, forecasters said they expected 12 to 15
tropical storms, seven to nine hurricanes and three to five intense hurricanes
in 2005.

Federal, state and local officials on hand at the National Hurricane Center to
unveil this year's forecast urged the millions living in hurricane-prone areas
to be prepared.

"Remember, it only takes one hurricane in your neighborhood to have a bad
hurricane season," Lautenbacher said.

The North Atlantic is in the midst of a "multi-decadal signal," a climate
pattern favorable to hurricane formation and likely to last another 10 or 20
years, said Max Mayfield, hurricane center chief.

That climate pattern involves a confluence of conditions in the ocean and
atmosphere, with warmer sea surface temperatures fueling storms and weaker than
usual wind shear allowing them to gather force rather than be broken up as they
travel westward, said Gerry Bell, hurricane outlook lead meteorologist.

Meteorologists said water in the Atlantic is not as warm as it was at this time
in 2005, meaning potential storms would have less of the fuel needed to develop
into hurricanes.

The government's seasonal forecast falls into the same range as one issued in
April by private forecaster William Gray. He and his team at Colorado State
University predicted 17 named storms that evolve into nine hurricanes, five of
them intense.

The averages over the past 40 years are 11 tropical storms, six hurricanes and
two intense hurricanes. Between 1971 and 1994, just before we entered the busy
period of hurricane development, each season produced an average of 8½ named
storms, five hurricanes and one major hurricane.

Government experts declined to predict the chances of a hurricane making
landfall in specific regions on the U.S. coast, saying such forecasts tend to be
less scientifically valid than those focusing on seasonal activity.

But Gray's forecasters took a stab at it.

They calculated an 89 percent probability that the East Coast, including the
entire Florida peninsula, would be a point of impact this year. They also
calculated a 64 percent chance that an intense hurricane would hit the East
Coast.

Officials stressed Monday that predictions mean nothing if people do not act.

David Paulison, the Federal Emergency Management Agency's acting director, said
more than 100,000 families still living in government trailers along the Gulf
Coast will have to evacuate if a tropical storm threatens, even with winds of
just 39 mph.

Paulison cautioned that those people who do not need to evacuate must still have
an emergency plan.

With visions of the chaotic response to Hurricane Katrina still in their heads,
FEMA officials have stocked up on food and water and pre-positioned those
supplies in the most vulnerable areas, said Paulison.

"What we've been doing at FEMA is fixing those things we saw didn't work well in
Katrina -- logistics, having the right things in the right places at the right
time," said Paulison. "We did not do that in Katrina."

NOAA has also acquired a link with Europe's main weather satellite to get images
from the far eastern Atlantic, where storms tend to form. A new satellite
downlink center in Washington to capture and analyze photos has been
established, a new geostationary satellite has been deployed and four more
forecasters have been hired at the hurricane center, a sturdy concrete bastion
20 miles inland.

This report includes information from the Associated Press, Los Angeles Times
and New York Times.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 484 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 15, 2016 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Where Are the Hurricanes?

BYLINE: By ADAM SOBEL.

Adam Sobel, an atmospheric scientist at Columbia, is the author of ''Storm
Surge: Hurricane Sandy, Our Changing Climate and Extreme Weather of the Past and
Future.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 912 words


THE United States coastline has been calm so far this hurricane season, just as
it has been over the last decade. Since 2005, the year of Hurricanes Katrina,
Rita and Wilma, the country has been in a hurricane ''drought,'' with no major
hurricane (Category 3 or above, meaning winds above 110 miles per hour) making
landfall. The nation's most hurricane-prone regions, the Southeast and Gulf
Coasts, have been eerily quiet.

Even so, climate scientists like me believe that human-induced climate change
will strengthen hurricanes and lead to worse disasters. We know that significant
global warming, over a degree and a half Fahrenheit, has already occurred since
preindustrial days. So where, you might ask, are the powerful hurricanes?

They're coming, if we don't take more aggressive action to slow climate change.

What we have seen recently is consistent with our scientific understanding of
hurricanes and climate. That knowledge is far from perfect, but the prediction
of stronger future hurricanes is not contradicted by the data thus far.

The Atlantic Ocean, where hurricanes affecting the United States arise,
generates only a little over 10 percent of the planet's tropical cyclones, a
term that includes both hurricanes and less intense but still powerful tropical
storms. What happens in the Atlantic isn't generally representative. In fact,
other regions have not enjoyed the vacation that our most susceptible coastlines
have had from serious storms. Ask the people in Taiwan and China, who just got
hit by a supertyphoon named Nepartak (''supertyphoon'' is, approximately, the
western Pacific label for what we would call a major hurricane).

There is also large natural variability, in the Atlantic and elsewhere. Some
hurricane seasons are active and some aren't. The fluctuations occur not just
year to year but even decade to decade and longer. The current hurricane drought
is one such fluctuation. While there is debate about the drought's significance,
there is little doubt that its primary cause is dumb luck, and that won't
continue forever.

The best science doesn't, in fact, predict that the future will hold more
hurricanes; most of our best models predict there may be fewer. But these
predictions of changes in the number of hurricanes are quite uncertain, in part
because they are connected to a more basic problem: Why does the number of
tropical cyclones average about 90 per year, and not more or fewer?

We don't really know.

But when it comes to the strength of hurricanes, we have a pretty good
comprehension of the physical science of how hurricane intensity is controlled
by the large-scale climate. In a paper this week in the journal Science, several
colleagues and I assess the state of this understanding and what it implies
about the recent past, present and future of hurricanes.

As the climate warms, the physics says hurricanes should get stronger, because
the tropical ocean surface heats up more than the atmosphere above it,
increasing the temperature differential on which storms feed. The best computer
models also predict stronger storms, so we have separate but consistent lines of
evidence. Even if the number of hurricanes decreases somewhat, the overall
increase in intensity may well mean that there are more of the strongest storms.
And the very strongest storms of the future will probably exceed any of the past
in their intensities.

While several groups of scientists who have done statistical analyses of data on
all storms for the last few decades have found significant increases in the
numbers of the strongest ones, Categories 4 and 5, it is also true that those
results are not consistent across all studies.

It also turns out that human influence on storm intensity is more complicated
than we have thought. Human activities have not just increased atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases, but also concentrations of aerosols -- tiny
liquid or solid particles from cars, industrial smokestacks and fires. These
particles tend to cool the climate by absorbing and reflecting sunlight, though
they haven't been enough to prevent significant global warming over the last
century.

But aerosol cooling appears to be disproportionately effective in reducing
hurricane intensity, and climate models suggest that, because of the aerosols,
hurricane intensity globally should not have increased much yet, despite warming
caused by greenhouse gases.

But it isn't likely to stay that way.

Global aerosol concentrations appear to have reached something of a plateau,
thanks to air quality regulations in the United States and Europe. While
increases in aerosol emissions in Asia have offset the decline elsewhere, this
pollution is unlikely to keep pace with rising greenhouse gas emissions.
Moreover, aerosols tend to wash out after a few weeks, while carbon dioxide
stays in the atmosphere for a very long time.

Barring global emissions reductions much larger than anything agreed on in the
Paris climate accord (or the development of carbon-capture technology on a
significant scale), greenhouse gas concentrations will continue to increase. And
without the compensating effect of increasing aerosol emissions, the warming of
the future, more than the warming of the recent past, will strengthen the most
powerful and destructive storms that the planet can produce.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion),
and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.




URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/15/opinion/where-are-the-hurricanes.html

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY LEANDRO CASTELAO)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 485 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              May 23, 2010 Sunday
                             South Pinellas Edition

STORM WARNINGS, WATCHES TO BE ISSUED EARLIER

BYLINE: JULI MARQUEZ, Bay News 9 Meteorologist

SECTION: 2010 TAMPA BAY HURRICANE GUIDE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 311 words



HIGHLIGHT: The aim is to give residents in areas likely to be hit more time to
pull up stakes and evacuate.


You will get earlier warnings this year about tropical storms, the result of
both greater need and improved forecasting.

Warnings and watches for tropical storms and hurricanes will be issued 12 hours
earlier than previous years, the National Hurricane Center says.

That means tropical storm watches will be issued when tropical storm conditions
are possible along the coast within 48 hours. The same time frames will apply to
hurricane watches and warnings.

Tropical storm warnings will be issued when those conditions are expected within
36 hours. The same times will also apply to hurricane watches and warnings.

Remember, a tropical storm has winds of 39 mph to 73 mph. Hurricanes have winds
of at least 74 mph.

The increasing coastal population means communities need more time to prepare
and evacuate. Advances in technology also have led to more accurate track
forecasts.

The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ranks hurricanes as a Category 1 to
Category 5 based on wind speed. Information about expected storm surge and
flooding will be issued separately based on each individual storm.

Tying storm surge to wind speed can be tricky.

For example, Hurricane Charley struck southwest Florida in 2005 as a Category 4
hurricane. The original Saffir-Simpson scale suggested the storm would produce a
13- to 18-foot storm surge. Charley, however, produced a storm surge of only 6
to 7 feet. But Hurricane Ike hit Texas in 2008 as a Category 2 storm, yet
created a storm surge of 15 to 20 feet.

The size of the hurricane, how fast it's moving and coastal features are just
some of the factors that must be considered when forecasting storm surge,
considered the greatest threat to Tampa Bay.

* * *

Prepare for hurricane season:
tampabay.com/specials/2010/reports/hurricane-guide/

In the event of a hurricane: Visit tampabay.com for complete and ongoing
breaking news coverage.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - SCOTT KEELER - Times (2004): In August 2004, an upscale home on
Captiva Island is framed by mounds of debris from a nearby damaged home, all the
result of Hurricane Charley roaring through.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 486 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              May 20, 2011 Friday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

NOAA AGAIN PREDICTS ACTIVE TROPICAL SEASON

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 256 words


The 2011 hurricane season is expected to be more active than normal, the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced Thursday.

Forecasters predicted 12 to 18 named storms in the Atlantic basin, with six to
10 hurricanes and three to six major hurricanes, with winds of 111 mph or more.

They attributed the busy season to an era of heightened Atlantic hurricane
activity, warmer-than-normal sea surface temperatures and La Nina conditions.

No hurricanes struck the United States during last year's unusually busy season,
but it is unlikely to be as fortunate this year, said Jane Lubchenco, under
secretary of commerce for oceans and atmosphere and NOAA administrator.

"We cannot count on having the same luck this year," she said.

Weather forecasters at Colorado State University have made similar predictions
for this season: 16 named storms, with nine of those strengthening into
hurricanes, five of them major.

Last season was the third-busiest in 160 years, with 19 named storms, 12
hurricanes and five major hurricanes.

But none hit the United States. Florida hasn't been hit by a hurricane in five
years. And the United States hasn't been hit by a major hurricane in as many
years. The U.S. has never gone six years without being hit by a major hurricane.

Tampa Bay has not been hit by a hurricane in 90 years.

The NOAA prediction for the 2010 season was accurate. Forecasters predicted 14
to 20 named storms, eight to 12 hurricanes, and three to six major hurricanes.

Information from the Associated Press was used in this report.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2011 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 487 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                           October 17, 2013 Thursday
                                2 Tampa Edition

LACK OF STORMS BAFFLES EXPERTS

BYLINE: PAT FARNAN, CLAIRE WISEMAN, TIMES STAFF WRITERS

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 554 words



HIGHLIGHT: Forecasters say this has been the least active hurricane seasonsince
1994.


As hurricane season winds to a close, this year may well be remembered for what
didn't happen:

- Only two hurricanes have formed, with no impact on the United States.

- Neither of them were major hurricanes, with winds of 111 mph or more.

- Tropical activity has been a third of normal in the Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean
Sea and Gulf of Mexico.

"It's been one of those years that keeps you humble,'' said hurricane forecaster
Phil Klotzbach of Colorado State University.

Most forecasters expect little activity in the final six weeks of the season,
though they offer the usual caveats.

"We are definitely winding down, and it is looking less likely that we will have
something major, but the probability is not zero,'' said Stacy Stewart, senior
hurricane specialist with the National Hurricane Center in Miami.

It has been the quietest hurricane season since 1994, when only seven storms
formed. Experts disagree about the exact starting point, but that was about the
beginning of the current above-average era of hurricanes, expected to run at
least 25 years.

Hurricane forecasters this year predicted an average of about 17 storms, with
half of them becoming hurricanes and four or five of those becoming major
hurricanes.

So far this year we have had 11 storms, two of which briefly developed into
hurricanes.

Many predictors are describing this season as a "forecast bust.''

''We don't forecast as well as we think we do,'' said George Sambataro, chief
meteorologist with PC weather products, which specializes in hurricane tracking
and analysis.

Part of the downturn can be traced to a massive cloud of dry air that moved into
the traditional hurricane breeding ground in the middle of the season.

Tropical storms, powered by warm water, can quickly destabilize or deteriorate
when infused with dry air.

But other factors also played a role, including high wind shear in parts of the
Atlantic, Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico, particularly at latitudes where several
storms tried to form, said Stewart, the hurricane center specialist.

Experts say unforeseen factors can dramatically alter a forecast, underscoring
the complexity of the atmosphere.

"Let's say eight of the 10 things we look at indicate a busy season,'' said
Klotzbach, who, along with Bill Gray, issues one of the primary annual
forecasts. "But every once in a while you get a year like this, when the other
two factors swamp everything else.''

As evidence of the season's anomaly, experts point to the accumulated cyclonic
energy, a measure of the total amount of tropical activity in a given area.

This season, the Atlantic basin had less than a third of accumulated energy it
normally would generate. If forecasters are accurate, the season will end with
less than a fourth of the norm.

But it's not over yet. In fact, one computer model foresees a tropical storm in
the Caribbean later this month or early in November.

"The Caribbean waters are still warm, and we could have something pop up
there,'' said Klotzbach, "but right now it does not look likely.''

Forecasters warn that the final weeks of the season should get particular
attention from west Florida residents. "We've been hit more in late October than
any other time, historically," said Mike Clay, chief meteorologist for Bay News
9. "I always say that in the tropics, you take it four or five days at a time."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2013 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 488 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              July 29, 2013 Monday

Washington: What Will A Hurricane Hit Cost You? Review Your Insurance Policy's
Hurricane Deductible Options Now To Understand Upfront Costs

LENGTH: 823  words

DATELINE: Washington


Insurance Information Institute has issued the following news release:


If you've chosen a high hurricane deductible, you are saving money every year on
homeowners insurance. That may be a good strategy when tropical storms remain
far from Florida, but it could prove otherwise when a hurricane actually
strikes. As the height of hurricane season approaches, the Insurance Information
Institute (I.I.I) and Florida Insurance Council (FIC) suggest that Floridians
review their hurricane deductibles to make sure they understand what that
decision will cost them and have a plan to pay for it.



"Because Floridians have had a seven-year reprieve from paying hurricane
deductibles, it may be time for some homeowners to revisit decisions they made
about covering these deductible costs," said Lynne McChristian, Florida
representative for the I.I.I.

Florida homeowners insurance policies have two deductibles--one for damage from
hurricanes and another for damage related to other perils covered under the
policy, including non-hurricane windstorms. Deductibles are the amount of a loss
paid by a policyholder, and a high deductible always makes annual premiums
lower. Paying less for insurance--even a few dollars a year less--seems right
when the weather is calm. But high deductibles mean a policyholder takes on the
extra risk, and that is not something many people consider. Policyholders should
make sure their deductible decisions are affordable.

"Saving money on insurance in the present day sounds smart, yet forgetting what
that decision may cost you if a hurricane strikes is risky," McChristian said.
"It is a good idea to match up the premium cost savings of various hurricane
deductible options with the out-of-pocket costs you will have to bear if your
home is damaged and requires costly repairs."

Sam Miller, executive vice president of the Florida Insurance Council, explains,
"Weighing the cost of the hurricane deductible options allows you to be better
able to judge the long-term financial implications of your decision."

In Florida, homes with insured values of less than $100,000 have either a flat
dollar amount hurricane deductible, starting at $500, or a percentage deductible
that the homeowner chooses; homes insured for $100,000 or more typically have
percentage hurricane deductibles that start at 2 percent; homeowners also may
choose higher hurricane deductibles such as 5 percent or 10 percent. Remember,
these percentages are based on the insured value of the entire home, NOT the
loss amount. Insured value, in turn, is based on the costs of rebuilding your
home after a disaster. It is different from the estimated real estate market
value of your home.

HURRICANE DEDUCTIBLE OPTIONS INTRODUCED AFTER ANDREW
Following the devastation caused by Hurricane Andrew in 1992, the Florida
Legislature introduced the concept of a separate hurricane deductible; by 1998,
all property insurers were required to offer them. Hurricane deductibles have
helped to make more private insurance available in coastal areas at a lower
price. Additionally, people who select a high deductible have an incentive to
mitigate hurricane damage by protecting property from high winds, so their
chances of severe damage are diminished.

Eighteen states and the District of Columbia have two different types of
deductibles: one for hurricanes or wind damage and one for everything else. An
"all other perils" deductible is typically a flat dollar amount of $500, $1,000
or $2,000, and it covers damage from calamities such as fire, lightning or if a
pipe bursts inside your home. The separate deductible for hurricanes is a
percentage of the insured value of a home.

HOW A HURRICANE DEDUCTIBLE WORKS
Homeowners get a premium credit for taking on the extra risk associated with a
hurricane deductible and, ideally, some of the credit could be saved up to pay
the hurricane deductible. Understandably, this is not something everyone can
afford to do--and those are the individuals most at risk if they choose a
hurricane deductible that is higher than they can in reality pay.

A policyholder who has chosen a 10 percent hurricane deductible pays less for
property insurance than someone who chose a 2 percent deductible--but paying
less for insurance now means paying five times more in out-of-pocket costs if a
hurricane strikes the property.

Consider a home insured for $250,000 with a 2 percent hurricane deductible. If a
hurricane strikes, the 2 percent hurricane deductible means an out-of-pocket
cost of $5,000. As the illustration below demonstrates, the savings with a 2
percent deductible have added up over the past seven hurricane-free years in
Florida, but the impact of the savings is greater in areas where the annual
premium is highest. It would require decades without hurricanes for the premium
savings from a 10 percent hurricane deductible to reach economic balance for a
homeowner.

For more information please visit: http://www.iii.org/

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 489 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                             April 15, 2016 Friday

Average hurricane season predicted;
HIGHLIGHT: ATLANTIC COAST

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: ; Pg. Z4

LENGTH: 349 words


A National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration satellite image shows
Hurricane Igor in the Atlantic in 2010.

Top meteorologists from Colorado State University forecast a near-average
Atlantic hurricane season this year, predicting 12 tropical storms will form,
with five becoming hurricanes.

A typical year, based on weather records dating to 1950, has 12 tropical storms,
of which seven spin into hurricanes. A tropical storm contains sustained winds
of 39 mph. It becomes a hurricane when winds reach 74 mph.

Meteorologists Philip Klotzbach and William Gray of Colorado State University's
Tropical Meteorology Project released the forecast this week. The Atlantic
hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, though storms sometimes form
outside those dates.

Although El Niño, which tends to suppress Atlantic hurricane activity, is
weakening, water in the North Atlantic Ocean is unusually cold, which could also
suppress storm development.

Klotzbach said that of the five predicted hurricanes, two should be major -
category 3, 4 or 5 - with sustained wind speeds of 111 mph or greater.

Insurance companies, emergency managers and the media use the forecasts to
prepare Americans for the year's hurricane threat. The annual predictions
provide a best estimate of activity during the upcoming season, not an exact
measure, according to Colorado State.

Last year, the team predicted seven named storms, with three becoming
hurricanes. The season ended with 11 named storms, of which four were
hurricanes.

For the U.S. coastline, Klotzbach said there is a 50% chance of a major
hurricane making landfall in 2016. For the East Coast, including all of Florida,
the chance is 30%. The chance along the Gulf Coast from the Florida Panhandle to
Brownsville, Texas, is 29%.

AccuWeather, in its hurricane forecast last week, predicted 14 named storms
would form, of which 8 will be hurricanes. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration will issue its forecast in May. The first named storm of the
Atlantic hurricane season was Alex, an unusual January hurricane. This forecast
does not include Alex.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 490 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                            October 1, 2016 Saturday

Matthew grows into major hurricane;
Storm bearing down on Jamaica poses threat to U.S. East Coast next week

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: ; Pg. Z2

LENGTH: 371 words


on A satellite Thursday image . It became shows Hurricane a Category Matthew 3
hurricane in the Friday Caribbean .

Matthew strengthened to a Category 3 hurricane in the Caribbean on Friday and is
a dangerous threat to Jamaica, Haiti, Cuba and the Bahamas over the next few
days. The storm could impact the U.S. East Coast by next week.

Early Friday evening, Matthew had maximum-sustained winds of 140 mph, according
to the National Hurricane Center. It was moving to the west-southwest at 9 mph
and was 465 miles southeast of Kingston, Jamaica.

A hurricane watch is in effect for Jamaica and a tropical storm watch has been
issued for portions of Haiti

A hurricane is classified as "major" when its sustained winds reach 111 mph. A
major hurricane is a Category 3, 4 or 5 on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind
Scale.

Matthew is the first major hurricane in September in the Caribbean since Felix
in 2007.

Sometime Saturday or early Sunday, Matthew should make its long-anticipated
northwest or northward turn in the Caribbean Sea, weather.com reported.

In Jamaica, Prime Minister Andrew Holness said government services have been
placed on high alert, according to the Jamaica Observer newspaper. Thursday,
fishermen on Jamaica's cays and banks were advised to evacuate immediately and
return to the mainland.

Other small craft operators in the island's coastal waters were told to return
to port, while those in port were advised not to venture out, the newspaper
reported.

Florida Gov. Rick Scott said the state emergency operations centers were active
on Friday.

He said state officials will monitor Matthew's path, and urged residents and
tourists to monitor the storm and have an emergency plan in place.

Whether or not impacts will be indirect from a hurricane at sea or direct from a
landfall in the U.S. were still unclear Friday, AccuWeather said.

"It is too soon to rule out possible hurricane impacts from Matthew in Florida,"
according to the hurricane center.

Even if Matthew turns toward the sea next week, rough surf and heavy seas would
occur along the Atlantic coast.

Hurricane Matthew is the fifth hurricane and second major hurricane of the 2016
Atlantic hurricane season. It's now the only hurricane or typhoon on the planet.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 491 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                            September 8, 2017 Friday

Storms Jose, Katia could also hit land on weekend

BYLINE: By Jason Samenow and Brian Mcnoldy

SECTION: ; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 464 words


Hurricane Irma caused significant damage on the Caribbean island of St. Maarten.
GERBEN VAN ES / DUTCH DEFENSE MINISTRY

Hurricane Irma is not the only show in town. Two other menacing hurricanes, Jose
and Katia, are swirling in the Atlantic Ocean basin and forecast to strengthen
and impact land areas late tonight and into the weekend.

Hurricane Jose

Jose could hit some of the same small islands in the northern Lesser Antilles
decimated by Irma.

The hurricane, which formed as a tropical storm on Wednesday, was intensifying
in the eastern Atlantic, following behind Irma on a similar path.

While it is expected to curve to the north out to sea well before reaching the
United States, it could pass very close to the northern Leeward Islands as a
major hurricane Saturday.

A hurricane watch was issued for Antigua and Barbuda, already devastated by Irma
on Tuesday night and Wednesday.

Tropical storm watches were issued slightly farther west for Anguilla,
Montserrat, St. Kitts, Nevis, Saba and St. Eustatius - areas less likely to be
seriously affected.

On Thursday, Jose had maximum sustained winds of 90 mph, which are expected to
increase to 120 mph today, making it a Category 3 hurricane.

If the storm tracks over the beleaguered islands of the northern Lesser
Antilles, they could face destructive winds for the second time in four days and
up to 10 inches of rainfall.

Hurricane Katia

Just as Jose was upgraded to a hurricane Wednesday afternoon, so was Katia. This
system formed in the western Gulf of Mexico from a lingering disturbance earlier
this week.

The storm, packing peak winds of 80 mph, is forecast to track westward toward
Mexico and make landfall as a hurricane tonight in the state of Veracruz.

The storm is forecast to strengthen up until landfall, with peak winds climbing
to 105 mph - which would make it a strong Category 2 hurricane, nearing major
Category 3 status.

A hurricane warning is out for the state of Veracruz, which is predicted to
receive 5 to 10 inches of rain.

"Isolated maximum amounts of 25 inches are possible in northern Veracruz and
eastern Hidalgo, Puebla, and San Luis Potosi," the Hurricane Center warned.
"This rainfall may cause life-threatening flash floods and mudslides, especially
in areas of mountainous terrain."

Rare combination

Incredibly, all three of the active hurricanes in the Atlantic basin could
affect land at the same time on Saturday: Irma over the Bahamas (and approaching
Florida), Jose over the northeastern Leewards, and Katia in Mexico.

It is quite rare to have three simultaneous hurricanes. The last time it
occurred was in 2010 with Hurricanes Igor, Julia and Karl. In an unlikely
coincidence, these storms are almost in the same order and position as Irma,
Jose and Katia, and have the same first three letters (I, J and K).

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 492 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                           September 11, 2017 Monday

HURRICANE IRMA

SECTION: ; Pg. SE1

LENGTH: 1261 words


HURRICANE IRMA BATTERS FLORIDA: A person walks through a flooded street in the
Brickell area of downtown as Hurricane Irma passes through Sunday in Miami,
Florida. Hurricane Irma made landfall in the Florida Keys as a Category 4 storm
on Sunday, lashing the state with 130 mph winds as it moves up the coast.

DIRE STRAITS: A car sits abandoned in storm surge along State Road A1A as
Hurricane Irma hits the southern part of the state Sunday in Fort Lauderdale,
Florida. The powerful hurricane made landfall in the United States in the
Florida Keys at 9:10 a.m. after raking across the north coast of Cuba.

PALM BAY: Palm Bay Public Works move debris from a second-story roof after a
possible tornado touched down at Palm Bay Point subdivision in Palm Bay, Fla.,
during Hurricane Irma's landfall Sunday. The debris was scattered over a
two-block area.

WATER RECEDES AHEAD OF STORM'S IMPACT: Residents inspect the dramatic receding
water level in Tampa Bay ahead of Hurricane Irma on Sunday in Tampa, Fla.
Hurricane Irma made initial landfall in the Florida Keys as a Category 4 storm,
lashing the state with 130 mph winds as it moved up the coast.

DESTRUCTION IN IRMA'S WAKE: A truck rests on its side after being blown over as
Hurricane Irma barreled through Miami on Sunday. Irma, which made a second
landfall south of Naples, Fla., weakened as it moved north up the coastline.

HURRICANE CHURNS SURF: Large waves produced by Irma crash into the end of
Anglins Fishing Pier on Sunday in Lauderdale-by-the-Sea, Fla. The Category 4
hurricane made initial landfall in the United States in the Florida Keys at 9:10
a.m. after raking the northern coast of Cuba. The massive Irma made a second
landfall on Marco Island, south of Naples.

AWAITING IRMA: Tied-up boats sit in mud from an unusually low tide Sunday in
Fort Myers, Fla., as the first eflects of Hurricane Irma began to reach the
southwest Florida city. Irma made landfall Sunday morning near Cudjoe Key, Fla.,
as it barreled into the mostly deserted Keys, bound for a trip up the state's
west coast.

BREEZY RIDER: A man rides a motorcycle through the wind and rain in Bonita
Springs, Fla., on Sunday as Hurricane Irma plows into southwest Florida. With
businesses closed, thousands in shelters and a mandatory evacuation in coastal
communities, the region around Bonita Springs was preparing for a catastrophic
storm.

OVERTURNED: A metal canopy at a gasoline station (above) in North Miami, Fla.,
lies on its top Sunday after high winds from Hurricane Irma tore it ofl its
moorings and flipped it over

NECESARIO: Some Miami Police oficers Saturday remembered to pack an essential
item into their hurricane planning: Cuban coflee. Here, in a photo tweeted by
the department, a cofleepot simmers away atop a lighted camp stove as police
personnel got ready for the storm's arrival.

ATTEMPT TO TAME THE WAVES: Deron Nettles, inventor of the wave dissipation
system seen here offshore, looks over the pounding surf at high tide caused by
Hurricane Irma as it washes up into homes in the Wild Dunes Resort community in
Isle of Palms, S.C., on Sunday.

AFTERMATH IN CUBA: A man carries a child on his shoulders as he walks on a
flooded street in Havana after the passing of Hurricane Irma in Cuba on Sunday.
The powerful storm ripped roofs off houses, collapsed buildings and flooded
hundreds of miles of coastline after cutting a trail of destruction across the
Caribbean. There were no immediate reports of deaths in Cuba, a country that
prides itself on its disaster preparedness, but authorities were trying to
restore power and clear roads.

THE CALM BEFORE THE WINDS: Fine art photographer Dan Kaufman stops in the middle
of nearly deserted downtown Savannah, Ga., on Sunday to take a photo of City
Hall before winds from the outer bands of Hurricane Irma were expected to sweep
across the area.

SMALL WORLD, BIG STORM: Entrance gates at Disney World's Magic Kingdom in Lake
Buena Vista, Fla., are quiet Sunday. The park closed as Hurricane Irma
approached the central Florida area. Other tourist attractions, including
Universal Studios and Sea World, were also closed and plan to reopen Tuesday.

BENDING IN THE WIND: Trees bend in the tropical storm wind along State Road A1A
in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., as Hurricane Irma hits the southern part of the state
on Sunday. The powerful hurricane made landfall in the United States in the
Florida Keys at 9:10 a.m. after raking across the north coast of Cuba.

MIAMI: A crane in downtown Miami collapses Sunday amid strong winds from
Hurricane Irma. It came down in a high-rise-heavy bayfront area near American
Airlines Arena, according to a tweet from the City of Miami.

KEYS: John Huston, of Key Largo, shared this photo of his home pool underwater
after a storm surge hit his dock on Sunday. Announcing itself with roaring 130
mph winds, Hurricane Irma plowed into the mostly vacated Florida Keys early
Sunday.

FACING THE FUTURE ALONE: Mary Della Ratta, 94, sits in a shelter Sunday after
evacuating from her home with the help of police Saturday night ahead of
Hurricane Irma in Naples, Fla. "I'm afraid of what's going to happen. I don't
know what I'll find when I go home," said Ratta, whose husband passed away 10
years ago. "I have nobody. I'm all alone in this world."

BIDING THEIR TIME: Leo Figueroa and his son Leo Jr., 2, wait out Hurricane Irma
in a hotel on Saturday in Fort Myers, Fla.

WAITING GAME: Courtney Vega, 12, of Miami, sits on a cot while staying at the
Red Cross Hurricane Irma Disaster Shelter at the Alabama State University
Acadome in Montgomery, Ala., on Sunday.

FEARING CATASTROPHE: Estrella Bell and her friend's daughter Ella look out the
window as they wait out Hurricane Irma in a hotel on Sunday in Fort Myers, Fla.
With businesses closed, thousands in shelters and a mandatory evacuation in
coastal communities, Fort Myers was prepared for a possibly catastrophic storm.

POWER GOES OUT IN SHELTER: A sheriff's deputy walks through a storm shelter
after the power went out as Hurricane Irma made its approach in Naples, Fla., on
Sunday. DAVID GOLDMAN / ASSOCIATED PRESS

MONITORING IRMA AT HURRICANE CENTER: National Hurricane Center acting director
Ed Rappaport (left) and senior hurricane specialist Richard Pasch monitor
Hurricane Irma on Sunday at the National Hurricane Center in Miami. Forecasters
declared the initial landfall of Irma to be just after 9 a.m. over Cudjoe Key.
ANDY NEWMAN / ASSOCIATED PRESS

GETTING READY TO SPRING INTO ACTION: Members of the Urban Search and Rescue
team, California Task Force 1, with the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
organize supplies at the Orange County Convention Center in Orlando, Fla., as
they wait for Hurricane Irma to reach the area Sunday. SAM HODGSON / THE NEW
YORK TIMES

GOOSE HAD THE ROAD TO ITSELF: An Egyptian goose stands in the middle of a
debris-strewn road in Coral Gables, Fla., on Sunday as Hurricane Irma passes
though.

RESCUED FROM THE BAY: This photo provided by Michael Sechler shows a stranded
manatee in Manatee County, Fla., on Sunday. The sea cow was one of two stranded
after waters receded from Sarasota Bay as Hurricane Irma approached. Sechler and
a group of friends posted photos of the mammals on social media, and Manatee
County deputies and Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission officials
responded to the scene.

TRYING TO MAKE DO IN KEY WEST: The Blinckman family use their personal devices
while sheltering in a stairwell utility closet as Hurricane Irma goes over Key
West, Fla., on Sunday. Hurricane Irma made landfall near Cudjoe Key as a
Category 4 hurricane.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 493 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                           September 19, 2017 Tuesday

Yes, this hurricane season really is unusually violent;
As Maria blusters, there are still two more months to go

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: ; Pg. Z4

LENGTH: 554 words


The already-catastrophic 2017 hurricane season shows no signs of letting up:
Hurricane Maria is roaring through some of the same Caribbean islands ravaged by
Irma, just as Hurricane Jose stirs up trouble along the U.S. East Coast.

And we still have more than two months to go.

The ferocity of the Atlantic storm season isn't just in your imagination. Thanks
primarily to monsters such as Harvey and Irma, it's one of the worst in years by
various meteorological standards.

For example: The hurricanes that have formed this year - seven - are about
double the average to date, as is the energy generated by the storms. This is a
statistic known as "Accumulated Cyclone Energy," and the number in 2017 is the
highest it's been since 2005, the year Hurricane Katrina hit, according to
Colorado State University meteorologist Phil Klotzbach.

There have been 30 days this year in which hurricanes have spun in the Atlantic
- which is also more than double the average and the most since 2004, Klotzbach
said.

Another record set in 2017: For the first year in recorded hurricane history,
which dates to 1851, two Category 4 hurricanes (Harvey and Irma) slammed into
the USA the same year.

In fact, there have been four major (Category 3 and above) hurricanes this
season - the first time since 2010 there have been four by Sept. 18, according
to Klotzbach. The average as of this date is less than two.

As for the reasons for the active season, one of the factors is probably a lack
of dust blowing across the Atlantic from Africa, which tends to have a drying
effect on developing storms, according to AccuWeather. The lack of an El Niño -
and its shearing winds that can tear apart nascent storms - also plays a role.

As bad as it's been, some of this season's intensity is really just a blast from
the past.

Irma was "reminiscent of the great hurricanes that unleashed their fury on
Florida in the first seven decades of the 20th century ... and then for the most
part disappeared," Weather Channel meteorologist Bryan Norcross said before the
storm hit.

"Mother Nature's hurricane-output cycle has its ups and downs," he said, "and a
lull came along in the 1970s, '80s, and early 1990s - Hurricanes Frederic, Hugo
and Andrew notwithstanding."

Especially in typically hurricane-prone states such as Florida, a race to build
along the shore went unfettered.

Americans became older, richer and more conspicuous consumers, Norcross said.
"The net result was exponential growth along the coastline - a construction
frenzy, mostly without hurricanes in mind. Add in the expensive cars and gadgets
of modern life, and the damage potential has skyrocketed."

Beyond whatever destruction Maria or Jose might wreak, there are still concerns
about the rest of the season.

A large area of high pressure centered near Bermuda is forecast to continue
pumping warm, humid air northward from the Gulf of Mexico and the western
Atlantic, AccuWeather said.

Tropical storms and hurricanes that brew will get caught up in the flow around
this high-pressure area.

"When we get a pattern such as this, we usually have two to three named storms
in October and can have one in November or December," AccuWeather hurricane
expert Dan Kottlowski said.

The Atlantic hurricane season officially lasts until Nov. 30, but hurricanes
have been recorded as late as New Year's Eve.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 494 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                           September 19, 2017 Tuesday

Yes, this hurricane season really is unusually violent;
As Maria blusters, there are still two more months to go

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: ; Pg. Z4

LENGTH: 554 words


The already-catastrophic 2017 hurricane season shows no signs of letting up:
Hurricane Maria is roaring through some of the same Caribbean islands ravaged by
Irma, just as Hurricane Jose stirs up trouble along the U.S. East Coast.

And we still have more than two months to go.

The ferocity of the Atlantic storm season isn't just in your imagination. Thanks
primarily to monsters such as Harvey and Irma, it's one of the worst in years by
various meteorological standards.

For example: The hurricanes that have formed this year - seven - are about
double the average to date, as is the energy generated by the storms. This is a
statistic known as "Accumulated Cyclone Energy," and the number in 2017 is the
highest it's been since 2005, the year Hurricane Katrina hit, according to
Colorado State University meteorologist Phil Klotzbach.

There have been 30 days this year in which hurricanes have spun in the Atlantic
- which is also more than double the average and the most since 2004, Klotzbach
said.

Another record set in 2017: For the first year in recorded hurricane history,
which dates to 1851, two Category 4 hurricanes (Harvey and Irma) slammed into
the USA the same year.

In fact, there have been four major (Category 3 and above) hurricanes this
season - the first time since 2010 there have been four by Sept. 18, according
to Klotzbach. The average as of this date is less than two.

As for the reasons for the active season, one of the factors is probably a lack
of dust blowing across the Atlantic from Africa, which tends to have a drying
effect on developing storms, according to AccuWeather. The lack of an El Niño -
and its shearing winds that can tear apart nascent storms - also plays a role.

As bad as it's been, some of this season's intensity is really just a blast from
the past.

Irma was "reminiscent of the great hurricanes that unleashed their fury on
Florida in the first seven decades of the 20th century ... and then for the most
part disappeared," Weather Channel meteorologist Bryan Norcross said before the
storm hit.

"Mother Nature's hurricane-output cycle has its ups and downs," he said, "and a
lull came along in the 1970s, '80s, and early 1990s - Hurricanes Frederic, Hugo
and Andrew notwithstanding."

Especially in typically hurricane-prone states such as Florida, a race to build
along the shore went unfettered.

Americans became older, richer and more conspicuous consumers, Norcross said.
"The net result was exponential growth along the coastline - a construction
frenzy, mostly without hurricanes in mind. Add in the expensive cars and gadgets
of modern life, and the damage potential has skyrocketed."

Beyond whatever destruction Maria or Jose might wreak, there are still concerns
about the rest of the season.

A large area of high pressure centered near Bermuda is forecast to continue
pumping warm, humid air northward from the Gulf of Mexico and the western
Atlantic, AccuWeather said.

Tropical storms and hurricanes that brew will get caught up in the flow around
this high-pressure area.

"When we get a pattern such as this, we usually have two to three named storms
in October and can have one in November or December," AccuWeather hurricane
expert Dan Kottlowski said.

The Atlantic hurricane season officially lasts until Nov. 30, but hurricanes
have been recorded as late as New Year's Eve.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 495 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           October 26, 2011 Wednesday

Hurricane Rina slowly strengthening

BYLINE: Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 495 words


Oct. 26--MIAMI -- At 5:00 pm EDT on Tuesday, the eye of hurricane Rina was
located about 275 miles east-southeast of Chetumal, Mexico, and about 275 miles
southeast of Cozumel, Mexico. Rina is moving toward the west near 3 mph.

According to the National Hurricane Center in Miami, a turn toward the
west-northwest was expected Tuesday night, followed by a gradual turn toward
north and a slight increase in forward speed by Thursday.

A hurricane warning is in effect for the east coast of the Yucatan peninsula
from north of Punta Gruesa to Cancun; a tropical storm warning is in effect for
the east coast of the Yucatan peninsula from Chetumal to Punta Gruesa; a
tropical storm watch is in effect for the coast of Belize from Belize City
northward and the Honduran Bay Islands of Roatan and Guanaja. A tropical storm
warning may be needed for these islands later Tuesday night or Wednesday.

On the forecast track, the center of Rina will approach the coast within the
hurricane warning area on Wednesday night and Thursday. Data from an Air Force
Reserve hurricane hunter aircraft indicated that maximum sustained winds have
increased to near 110 mph, with higher gusts. Rina is a category two hurricane
on the Saffir-Simpson hurricane wind scale. Some additional strengthening is
forecast during the next 48 hours and Rina is expected to become a major
hurricane Tuesday night or Wednesday. Hurricane force winds extend outward up to
30 miles from the centre and tropical storm force winds extend outward up to 140
miles.

Hurricane conditions are expected to reach the coast within the hurricane
warning area by early Thursday, with tropical storm conditions expected by
Wednesday afternoon or Wednesday night. Tropical storm conditions are expected
to reach the coast in the tropical storm warning area on Wednesday.

Rina is expected to produce rainfall amounts of 8 to 16 inches over the eastern
Yucatan peninsula from Wednesday morning into Friday. A dangerous storm surge
will raise water levels by as much as 5 to 7 feet above normal tide levels along
the immediate coast near and to the right of the track of the centre. Near the
coast, the surge will be accompanied by large and destructive waves.

Meanwhile, a surface trough over the south-central Caribbean Sea continues to
produce disorganized shower and thunderstorm activity. This system became less
organized on Tuesday and any development is expected to be slow to occur as it
moves west-northwestward at 15 to 20 mph over the next couple of days.

This system has a low chance -- 20 percent -- of becoming a tropical cyclone
during the next 48 hours. Regardless of development, locally heavy rains were
possible over Aruba, Curacao and Bonaire, the northwestern coast of Venezuela
and the northeastern coast of Colombia.

___ (c)2011 the Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) Visit the
Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) at www.caribbeannewsnow.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20111026-1CN-Hurricane-Rina-slowly-strengthening-1026-20111026

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CN


                                 Copyright 2011


                          FOCUS - 496 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           The Orange Leader (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             October 3, 2008 Friday

Forecasters predict October to be a busy month for hurricanes

BYLINE: Debby Schamber, The Orange Leader, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 539 words


Oct. 3--Southeast Texans may still feel Hurricane Ike's bite, but hurricane
season is not over yet and forecasters with the Colorado State University
predict October to pack a punch.

October is expected to be above average in activity. Forecasters expect to see
three named storms with two of the storms becoming hurricanes. They also expect
one of the hurricanes to become a Category 3, 4, or 5 hurricane. Overall, the
forecast team expects activity to be nearly twice the activity of the average
October. according to CSU forecasters.

Through September, this season has experienced 12 major storms, 6 hurricanes and
3 major hurricanes. There have been 74 named storm days so far this season which
is nearly twice the number of storm days expected through the end of September.

"We expect the month of October to be quite active," said Phil Klotzbach, lead
author of the hurricane forecast in a press release. 'We continue to observe low
sea surface temperatures across the tropical Atlantic. A combination of these
two factors typically leads to an active October."

Additionally, forecasters have continued to observe neutral ENSO (El Nino
Southern Oscillation) conditions in the tropical Pacific and do not expect the
conditions to be detrimental to October's activity.

'We predict the October will be quite active based on the climate signals
through September," said Dr. William Gray, of CSU who has been issuing forecast
for more than 25 years. "There has been a strong clustering of hurricane
activity around mid-July and late August-early September. We think we are
entering a new period of heightened activity that is likely to go for another
two to three weeks."

Three named storms formed during a very active July, which were Hurricanes
Bertha, Cristobal and Dolly. Bertha became the longest lived July storm on
record. Dolly made landfall in South Texas as a Category 2 hurricane.

August was slightly above average activity due largely to Hurricane Gustav which
became a major hurricane in the northwest Caribbean late in August and made
landfall in central Louisiana on Sept. 1.

September was also slightly above average activity. Several storms formed early
during early portion of the month with Hurricane Ike being the most notable. Ike
battered the Caribbean before slamming into our own backyard here in Southeast
Texas.

Hurricanes Hanna and Kyle also reached hurricane strength during September.

Hanna, which reduced to a tropical storm, hit the Carolinas Sept. 6 while Kyle
made landfall as a Category 1 in Nova Scotia, according to Erin Snavely,
meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Lake Charles, La.

Laura was a tropical storm, but has lost tropical characteristics, Snavely said.

Eyes now look for Marco, however, he has yet to make an appearance.

"Nothing has formed at this time," Snavely said.

To see more of The Orange Leader or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.orangeleader.com. Copyright (c) 2008, The Orange Leader, Texas
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20081003-XY-Forecasters-predict-October-to-be-a-busy-month-for-hurricanes-1003

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: XY


                                 Copyright 2008


                          FOCUS - 497 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                            November 28, 2008 Friday

In a hard season, Florida got off easy

BYLINE: ANNA SCOTT anna.scott@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 871 words


The 2008 hurricane season ends Sunday, leaving behind assurances that the era of
pumped-up storm activity is still alive and spinning.

While the previous two hurricane seasons were relatively quiet, this year's
season ranked in the top 20 percent for most storm activity over the past 50
years.

"It has been a busy year by any measure," said Chris Landsea, science and
operations officer at the National Hurricane Center in Miami. "Overall, it's
suggestive that we're still in an active period."

Scientists have tracked a steady uptick in Atlantic basin hurricane activity
since 1995. The prevailing thought has been that the increase is part of a cycle
of above-average storm activity that will likely last another 10 to 25 years.

But the 2006 and 2007 hurricane seasons broke with the trend -- each was
below-normal -- and cast doubt on the theory.

For the first time since then, the level of hurricane activity has returned to
the average for the period starting in 1995. The last six months brought 16
named storms, eight of them hurricanes and five of them major hurricanes.

The duration of the storms -- there were 84 days when a named storm was
swirling, and 29 hurricane days -- was double that of 2007.

The season was also significant for Floridians in particular.

While 2008 marks the third year in a row the state has avoided a hurricane
strike, Tropical Storm Fay did nearly as much damage, making a record four
landfalls on the state -- more than any other Tropical Storm or hurricane ever
recorded.

Fay slowly zigzagged across the state, crossing Key West on Aug. 18, making
landfall in Cape Romano, south of Naples, leaving the east coast near Melbourne,
re-entering near Flagler Beach and again making landfall near Carabelle in the
Panhandle.

It spawned 15 tornadoes, caused 15 deaths, and pushed flood waters above 3 feet
in northern and eastern parts of the state.

One benefit: The flooding brought relief from drought. Fay restored Lake
Okeechobee from 9.3 feet in June back to 15 feet by the middle of September.

Nearly two-thirds of Florida counties received government recovery aid or were
declared federal disaster areas after Fay. Insured damages are $246 million.
Estimated assistance payments top $250 million.

In addition, the three hurricanes that made landfall in the U.S. -- Dolly, Ike
and Gustav -- enveloped Florida in the cone of uncertainty, where landfall was
possible. They all landed on the Gulf Coast as Category 2 storms.

Hurricanes Dolly and Ike struck Texas, and Gustav, which prompted former
presidential candidate John McCain to postpone the Republican nominating
convention, made landfall in Louisiana.

Other storms that amounted to near misses for Floridians meant mayhem to
residents of Haiti and Cuba. Hundreds of Haitians died and crops were washed
away when four tropical storms blasted the island in less than a month.

"This was the most active and deadly hurricane season since 2005," noted Mike
Stone, spokesman for the Florida Department of Emergency Management. "Between
the Caribbean nations and the U.S. we had nearly 900 fatalities."

The 2008 season as a whole did not match the intensity of the record-breaking
2005 season, when 27 named storms spun through the Atlantic. But the month of
July came close.

With three named storms, two hurricanes and one major hurricane, only July of
2005 showcased a higher level of hurricane activity in the period starting in
1995.

This period of increased Atlantic hurricane activity is a result of a period of
busier monsoon seasons in Africa. It contributes to warmer ocean temperatures,
calmer winds and more rain over west Africa, which creates more tropical waves
that eventually become hurricanes.

In 2006, when only 10 named storms formed, the El Nino weather pattern was
thought to have driven them away. In 2007, unexpected bouts of wind shear tore
most of them apart within a few days.

"When you're in an active era it doesn't mean every season is going to be very
active, it means the conditions are going to be in place every year," said Gerry
Bell, NOAA's lead seasonal hurricane forecaster.

"Even in 2006 and 2007 the base conditions for active seasons were in place.
This year they popped up again. It's a good reminder to people -- expect these
conditions to last."

HOW THE 2008 SEASON STACKS UP STATISTICALLY Every hurricane season ushers in a
new round of record-breakers. Here is a look at what made 2008 special: Tropical
Storm Fay was the first system in U.S. history to make four landfalls in the
same state, breaking the record of three landfalls set by Hurricane Gordon in
Florida in 1994. The 2008 season is the first on record to have a major storm in
each of five consecutive months, July through November. With six storms making
U.S. landfall in a row, the 2008 hurricane season broke the record number of
consecutive storms to land here. The six storms were Hurricane Dolly, Tropical
Storm Eduoard, Tropical Storm Fay, Hurricane Gustav, Tropical Storm Hanna, and
Hurricane Ike. The previous record was five storms in 2004. Tropical Storm Marco
became the smallest on record, with winds estimated to extend only 10 nautical
miles from the center of the system. The previous record was in 1974. SOURCE:
Tropical Meteorology Project

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2008 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 498 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             May 27, 2010 Thursday

In storm season, oil is a side issue

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: A; ARTICLE; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: FORT LAUDERDALE


FORT LAUDERDALE

HURRICANES: Officials want public to be vigilant about wind and surge, not spill

The combination of a catastrophic oil slick in the Gulf of Mexico and the start
of hurricane season brings an unprecedented threat for human and environmental
disaster. But emergency managers say speculation about the slick is
overshadowing the real, life-threatening dangers of hurricanes this year.

With the start of hurricane season just five days away, emergency officials and
National Hurricane Center forecasters want to emphasize hurricane preparedness.
At the annual statewide hurricane conference this week, however, they have been
bombarded with oil slick questions.

Federal Emergency Management Agency Administrator Craig Fugate said the slick's
presence and forecasts for a busier than normal hurricane season have not
changed his focus.

"If people do not heed evacuation orders, if people do not move to higher
ground, we're going to lose lives," Fugate said at the conference.

While officials want to keep the attention on the single threat of hurricanes,
the oil should be considered an important, and probably disastrous, component of
this year's season, said Jeff Masters, meteorologist and founder of Weather
Underground.

"I'd say it's highly likely that we'll get some sort of tropical storm or
hurricane pushing the oil around significantly," Masters said.

Since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and sank off the Louisiana coast more
than a month ago, oil has poured into the Gulf at a rate of more than 5,000
barrels a day -- and possibly more than 10 times that.

In the past 15 years, 35 tropical storms or hurricanes have passed within 200
miles of the center of the spill, now stretching about 100 miles wide, Masters
said. That amounts to an average of more than two storms per year.

Seasonal forecasters with the Colorado State University and a top meteorologist
with the National Center for Atmospheric Research, also in Colorado, told news
media on Wednesday that this year's hurricane season might be one for the record
books.

Environmental factors such as wind patterns and ocean temperatures are more
conducive to storm development this year than in the record-setting 2005 season,
said Greg Holland, director of the Mesoscale and Microscale Meteorology Division
of the National Center for Atmospheric Research Boulder, Colo.

While the oil spill is not likely to put lives at direct risk, its combination
with the approach of hurricane season has fueled considerable doomsday
speculation. Masters on Wednesday addressed almost every imaginable scenario,
from flaming hurricanes to sea spay splattering oil for miles.

He ruled out the likelihood that lightning could ignite an oil-laden hurricane
into a cyclonic fireball. The wind and rain hurricanes produce dampens the
chance of that happening.

More realistically, a hurricane could spread the oil for hundreds of miles along
a Gulf of Mexico coastline or send violent sea sprays full of oil droplets and
toxic dispersents far inland.

And if the slick grows at least five times bigger and decomposes into large mats
of tarry goo instead of sheen, it could absorb enough sunlight to raise the Gulf
of Mexico water temperature. The increased heat could intensify a passing
tropical storm or hurricane.

The opposite scenario could occur with a developing storm, one producing winds
of less than 40 miles per hour. In that case, the oil could suppress the storm
by inhibiting rainfall and wave action.

Forecasters with the National Hurricane Center are testing theories about the
interaction of storms and oil, agency spokesman Dennis Feltgen said in a
prepared statement.

Masters blamed the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's leadership
for putting a clamp on discussions about how hurricanes could affect the slick
and vice versa.

"It's time to stop being conservative. They need to have their scientists
talking directly to the public, not in talking points," Masters said, adding
that the NOAA scientists are some of the best in the world. "I shouldn't be the
one having to do it."

This report includes information from Herald-Tribune wire services.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: AP PHOTO / J PAT CARTER Bill Read, the Director of the National
Hurricane Center, speaks to the media about the upcoming hurricane season at the
annual Governor's Hurricane conference in Fort Lauderdale Wednesday.Read says
the potential for a new catastrophe in Haiti is his biggest concern for the
upcoming Atlantic storm season. Officials says the oil spill in the Gulf of
Mexico will have little effect on any storms that develop in those waters, but a
hurricane could help break it up.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 499 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             August 5, 2011 Friday

Experts upgrade storm forecast

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 825 words


HURRICANES: Predictions now call for nearly double the usual tally. Here's why.

Heading into the busiest part of the hurricane season, federal forecasters have
significantly increased their prediction for the number of storms they expect to
form in the Atlantic this year, to almost double the typical total.

Conditions have become so conducive to hurricane formation that up to 19 named
storms -- seven to 10 of them hurricanes -- are expected, forecasters with the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said on Thursday. A typical
season has 11 named storms, six of them hurricanes.

The prediction is one of the most aggressive August forecasts since NOAA began
issuing the seasonal figures in 1998. The activity, however, is not expected to
exceed last year's total of 19 named storms or 2005's total of 27.

But with potentially 14 more named storms to go, the season will be busy enough.
The fifth storm since the six-month hurricane season began on June 1, Tropical
Storm Emily, broke apart over Haiti on Thursday.

"Make no mistake about it: We're predicting an active season," said Gerry Bell,
lead seasonal hurricane forecaster for NOAA's Climate Prediction Center. "This
year we're expecting a lot of activity. You need to be prepared."

In May, forecasters anticipated a busy season, with 12 to 18 named storms. The
confidence level in that forecast was only 65 percent, however. Now, the
confidence level for a more active season is 85 percent, as the conditions that
make for a busy season have become more pronounced.

Sea surface temperatures in the tropical Pacific, which trigger the El Niño and
La Niña weather patterns, drove a large part of the forecast change. Forecasters
were uncertain in May about which pattern would take hold during the peak of
hurricane season from mid-August through mid-October.

Now, experts say that neither pattern is likely to be present until about
October, at which point La Niña may develop. Neutral conditions favor hurricane
activity, but La Niña, caused by cooler than normal seas in the tropical
Pacific, adds a boost.

Cool Pacific waters lead to fewer storms there, which then relaxes westerly wind
flow over the Atlantic. Hurricanes move from east to west with the trade winds.
Strong opposing winds shred them apart by disrupting their organized
counter-clockwise motion.

El Niño, the opposite of La Niña, usually makes for a quiet hurricane season by
increasing westerly wind flow over the Atlantic.

Sea surface temperatures in the tropical Atlantic also have a big influence on
the hurricane season by giving storms more fuel. The water needs to be 80
degrees for a hurricane to develop. Temperatures across the tropical Atlantic
are about 85 degrees, with higher temperatures -- up to 90 degrees -- in the
Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean. Seas are about a degree above normal where
most hurricanes form.

Also, atmospheric pressure over much of the tropical Atlantic is lower than
normal, which increases instability in the atmosphere and allows more
thunderstorms to develop.

The conditions are similar to those found last year. But last time around, La
Niña set in before the hurricane season began. Also, sea surface temperatures in
the Atlantic were the warmest on record.

Although last year had more storms than forecasters predict for this year, the
warmer seas may have helped keep some of the storms that formed away from the
U.S. Several very intense thunderstorms rolled off the African coast during the
peak of the season and became tropical storms or hurricanes almost immediately.
Such thunderstorms usually spend more time over the Atlantic before they
develop, bringing them closer to the U.S. and Caribbean.

"When they form that far east, because they have so much more ocean to go, they
have a much larger chance of recurving over the Atlantic before making
landfall," Bell said.

Bell would not speculate on whether cooler seas this year would cause more
storms to develop closer to the U.S. Steering patterns in the atmosphere, which
usually cannot be predicted beyond a week, deflected all of last year's storms
north to Canada or south to the Caribbean and Mexico, sparing the U.S. from a
hurricane strike for the second year in a row.

"The U.S. was fortunate, but a lot of other places were not and there's no
reason to expect that we could be lucky like that again," Bell said.

Last year was the third-most active hurricane season in the Atlantic record; the
year before was one of the least active in recent history.

The last hurricane strike on the U.S. was Sept. 13, 2008, when Hurricane Ike
pushed a 25-foot storm surge up Galveston Bay and caused floodwaters to creep
more than 10 miles inland. Although it was a Category 2 storm, not a major
hurricane, the damage it caused was eclipsed only by Hurricane Katrina in 2005
and Hurricane Andrew in 1992.

The last major hurricane to strike the U.S. was Hurricane Wilma in 2005. That
was also the last hurricane to strike Florida.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 500 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                           September 10, 2013 Tuesday

'Strange' season perplexes hurricane forecasters

BYLINE: ZAC ANDERSON

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 643 words


PREDICTIONS: Despite slow start, series of storms still could form in fall
months

As the peak of hurricane season arrives today without a major storm having
formed, forecasters are starting to rethink predictions of a busy year for
high-powered tropical systems.

Depending on what happens with Tropical Storm Humberto this week, 2013 could
mark the slowest start to a hurricane season by one measure in more than 100
years.

Humberto formed off the coast of Africa on Monday and is expected to stay far
away from Florida.

The system is notable only because forecasters believe it has a good chance of
becoming the first hurricane of the season. If it does, it would be one of the
latest first hurricanes on record.

On average, two hurricanes should have formed by now. Past seasons have started
slow and finished with a flurry of tropical cyclones, but the window is starting
to close.

Phil Klotzbach, a research scientist with Colorado State University's Tropical
Meteorology Project, has been perplexed by the hurricane season's progress so
far. Klotzbach predicted there would be 18 named storms this year, including
eight hurricanes. The average is 12 named storms and six hurricanes.

Other forecasters, including the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, also looked at the conditions that contribute to storm formation
earlier this year and similarly predicted a busy season.

"As with any statistical model, there are going to be busts in some years,"
Klotzbach wrote in an email, adding: "I'm certainly going to be doing a lot of
study over the next couple of months to try and figure out exactly what happened
with this year's hurricane season. It's a very strange one so far!"

Hurricanes feed off moisture, but there has been an unusual amount of dry air at
mid-levels in the atmosphere this year.

Additionally, strong upper-level westerly winds have hampered hurricane
development. Such winds usually are less prevalent during years when the El Niño
weather pattern is absent, as it is this year.

"The combination of wind shear and dry air have certainly been the surprise
factors," said Accuweather meteorologist Dan Kottlowski.

Kottlowski's team predicted 16 named storms this year and eight hurricanes. He
no longer believes that many hurricanes will form.

"We do not think we will have an above-normal year for hurricanes" anymore, he
said.

Yet in some ways this has actually been a busy year for tropical cyclones.
Humberto is the eighth named storm of the season. That mark usually is not hit
until Sept. 24. But none of the storms have generated sustained winds of 74 mph,
the minimum required to qualify as a hurricane.

There are still more than 2 1/2 months left in the hurricane season, but the
tropics must heat up fast for an above-average season to materialize.

The probability of major storms forming starts dropping after today. Hurricanes
are rare after late October.

Still, it's not unusual for a series of storms to form quickly in September and
October, even after a slow start to the hurricane season.

The first hurricane of 2001 did not form until Sept. 9, but the season ended
with nine hurricanes and 15 named storms.

"We're only at the midway point," said Hurricane Center spokesman Dennis
Feltgen. "We still have a lot of season to go."

The record for the latest first hurricane of the season is Oct. 8, 1905,
although before satellites were invented some storms likely went undetected if
they stayed out at sea. The six-month hurricane season ends Nov. 30.

The latest first hurricane of the modern satellite era is Hurricane Gustav,
which formed on Sept. 11, 2002.

Forecasters are predicting that Humberto will become a hurricane late today or
Wednesday, possibly eclipsing Gustav but leaving 1905 in the record books.

"It's the old baseball saying: Records are made to be broken," Feltgen said.
"This is a record I don't mind breaking."

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Research scientist Phil Klotzbach predicted there would be 18 named
storms this year, including eight hurricanes. Homes in Braithwaite, La., are
seen amid floodwaters from Hurricane Isaac, which barely had hurricane-strength
winds when it blew ashore southwest of New Orleans about a year ago. AP ARCHIVE
/ SEPTEMBER 2012

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 501 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             May 28, 2015 Thursday

NOAA also calls for a mild season

BYLINE: HAROLD BUBIL Real Estate Editor

SECTION: B; ARCHIVES; Pg. BNV01

LENGTH: 653 words


HURRICANES: Forecasters predict few storms, but warn against complacency

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on Wednesday joined several
private tropical storm forecasters in predicting a below-average hurricane
season this year.

The federal government's outlook calls for a 70 percent chance of a below-normal
season, and a 20 percent chance of a near-normal season. The odds are only 1 in
10 that the season will be more active than usual.

But hurricane forecasting is not based on Las Vegas-style odds. It is based on
facts, and the facts show that the presence of the El Ninõ warm-water phenomenon
in the Pacific Ocean that poses a threat to emerging storms off the coast of
Africa.

El Ninõ creates a westerly wind pattern that tends to shear the tops off of
tropical disturbances in the Atlantic.

NOAA's forecast is much broader than the one released earlier this spring by the
Tropical Meteorology Project at Colorado State University. Phil Klotzbach, who
has taken over that forecast from William Gray, predicted seven named storms,
three hurricanes and one major hurricane for 2015 season, which officially
begins Monday and runs through November.

NOAA is expecting six to 11 named storms (tropical storms and hurricanes
combined), three to six hurricanes and zero to two major hurricanes of Category
3 or stronger.

The average hurricane season generates 12 named storms, including six hurricanes
- four of them major - and two storms that make landfall in the United States.

Klotzbach says the eastern seaboard, including the Florida peninsula, has a 15
percent chance of a hurricane landfall. The average for the past century is 31
percent.

North Carolina State University's forecast calls for four to six storms, one to
three hurricanes and zero or one major hurricane.

With the meteorologists unanimously predicting yet another below-average season,
the main concern among emergency managers and forecasters is the "C" word -
complacency.

"Most people don't care about an emergency until there is an emergency," said
Cathie Perkins of Miami-Dade County's emergency management department.

"It only takes one," said Wayne Sallade, Charlotte County's emergency manager.
He, like other hurricane professionals, point out that some of the deadliest
hurricanes in history have occurred in below-average hurricane seasons.

"Florida learned that the hard way in 1992, when the first storm didn't come
along until late August," Sallade said. "That was Andrew, and he made for a
really bad season here in Florida, despite there being only four storms that
season.

"In El Ninõ years, the Gulf and western Caribbean are often busier, and the
storms come later in the season. We never consider those predictions, as we
prepare the same each year."

Part of the complacency risk is tied to an inexperienced public.

"We haven't been threatened in a long time," said Betty Morrow, a sociologist in
Miami who works with the National Hurricane Center to refine how it communicates
forecasts and warnings. "We get all kinds of new residents all the time. It is a
moving population, and they have not been exposed to it.

"Evacuation is not simple. It that takes a lot to get up and leave your home. It
takes resources. We are not talking about a light decision."

Adding to the public's indecision is the unpredictability of hurricanes. In
2004, countless Tampa Bay-area residents evacuated inland as Hurricane Charley
approached. Then the small-but-vicious storm turned into Charlotte Harbor,
headed up the middle of the state via Arcadia, and went right over the top of
many who had evacuated the bay area.

"Is the hurricane coming?" said Robert Molleda, a National Weather Service
meteorologist, at the recent Governor's Hurricane Conference in Orlando. "That
is the hardest question to answer without disclaimers and modifiers. There are
complex scenarios with many variables and possible outcomes. We are criticized
for that."

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 502 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                              June 15, 2015 Monday

Surging danger

BYLINE: John Hielscher

SECTION: D; FL News; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 599 words


HURRICANES

More than 320,000 homes in Southwest Florida are at risk of a hurricane storm
surge, with a potential rebuilding tab topping $61 billion.

Florida, surrounded by water, has the most homes at risk of a storm surge and
the highest reconstruction cost value in the U.S., according to an annual study
by data provider CoreLogic.

The start of the 2015 hurricane season on June 1 brought renewed attention to
the potential damage that could be caused by a major storm. While it has been 10
seasons since a hurricane made landfall in Florida, experts say the risk of
storm surge damage remains high.

"The number of hurricanes each year is less important than the location of where
the next hurricane will come ashore," said Tom Jeffery, senior hazard risk
scientist at CoreLogic.

"It only takes one hurricane that pushes storm surge into a major metropolitan
areas for the damage to tally in the billions of dollars. With new home
construction, and any amount of sea-level rise, the number of homes at risk of
storm surge damage will continue to increase," he said.

In Sarasota and Manatee counties, 229,889 homes have locations that make them in
low to extreme storm surge risk levels, CoreLogic says. They have an estimated
reconstruction cost value of $42.3 billion.

Of those, 42,389 homes are in the "extreme" risk zone, meaning they would be
affected by all hurricane category levels.

In Charlotte County, 93,151 homes are storm-surge candidates, with an estimated
rebuild cost of $19 billion. Among them are 44,497 homes that would be affected
by any hurricane.

Statewide, 2.5 million at-risk homes would cost $491.1 billion to rebuild.

The Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater region ranked third among major U.S. metro
areas, with 447,990 properties that would cost $78.1 billion to replace.

Louisiana was second for the number of homes with 760,272, but third in value at
$162 billion. New York was third with 464,534 homes and second at $177.3
billion.

Nationwide, more than 6.6 million homes on the Atlantic and Gulf coasts are at
risk of hurricane storm inundation with a reconstruction cost of nearly $1.5
trillion, CoreLogic said.

Forecasters are predicting a below-average hurricane season this year.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said there is a 70 percent
chance of a below-normal season, with 20 percent odds of a near-normal season.
NOAA expects six to 11 named tropical storms or hurricanes, with three to six
hurricanes and up to two major hurricanes of Category 3 or stronger.

The experts at Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project predict
seven named storms, with three hurricanes and one major hurricane.

The long hurricane drought has helped stabilize the property insurance market
that was roiled after the disastrous 2004-2005 storm seasons when eight
hurricanes slammed Florida.

The state-run Citizens Property Insurance, the largest property carrier, has
built up a $7.5 billion surplus. The Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund has $13
billion in cash reserves that serve as a safety net for Florida's private
insurers, providing cheaper reinsurance that helps hold down homeowners' rates.

Storm surge risks

Storm surge risk level Homes potentially affected Estimated rebuild cost

Sarasota-Manatee

Extreme 42,389 $9.41 billion

Very high 42,210 $8.10 billion

High 59,153 $10.59 billion

Moderate 43,721 $7.38 billion

Low 42,416 $6.82 billion

Total 229,889 $42.31 billion

Charlotte

Extreme 44,497 $9.82 billion

Very high 22,223 $3.97 billion

High 12,443 $2.33 billion

Moderate 12,239 $2.51 billion

Low 1,749 $353.28 million

Total 93,151 $19.00 billion

-Source: CoreLogic

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Real estate agent Tim Sidmuke looks over a nine-unit condominium on
Seagrove Beach, Fla., that was condemned after Hurricane Dennis struck in 2005.
The second floor of the unit fell to the beach after the storm surge hit the
building. AP ARCHIVE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 503 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 15, 2017 Monday

Washington: Hurricane Awareness Tour stresses awareness and preparedness along
Atlantic coast

LENGTH: 613  words

DATELINE: New York



Washington: U.S. Air Force Reserve Command has issued the following news
release:

The Air Force Reserve's 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron "Hurricane Hunters"
and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Hurricane Center
partnered together for another year to promote hurricane preparedness through
the 2017 Hurricane Awareness Tour May 6-12.


According to Dr. Rick Knabb, National Hurricane Center director, the purpose of
this tour, also known as the HAT, is to focus attention on the approaching
hurricane season and on protecting communities through preparedness and
awareness.
"We've been talking about being 'hurricane strong' because the things you need
to do to get ready for the next hurricane and to survive the hurricane, and to
recover in the aftermath, are a lot more difficult, a lot more expensive to do -
if not impossible - if you wait until the last minute," said Knabb.
Maj. Devon Meister, 53rd WRS pilot and mission commander for the Hurricane
Hunters on the HAT, mentioned the main importance behind these types of tours.

"(They're important) primarily for education, not only for the kids, but also
for the local media and the community," said Meister. "It's important to show
how the Hurricane Hunters and the National Hurricane Center are working in
concert with local civic leaders to get them the most accurate information
possible so they can make informed decisions and so families can make
appropriate preparations and evacuation plans."
Meister noted how the data that the Hurricane Hunters provide to the NHC can
increase the accuracy of forecasts by up to 30 percent, which is important in
helping to narrow down the cone of uncertainty in NHC storm-tracking models.
Several other government and private organizations took part in the tour to
spread the message of awareness and preparedness, such as Chief, Aerial
Reconnaissance Coordination, All Hurricanes, and the Federal Alliance for Safe
Homes.
During the tour, the Hurricane Hunters and other HAT participants flew the
squadron's WC-130J Super Hercules aircraft to six locations along the Atlantic
coast of North America. Officials from various local government organizations,
as well as local and national media, toured the aircraft at each stop and talked
with Hurricane Hunter crew members and other tour participants.
The first stop was in Gander, Newfoundland, Canada, on May 7. Canada had most
recently felt the effects of Hurricane Igor in 2010, so the NHC tries to include
it in the HAT each year to help promote preparedness and awareness as well.
Their second stop on the tour was their first one in the United States; HAT
participants and the Hurricane Hunters met with local officials, media, school
children and the public in Islip, New York, May 8.
The tour's third stop on May 9, was a historic one for this event. This was the
first time the HAT took place at the Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport,
in Arlington, Virginia just outside of Washington D.C. It was also the first
time four of the airplanes used by the Hurricane Hunters and NOAA were all
together at one stop on the HAT. The Hurricane Hunter aircraft is the WC-130J
Hercules, and the three NOAA aircraft are the Gulfstream IV-SP, the Beechcraft
King Air 350 CER, and the WP-3D Orion. At least one of these NOAA aircraft was
at each stop along the tour with the Air Force Reserve Hurricane Hunter plane.

The Hurricane Hunters and other 2017 HAT participants stopped at Raleigh, North
Carolina, for their fourth leg of the HAT May 10. The governor of North
Carolina, Roy Cooper, spoke at the event and toured the Hurricane Hunters'
WC-130J Hercules aircraft after the press b

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 504 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             October 2, 2016 Sunday

Hurricane warning issued for Jamaica and much of Haiti

BYLINE: Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 686 words


Oct. 02--MIAMI, USA -- Hurricane Matthew, which remained a category 4 hurricane
on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale on Saturday, is expected to approach
Jamaica and southwestern Haiti on Monday, bringing life-threatening rainfall to
portions of Haiti.

The government of Jamaica has issued a hurricane warning for Jamaica and a
hurricane warning has also been issued for Haiti from the southern border with
the Dominican Republic to Le Mole St Nicholas.

According to the National Hurricane Center (NHC) in Miami, at 5:00 pm EDT on
Saturday, the eye of Hurricane Matthew was located about 360 miles (580 km)
south-southwest of Port au Prince, Haiti, and about 385 miles (620 km) southeast
of Kingston, Jamaica, drifting toward the northwest near 3 mph (6 km/h).

A slow northwestward motion is expected to continue through Saturday night and a
turn toward the north-northwest with an increase in forward speed is expected on
Sunday, followed by a turn toward the north on Monday.

A hurricane watch is in effect for Haiti from east of Le Mole St Nicholas to the
northern border with the Dominican Republic, Cuba from Camaguey province to
Guantanamo province. Interests elsewhere in Hispaniola and in The Bahamas should
monitor the progress of Matthew. A hurricane watch could be issued for portions
of The Bahamas on Saturday night or Sunday.

Data from a NOAA Hurricane Hunter aircraft indicate that maximum sustained winds
are near 150 mph (240 km/h) with higher gusts. Some fluctuations in intensity
are possible during the next couple of days, but Matthew is expected to remain a
powerful hurricane through Monday. Hurricane-force winds extend outward up to 25
miles (35 km) from the centre and tropical-storm-force winds extend outward up
to 205 miles (335 km).

Hurricane conditions are expected to reach the warning area in Jamaica and Haiti
on Monday. Tropical storm conditions are expected to first reach these areas by
late Sunday or Sunday night, making outside preparations difficult or dangerous.
Preparations to protect life and property should be rushed to completion.
Hurricane conditions are possible the hurricane watch areas by Monday night or
Tuesday morning, with tropical storm conditions possible by Monday.

Matthew is expected to produce additional rain accumulations of 1 to 2 inches
over Aruba, Curacao, and Bonaire through Sunday. Matthew is expected to produce
total rain accumulations of 2 to 4 inches over northern Colombia, northwest
Venezuela, and western Jamaica, with possible isolated maximum amounts of 6
inches. Matthew is expected to produce total rain accumulations of 15 to 25
inches over southern Haiti, with possible isolated maximum amounts of 40 inches.
Matthew is expected to produce total rain accumulations of 10 to 20 inches over
eastern Jamaica, the Dominican Republic, and eastern Cuba, with possible
isolated maximum amounts of 25 inches. This rainfall will likely produce
life-threatening flash floods and mud slides.

The combination of a dangerous storm surge and large and destructive waves could
raise water levels by as much as the following amounts above normal tide levels:
southern coast of Cuba east of Cabo Cruz -- 7 to 11 feet; south coast of Haiti
-- 5 to 8 feet; northern coast of Cuba east of Camaguey-- 4 to 6 feet; Jamaica
-- 3 to 5 feet; Gulf of Gonave in Haiti -- 2 to 4 feet. Surge-related flooding
depends on the relative timing of the surge and the tidal cycle, and can vary
greatly over short distances. Large waves generated by Matthew will cause water
rises to occur well in advance of and well away from the track of the centre.

Swells generated by Matthew are expected to affect portions of the coasts of
Puerto Rico, Hispaniola, Jamaica, Aruba, Bonaire, Curacao, Venezuela, Colombia,
eastern Cuba, and the Caribbean coastline of Central America during the next few
days. These swells are likely to cause life-threatening surf and rip current
conditions.

___ (c)2016 the Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) Visit the
Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) at www.caribbeannewsnow.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20161002-1CN-Hurricane-warning-issued-for-Jamaica-and-much-of-Haiti-1002-2016100
2

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CN


        Copyright 2016 Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands


                          FOCUS - 505 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                  The National

                           September 9, 2017 Saturday

Miami awaits Hurricane Irma - in pictures

BYLINE: The National

LENGTH: 664  words


The National


Forecasters say the city could miss the worst of the devastating storm

Dark clouds are seen over Miami's skyline prior to the arrival of Hurricane Irma
to south Florida. Carlos Barria / Reuters

A woman walks along South Beach prior to the arrival of Hurricane Irma to south
Florida, in Miami. Carlos Barria / Reuters

Miami Beach Police Department officers speak at an intersection ahead of the
arrival of Hurricane Irma in Miami. Adrees Latif / Reuters

The Miami skyline is seen ahead of the arrival of Hurricane Irma in Miami Beach,
Florida. Adrees Latif / Reuters

Boats clustered together after Hurricane Irma. The death toll from Hurricane
Irma has risen to 22 as the storm continues its destructive path through the
Caribbean. The dead include 11 on St Martin and St Barts, four in the US Virgin
Islands and four in the British Virgin Islands. There was also one each in
Barbuda, Anguilla, and Barbados. The toll is expected to rise as rescuers reach
some of the hardest-hit areas. Caribbean Buzz via AP

The Miami skyline is seen in the background as a boy fishes ahead of the arrival
of Hurricane Irma in Miami Beach, Florida. Adrees Latif / Reuters

In this Tuesday, August 28, 2012 file photo, waves from the Santa Rosa Sound
crash over the Navarre Beach causeway in Navarre, Florida, as Isaac approaches
the Gulf Coast.

The National Hurricane Center warns that the worst damage from 2017's Hurricane
Irma could be from storm surge that could top 12 feet high in some areas of the
Florida coast. Nick Tomecek / Northwest Florida Daily News via AP

A lone pedestrian walks through the usually bustling South Beach ahead of
Hurricane Irma in Miami Beach. Florida has asked 5.6 million people to evacuate
ahead of Hurricane Irma, or more than one quarter of the state's population,
according to state emergency officials. David Goldman / AP Photo

The Miami skyline is seen in the background as boys fish ahead of the arrival of
Hurricane Irma in Miami Beach, Florida. Adrees Latif / Reuters

Hurricane Irma's relentless advance on Florida narrowed the window for residents
to get to safely, with the latest forecasts shifting landfall southwest of the
heavily populated Miami metro area.

Forecasters adjusted Hurricane Irma's potential track more toward the west coast
of Florida, away from the Miami metropolitan area of 6 million people, meaning
"a less costly, a less deadly storm," University of Miami researcher Brian
McNoldy said.

Nevertheless, forecasters warned that its hurricane-force winds were so wide
they could reach from coast to coast, testing the nation's third-largest state,
which has undergone rapid development and more stringent hurricane-proof
building codes in the last decade or so.

"This is a storm that will kill you if you don't get out of the way," National
Hurricane Center meteorologist Dennis Feltgen said. "Everybody's going to feel
this one."

Irma killed at least 20 people in the Caribbean and left thousands homeless as
it devastated small resort islands known for their warm, turquoise water.

In Florida, gas shortages and gridlock plagued the evacuations, turning normally
simple trips into tests of will. Parts of interstates 75 and 95 north were
bumper-to-bumper, while very few cars drove in the southbound lanes.

______________

UAE embassy in US welcomes citizens evacuated from Florida ahead of Irma

______________

"We're getting out of this state," said Manny Zuniga, who left his home in
Miamiat midnight Thursday to avoid the gridlock. "Irma is going to take all of
Florida."

Despite driving overnight, he still took 12 hours to reach Orlando -- a trip
that normally takes four hours. From there, he and his wife, two children, two
dogs and a ferret were headed to Arkansas.

Andrew razed Miami's suburbs with winds topping 165 mph (265 kph), damaging or
blowing apart over 125,000 homes. Almost all mobile homes in its path were
obliterated. The damage totaled $26 billion in Florida's most-populous areas. At
least 40 people were killed in Florida.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 818


                     Copyright 2017 Abu Dhabi Media Company
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 506 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                            November 5, 2012 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricanes vs. People

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 299 words


THE EYE OF THE STORM

When a hurricane grows strong, thunderstorms form in a ring around the centre.
This ring of storms is called the wall of the hurricane. The wall is where the
worst conditions are, with the highest winds and the most rain. The centre of
the storm is called the eye. Inside the eye, there is no thunderstorm activity.
The conditions are clear and calm. The eye may be 45 to 65 kilometres across.

HURRICANE SEASON

The hurricane season in the U.S. is from June through November. Most hurricanes
hit from mid-August through October.

Most hurricanes in North America hit the East Coast. The Pacific Ocean waters
off the U.S. West Coast are usually too cold for hurricanes to form. Hurricanes
like the warmer water flowing from the Gulf Stream up the East Coast.

Look through your newspaper for stories and pictures about storms.

TOP DANGERS

The top four dangers from hurricanes are: . storm surge

. high winds

. flooding

. heavy rainfall

A storm surge is a mountain of water that can stretch up to 160 kilometres wide.
It is the biggest danger from a hurricane.

As the hurricane moves ashore, sea levels rise quickly, sometimes within just a
few minutes. Huge, battering waves increase the danger. Sea levels can rise by
more than 5 metres. Much of the East Coast and Gulf Coast, where a lot of people
live, are less than 3 metres above sea level.

Storm surges from Hurricane Katrina rose to 8.5 metres above sea level. Coastal
areas were left under 7.5 metres of water.

STAYING SAFE

Pay attention to the radio or TV. A hurricane watch means one could hit within
48 hours. A hurricane warning means a hurricane is expected with 36 hours.

Stay inside unless you are told to evacuate (ee-VAK-yuh-wate), or leave the
area.

For more information, go to: oceantoday.noaa.gov/ hurricanesurvival/welcome.html

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: NASA; The eye of Hurricane Isabel is clear in this shot from the
International Space Station.; LT. MIKE SILAH, NOAA;  The wall of a hurricane got
that name because it really does look like a wall when pilots are flying in it.
A NOAA Corps officer flew into Hurricane Katrina. She shot this photo as she
faced the hurricane's wall. Hurricane hunters fly directly into hurricanes to
gather information to keep people safe. The first time a pilot deliberately flew
into a hurricane was in 1943, during World War II. Before satellites, this was
the only way to learn about them.; NOAA;  Floodwaters cover large parts of New
Orleans after Hurricane Katrina. Heavy rains added to the flooding.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2012 The Gazette, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 507 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                             May 25, 2013 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

U.S., Canada get hurricane warning; Another tough season predicted

BYLINE: WILLIAM MARSDEN, Postmedia News Washington Bureau

SECTION: NEWS; William Marsden; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 468 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Seven months after hurricane Sandy ravaged the Atlantic coastline from Maryland
to Connecticut, U.S. and Canadian climate scientists are predicting another
banner season for the giant storms.

That could be bad news for the residents and business owners of the northeastern
seaboard, many of whom are still rebuilding their shattered lives after Sandy
killed 42 people and, according to insurers, cost about $65 billion U.S. in
destroyed homes and infrastructure.

The Canadian Hurricane Centre is also warning the Atlantic provinces of major
hurricane activity this season, primarily because of warmer ocean waters.

This year's hurricane season, which begins June 1 and which is expected to last
at least six months, will again be above normal, according to the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's hurricane centre.

NOAA predicts hurricanes in the Atlantic region will range from "active" to
"extremely active." Scientists said there is a 70 per cent likelihood of 13 to
20 named storms, of which seven to 11 could become hurricanes, with winds of 119
kilometres an hour or higher, and three to six major hurricanes (178 km/h or
higher). These numbers are well above the 1981-2010 seasonal averages of 12
named storms, six hurricanes and three major hurricanes for the Atlantic.

During the 2012 storm sea-son, the number of named storms in the Atlantic region
was higher than average but the intensity was lower. There were 19 named storms
of which 10 became hurricanes. Only one - Michael in September - was classified
as major. Sandy was just shy of the "major" category with winds up to 177 km/h.

NOAA says it does not make predictions of whether any of these hurricanes will
reach landfall because the path of hurricanes depends on daily weather patterns,
which cannot be predicted months or weeks in advance.

Scientists said the same atmospheric conditions are at play that have produced
increased Atlantic hurricane activity since 1995. These include a strong West
African monsoon, warmer tropical Atlantic and Caribbean waters, lower air
pressure and reduced wind shear. As usual, the storms will incubate just above
the equator off the west coast of Africa and travel westward toward the
Caribbean before turning north.

NOAA acting administrator Kathryn Sullivan warned that tropical storm and
hurricane impacts are not limited to the coastline.

"Strong winds, torrential rain, flooding and tornadoes often threaten inland
areas far from where the storm first makes landfall," she said.

Joe Nimmich, associate administrator at the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
warned Americans to prepare themselves for a difficult season. "Preparedness
today can make a big difference down the line, so update your family emergency
plan and make sure your emergency kit is stocked," he said in a statement.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GETTY IMAGES FILES; As many continue to rebuild after hurricane Sandy
ravaged the Atlantic coast in October, scientists are warning of an above normal
season for 2013.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 The Gazette, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 508 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                               Stornoway Gazette

                            October 21, 2014 Tuesday

Hurricanes hardly happen in the Hebrides... or do they?

BYLINE: Dr Eddy Graham

LENGTH: 755  words


The remains of ex-hurricane Gonzalo crossed Scotland on Tuesday, bringing heavy
rain, strong winds and some disruption.

Although inconvenient and unpleasant for us, the amount of disruption caused was
a far cry from that of the full-blown hurricanes which regularly threaten
vulnerable tropical islands and coasts during the summer.

In the Atlantic Ocean (Gulf of Mexico and the Carribean Sea), the hurricane
season lasts from June to December and up to a dozen or more hurricanes may form
in any given year.

Occasionally (usually once or twice a year) one of these hurricanes swings
north-eastwards into the North Atlantic Ocean and heads up towards Scotland,
just as ex-Hurricane Gonzalo has done during this past week.

What are hurricanes?

Hurricanes are part of a family of small revolving storm systems in the Tropics,
also known as Tropical Cyclones (in the Indian Ocean and Bay of Bengal) or
Typhoons (in the Far East and China Sea).

Unlike our regular low pressure systems or "depressions" in, tropical cyclones
are found only in the tropical regions between about 5° and 25° N/S.

They are smaller than our deepest Atlantic lows, being only a few hundred
kilometres across, but are considerably more severe and average windspeeds near
to their centres can reach well over 120 knots (140 mph).

Such storms may also bring torrential rainfall of up to 500 mm/day (20 inches)
and storm surges (sudden rises in sea-level) of up to 10 metres, devastating
coastal regions.

About 80 tropical cyclones occur worldwide each year, but only about 20 of them
reach "major" status.

There are a number of criteria that must be met before a hurricane can form.
Most importantly is the pre-requisite that the sea temperatures must be greater
than about 26.6°C (80°F) - which thankfully, is never achived near Scotland.

Only temperatures higher than value this allow for sufficient evaporation of
water to sustain the storm system. If windspeeds do not vary greatly with
height, this also favours their development, as it helps to avoid the system
"tearing itself apart".

This is contrast to our usual North Atlantic lows, in which windspeeds increase
strongly with height.

How is a hurricane born?

In the case of the North Atlantic hurricane, the initial disturbance from which
it grows is usually the remnants of a large thunderstorm moving offshore from
North Africa.

As these disturbances track across the Atlantic from east to west, a tropical
storm system may form. If average windspeeds within the storm reach 56 knots or
more (64 mph), then the storm is classified as a tropical cyclone (hurricane).

Once formed they are remarkable self-sustaining systems, and it is not unknown
for a tropical cyclone to meander around the tropics for two weeks or more,
before eventually making landfall or decaying over an area of cooler sea
temperatures.

The Eye

The most characteristic feature of a severe hurricane is the circular "eye" in
the direct centre of the storm (see photo, courtesy NASA).

Typically the eye is a few tens of kilometres in diameter and is an area of
eerily calm, clear and warm conditions, in complete contrast to the immense
towering walls of cloud and raging tempest surrounding it on all sides.

Atmospheric pressure in the central eye has been known to drop to a low as 880
hPa (millibars).

Hurricane Force

A hurricane should not be confused with the term hurricane force, which refer to
sustained winds of 64 knots or more (equivalent to Force 12 on the Beaufort
Scale), no matter from what type of storm system they are generated.

Thus, the most severe winter windstorms in the Hebrides may be referred to as
bringing winds of "hurricane force", but strictly speaking they are not
hurricanes.

Pack a Punch

But - every twenty years or so, one of ex-hurricanes reaching Scotland can still
pack a punch and is very severe. Usually such ex-hurricanes heading towards
Scotland lose their identity quickly and dissipate over the cooler seas of the
North Atlantic, but the remaining large quantities of moisture and energy may
become incorporated into our own separate low pressure systems, giving them a
kind of "turbo boost".

Such happened, for example, on 16 September 1961, when a low pressure system
owing its origins to ex-Hurricane Debbie gave an extraordinary wind gust of 98
knots at Malin Head in county Donegal, Ireland, a record that stll stands to
this day, and there was widespread havoc and disruption.

This week, we are having to deal with consequences of a very unsettled, albeit
less severe ex-Hurricane Gonzalo.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SLSG


                       Copyright 2014 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 509 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                             August 4, 2006 Friday

In the hurricane's path

BYLINE: Steve Rennie, Toronto Star

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 838 words


"Abnormally high" ocean temperatures off the Maritimes have put Atlantic Canada
in the path of a potentially devastating hurricane, say meteorologists.

"A Category 3 (hurricane) is very likely," said meteorologist Peter Bowyer of
the Canadian Hurricane Centre, a branch of Environment Canada, in Dartmouth,
N.S. "I don't have a lot of doubt that is something that is very possible."

While hurricanes rarely form north of Florida - because the waters are usually
too cool and the atmospheric conditions aren't favourable - the temperatures in
the North Atlantic this year are "abnormally high" said John Gresiak, a
meteorologist at the AccuWeather Hurricane Center in Pennsylvania.

That creates a hothouse breeding ground for stronger storms farther north, which
normally would get weakened by colder waters. Another reason why major storms
seldom carry much punch as they head north is that atmospheric steering currents
typically intensify in the North Atlantic and push hurricanes out to sea before
they make landfall.

Gresiak said it's difficult to pinpoint why the waters in the North Atlantic are
so much warmer this year. Southern currents might be carrying warmer water north
from the Caribbean area, he said, or it could be chalked up to global warming -
a hot-button issue among meteorologists.

Any storm of Category 3 intensity and above is considered a major hurricane by
the Canadian Hurricane Centre. Category 3 hurricanes carry wind speeds of 178 to
210 kilometres an hour and can produce storm surges anywhere from 2.7 to 4
metres high.

The fiercest hurricane classification, Category 5, has wind speeds exceeding 250
kilometres per hour. Walls of water higher than 5.5 metres can pummel coastal
areas during these storms.

Bowyer said the likelihood of Category 4 or 5 hurricanes hitting Atlantic Canada
is slim, but he didn't rule out the possibility.

On average, three to four hurricanes or tropical storms threaten Canada or its
territorial waters each year, said the Canadian centre. The agency routinely
consults with the National Hurricane Center in Miami to co-ordinate the tracks
and positions of all storms that threaten Canada.

Last year's hurricane season was the most active on record, with 15 hurricanes -
seven of them classified as major - and 28 tropical storms.

Bowyer says hurricane-tracking methods change constantly, meaning there's no
definitive yardstick to measure or detect the storms. Hurricane Andrew, which
devastated the southern United States in 1992, was first classified as a
Category 4 hurricane until its severity was upgraded to Category 5 years later,
he said - and that's with modern tracking data at scientists' disposal.

"And this is in the time when we would say we have a good-quality, robust data
set," Bowyer said. "Ten years it took them to make up their minds. . . Maybe
there were just as many (in the past); we just weren't able to see them or
measure them accurately."

The effects could be disastrous were a major hurricane to strike Atlantic
Canada, said Andrew Miall, a University of Toronto geology professor who has
taught about natural hazards like tsunamis and floods.

Atlantic Canada doesn't have the infrastructure to withstand the widespread
flooding caused by a hurricane, he said. Sudden, heavy rainfall from a hurricane
would overwhelm the region's natural drainage systems, such as canals and dams,
he said, because most aren't designed to withstand massive natural disasters.

"The normal infrastructure of storm runoffs, hydro wires, roads, bridges, all
these sorts of things are not capable of withstanding an extreme event and we
shouldn't expect them to," Miall said.

The Toronto area would likely get drenched with heavy rain but be largely spared
because the amount of wind damage lessens as storms move inland, Gresiak said.
"If something hit the New England coast or Atlantic Canada, odds are Toronto
would see fairly minimal effects from it," he said.

Hurricane Hazel, the last major storm to slam into Toronto, smashed the main
road bridge over the Humber River in October 1954, killing 81 people and leaving
1,896 families homeless. In 2003, Hurricane Juan, one of the most damaging
hurricanes to ever hit Canada, pummelled Nova Scotia when it made landfall.

Canada has been affected by 173 hurricane-strength storms in the 20th century,
claiming at least 629 lives, according to a report from the Canadian Hurricane
Centre last fall.

According to the hurricane centre, preparedness is key when a hurricane strikes.
The agency advises people to keep away from areas that may be swept by storm
surges, and to board up windows and secure anything the wind could pick up and
turn into a potentially lethal weapon. It's also a good idea to store drinking
water, non-perishable food and emergency supplies.

Most Atlantic Canadians never expected to deal with a hurricane so they weren't
prepared for Hurricane Juan, Bowyer said. That's changed now.

"We're better than we were. The biggest thing in terms of preparation is the
acceptance that these things are a reality."

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                  Copyright 2006 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                          FOCUS - 510 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                            Evening Times (Glasgow)

                           October 22, 2014 Wednesday
                                   1 Edition

worst U.S. hurricanes

BYLINE: TODAY'S TOP 10

SECTION: HS - NEWS; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 150 words


1 Hurricane Katrina: It killed almost 2000 people and flooded 80% of New
Orleans.

2 1900 Galveston Hurricane: As many as 12,000 died and [#x2028]the Texas city
was devastated.

3 1926 Miami Hurricane: More than 300 died in the massive storm.

4 Hurricane Andrew: The costliest disaster in US history, it hit Florida and
Louisiana in 1992.

5 Hurricane Camille: Devastated the coast of Mississippi in 1969, killing more
than 200.

6 1928 Southeast Florida Hurricane: Gigantic hurricane that killed more than
2500 people.

7 1935 Labour Day Hurricane: The intense hurricane killed 408 people, mostly
First World War veterans in Florida.

8 Superstorm Sandy: 72 deaths over 24 US states and £65bn worth of damage in
2012.

9 1938 Hurricane: 256 people in New England and Long Island were killed
[#x2028]by the unnamed hurricane.

10 Hurricane Charley: Hit Florida and South Carolina in 2004, killing 10 people
and causing massive damage.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ET


                      Copyright 2014 Newsquest Media Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 511 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                      The Gold Coast Bulletin (Australia)

                              June 1, 2010 Tuesday
                                B - Main Edition

From bad to way worse

BYLINE: Holbrook Mohr

SECTION: FOCUS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 873  words


Another threat to the effort to solve the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster is looming
- hurricane season. Holbrook Mohr reports

AS the Atlantic hurricane season approaches, the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico
is taking weather forecasters into nearly uncharted waters.

The gulf is a `superhighway' for hurricanes that form over warm water, then go
north or west to the coast.

It's now the site of the worst oil spill in US history and along the general
path of some of the worst storms ever recorded.

The season officially starts today and although scientists seem to agree that
the sprawling slick isn't likely to affect the formation of a storm, the real
worry is that a hurricane might turn the millions of litres of floating crude
into a crashing black surf.

Those worries have only intensified as BP has failed time and again to stem the
flow of oil gushing from the blown-out well.

Some fear a horrific combination of damaging winds and large waves pushing oil
deeper into estuaries and wetlands and coating miles of debris-littered
coastline in a pungent, sticky mess.

In 1979, storms hampered efforts to contain a spill from a Mexican rig called
Ixtoc 1 that eventually dumped 530,000 tonnes of oil.

Hurricane Henri, a category 1 storm, damaged a steel cap designed to stop the
leak but also helped disperse some of the oil.

``That's what I think would happen this time,'' said Joe Bastardi, chief
long-range hurricane forecaster with AccuWeather.com

``I'm sure a hurricane would do a great deal of diluting the oil, spreading it
out where the concentrations would be much less damaging.''

At least 72,000 tonnes have leaked from the seabottom 1.5km below the surface
since the April 20 explosion of BP's Deepwater Horizon rig.

Oil has crept into Louisiana's marshes, coating plants, killing some birds and
threatening wetlands.

BP's most promising solution - but still without any guarantees - is the
drilling of a relief well that has been ongoing. But that one will not be
completed until at least August.

By August 1, even under the best-case scenario offered by federal scientists,
there could be 193,000 tonnes of oil spilled into the Gulf.

Under the worst-case scenario, it could be twice that.

The threat to the marshes could have implications lasting well beyond this
hurricane season.

Louisiana already has lost huge areas of coastal wetlands in recent decades and
the oil is a major threat to that delicate ecosystem.

``If the plants that hold the marshes together were to die at the roots, the
base would wash away, leaving deeper water and less of a buffer for
hurricanes,'' said Joseph Suhayda, director of the Louisiana State University
Hurricane Centre.

``That would increase the amount of surge inland.''

There is a chance a hurricane or tropical storm could offer wetlands a reprieve
from the oil, at the expense of areas farther inland.

A storm surge of several feet, even if it is carrying oil, would pass over the
top of the outer, low-lying marshes and disperse the mess in less toxic amounts,
said Mr Suhayda.

But such a storm could also push oil into freshwater marshes where ducks and
geese thrive.

Experts are predicting a busy hurricane season with powerful storms.

Mr Bastardi predicts seven named storms, five hurricanes and two or three major
hurricanes will have an effect on land this year.

Colorado State University researchers Philip Klotzbach and William Gray give a
69 per cent chance at least one major hurricane will make landfall on the US and
a 44 per cent chance that a major hurricane will hit the Gulf Coast.

Last week, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted 14 to
23 tropical storms this year, including up to seven major hurricanes.

Hurricane season runs through November. Early season storms are uncommon with
the busy part of the season traditionally being August to October.

Stronger storms typically form during this time, like Katrina did in August of
2005.

A hurricane like Katrina `would be a worst-case scenario' with oil pushed far
ashore, said scientist Doug Inkley.

``It would suffocate the vegetation. You'd get oiled birds and other animals,
it's virtually impossible to clean up oil.''

``What worries us most is a hurricane taking oil to areas like the Florida
Panhandle and Texas,'' said Gregory Stone, of the Coastal Studies Institute at
Louisiana State University.

'Some fear a horrific combination of damaging winds and large waves . . .
coating miles of debris-littered coastline in a pungent, sticky mess'

US predicts active hurricane season

Forecasters are predicting the most active Atlantic hurricane season since 2005,
when Hurricane Katrina devastated the same area of the Gulf Coast now struggling
to cope with the largest oil spill in US history

2010 PROJECTIONS (70% probability) Average 2005

Named storms 14-23 11 28

Hurricanes (top winds of 120km/h or more) 8-14 6 15

Major hurricanes 3-7 2 7

(Category 3, 4 or 5; winds of at least 180km/h)

PREDICTING ATLANTIC HURRICANES

Warm Sea Surface Temperature (SST), low surface pressure, low wind shear

"African easterly jet" generates tropical waves

Lower atmosphere: Weak trade winds

High pressure in upper atmosphere

Upper atmosphere: Expanded area of easterly winds

Warmer than usual water in Caribbean provides heat, moisture to power storms

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GCB


                   Copyright 2010 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 512 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 11, 2016 Tuesday

Florida: Hurricane Deductibles 101

LENGTH: 951  words

DATELINE: New York



 Tallahassee: Association of Insurance Agents, The State of Florida has issued
the following news release:



   While there is an exception to almost every rule, the "general rule" is that
Florida residential insurance policies (that would include homes, residential
condominium associations, homeowners associations, and residential apartments)
have a separate deductible that applies to losses occurring during a hurricane.
Therefore, most residential policies have an "all other peril" (AOP) deductible
for losses caused by perils such as fire, lightening, and theft, and a separate
deductible for hurricane losses. The hurricane deductible is mandated by Florida
statutes.





 The hurricane deductible is expressed as a percentage, typically two percent,
but higher percentages are available. The percentage is a percentage of the
coverage amount, not a percentage of the loss. For example, a structure insured
for $400,000 with a two-percent deductible would have a deductible of $8,000 for
damage caused by a hurricane.



 The hurricane deductible applies only for a hurricane as defined in the
statutes. According to Florida Statute 627.4025, a hurricane means a storm
system that has been declared a "hurricane" by the National Hurricane Center of
the National Weather Service. Note that a named tropical storm does not trigger
the hurricane deductible.



 According to the statutes, the duration of a hurricane in which the hurricane
deductible would apply includes the time period:



     Beginning at the time a hurricane watch or warning is issued for any part
of Florida by the National Hurricane Center.

     Continuing for the time period during which the hurricane conditions exist
anywhere in Florida; and

     Ending 72 hours following the termination of the last hurricane watch or
hurricane warning issued for any part of Florida by the National Hurricane
Center.



 To summarize, to trigger the hurricane deductible there must first be a named
hurricane. Then, a hurricane watch or warning must be issued for any part of
Florida. There have been situations when these conditions did not exist and some
carriers incorrectly applied a hurricane deductible. For example, in 2013,
Tropical Storm Karen formed October 3. Simultaneous with the National Hurricane
Center naming Karen as a tropical storm, the center issued a hurricane watch and
warning for parts of Florida, anticipating that Karen would likely become a
hurricane. Karen was never declared to be a hurricane. As such, wind damage
caused by Karen was not subject to the hurricane deductible; the AOP deductible
applied instead.



 The deductible applies on a calendar-year basis. (For commercial residential
policies such as a condominium association policy, the customer can select
either a hurricane deductible on a calendar-year basis or a hurricane deductible
that applies to each hurricane.) Using the earlier example of the $8,000
hurricane deductible, that $8,000 applies for all losses during the calendar
year for losses due to hurricanes.



 For example, in 2004 some areas of Florida were hit by three major hurricanes
in about 40 days. This calendar year deductible applies only if the customer was
insured by the same company (or group of companies if an insurer has multiple
companies) during all hurricanes. Assume that a hurricane causes $40,000 in
damage; the claim is paid less the $8,000 deductible. If there is a second
hurricane during the calendar year, the $8,000 hurricane deductible does not
apply; instead the AOP deductible applies.



 In a different example, suppose that the first hurricane causes damage of only
$3,000. Due to the $8,000 deductible, nothing is paid. If a second hurricane
were to cause $35,000 in damage, the claim is paid less a $5,000 deductible
($8,000 hurricane deductible less the $3,000 that applied for the first
hurricane, leaving $5,000 deductible). If a third hurricane were to cause damage
in the same calendar year, the AOP deductible would apply. Many, if not most,
insurance policies require that the customer report all hurricane losses, even
those that are clearly below the deductible. Failing to do so could result in
the full application of the hurricane deductible for second and subsequent
hurricane claims.



 There are other key points to keep in mind:



     Policies are different; it's key to read the specific policy in question to
see how deductibles are structured.

     The statute dealing with hurricane deductibles applies only to "admitted"
insurers; it does not apply to surplus lines insurers. While surplus lines
insurers typically also use a hurricane deductible, they are not required to do
so.

     Wind damage that is not associated with a hurricane (such as a tornado or
summer thunderstorm) is not subject to a hurricane deductible. An insurance
company may, however, issue a policy with a separate "windstorm" deductible that
would apply to wind losses not due to a hurricane as long as the deductible was
approved by the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation.

     Hurricane deductibles on policies typically can only be changed at the
renewal date of the policy.

     Commercial non-residential policies (for example policies covering a hotel
or office building) are not required by the statutes to have a separate
hurricane deductible. If an insured desired to use a hurricane deductible for
these type of structures, she would be free to do so as long as it was approved
by the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation.

     Florida Statute 627.701 contains the information on deductibles; F.S.
627.4025 defines "hurricane" and "hurricane coverage."



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 513 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                              May 31, 2013 Friday

Will Florida's hurricane luck run out?

SECTION: Pg. A-6

LENGTH: 648 words


The hurricane season starts tomorrow and with it comes this question: Do you
feel lucky?

Hurricane season lasts from June 1 through Nov. 30. The last major hurricane to
hit Florida was Wilma in October of 2005

Florida has been spared from a direct hurricane strike now for the last seven
consecutive years.

Hurricane activity has picked up in recent years. Luckily, the storms have
missed Florida.

Jacksonville has not had a direct hit from a hurricane since Dora in 1964, but
tropical storms have caused plenty of damage here.

INADEQUATE INSURANCE

Our luck is sure to run out. And if we get hit by one massive strike or several
smaller ones in the same year the state's inadequate property insurance system
will be exposed.

For instance, in the 2004 and 2005 hurricane seasons, Florida was struck by four
back-to-back storms in which the insurance industry paid out nearly $40 billion
in claims.

Basically, the state has flipped insurance on its head when it comes to
hurricane protection. Rather than build reserves and insurance ahead of a
serious strike, the state will have to pass along assessments after the fact.
Those assessments will be felt in a wide range of insurance products, not just
property insurance.

ANOTHER BUSY SEASON

About a month ago, four independent forecast outlets unanimously agreed that
this hurricane season will be a busy one. How busy?

Here is the 30-year average per season:

- 12 named storms, 6.4 hurricanes and 2.7 major hurricanes.

The consensus of four forecasts this year:

- 16 named storms, nine hurricanes and four major hurricanes.

Colorado State's Bill Gray and Philip Klotzbach, the pioneers of seasonal
hurricane forecasting, predict 18 named storms, 9 hurricanes and four major
hurricanes.

"We anticipate an above-average Atlantic basin hurricane season due to the
combination of an anomalously warm tropical Atlantic and a relatively low
likelihood of El Niño," Klotzbach and Gray write in their outlook in The
Washington Post.

The Colorado State pair say there's a 72 percent chance a hurricane will strike
the coast and a 61 percent chance of a major hurricane coming ashore along the
Atlantic or Gulf coast

"The probability of U.S. major hurricane landfall is estimated to be about 140
percent of the long-period average," Klotzbach and Gray wrote.

"A wild season is on the way, and the major hit drought on the U.S. coast should
end," meteorologist Joe Bastardi writes in the hurricane season outlook from
WeatherBell, a private forecasting company.

Bastardi predicts 16 named storms, 12 hurricanes and five major hurricanes.

CHECK YOUR COVERAGE

Most homes in Florida, 70 percent, have a special deductible for hurricane
damage - generally 2 percent of the policy limits.

In return for the higher hurricane deductible, consumers receive a premium
discount on the wind portion of the policy, usually 10 to 20 percent.

You need enough insurance to cover the cost of rebuilding your home at current
construction costs. Don't include the cost of the land.

And don't base your rebuilding costs on the price you paid for your home.

The cost of rebuilding could be more or less than the price you paid or could
sell it for today.

These details may become painfully relevant some day. Don't depend on luck.
Prepare your home and family for the inevitable.

HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS

Major P. May, FEMA Region IV administrator, suggests learning preparedness
lessons from the recent tornados.

Know your risk: Understand how storms can directly affect you and your family.
Sign up for local alerts from emergency management officials and get a NOAA
weather radio.

Take action now: Complete your ready emergency preparedness plan, update your
emergency supply kit and download the FEMA smart phone application.

Be an example: Encourage your family and friends to prepare and post your
preparedness story on social media accounts. Website: Pledge to prepare at
www.ready.gov/hurricanes.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
Associated Press A GLANCING BLOW. Fort Lauderdale Beach felt effects from
Hurricane Sandy last year, but the Northeast took the brunt of the storm.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 514 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                            December 9, 2014 Tuesday

Hurricanes: We won't be lucky forever

SECTION: Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 601 words


Fellow Floridians, are you feeling lucky? Historically lucky? You should be
because for a ninth consecutive year no hurricane hit the Sunshine State.

Historically, Florida is hit by a hurricane every other year.

What's even more amazing is that some of these recent years included a large
number of Atlantic storms but still missed the state.

Incredibly, the worst hurricane in recent years hit New Jersey and New York.
Hurricane Sandy in 2012 was the 18th hurricane of that year.

The longest period the state went without a hurricane in recent history was 1980
to 1984, reported the Florida Sun-Sentinel.

HURRICANE FACTS

- For the Atlantic, Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico, a typical year includes six
hurricanes.

- Over a typical two-year period, the U.S. coastline is struck by three
hurricanes, including one major storm.

HISTORIC EVENTS

- 2008: Hurricane Ike produced a 20-foot storm tide in Texas.

- 2005: Hurricane Katrina generated a 27-foot storm tide in Mississippi.

- 1989: Hurricane Hugo produced a 20-foot storm tide in South Carolina

- 1969: Hurricane Camille produced a 24-foot storm tide in Mississippi.

THE DANGERS

So for those newcomers who don't know that a hurricane is like, here are few
highlights:

- Its high winds can cause trees to fall, roofs to tear apart and debris to fly
like a bullet.

- The flooding can do even more long-lasting damage.

People can die and be injured while property can be damaged severely.

Power can be knocked out for weeks and months even if an area is spared the
fiercest winds.

Residents can be forced to abandon their homes and seek lodging elsewhere or
simply go to shelters.

In short, the experience is traumatic.

FINANCIAL PREPAREDNESS

Financially, Florida also has dodged a bullet because previous state leaders
decided to go the anti-insurance route.

If the state's reserves can't cover property damage, then Florida would assess
fees on insurance holders.

In fact, Floridians are still paying surcharges on insurance policies from the
2005 hurricanes that are scheduled to end next year, reported the News Service
of Florida.

The good news is that the break in hurricanes has allowed Florida to build up
reserves in its Catastrophe Fund. Experts say Florida could handle a repeat of
the multiple hurricanes of 2004 and 2005, which is remarkable.

Meanwhile, Florida leaders are trying to move the state toward a real insurance
market by reducing the role of Citizens from an insurer of first resort to one
of last resort.

In 2015, Citizens will continue to shift its least risky policies into the
private market. About 500,000 have been moved so far.

Frankly, Floridians have been subsidizing homeowners in the hurricane-prone
areas of beaches and South Florida for years. It's time that people paid the
market freight for their decisions to build near coastlines.

The danger, as always, is that a hurricane will hit a heavily populated area
like Andrew did in 1992, damaging 62,000 homes.

But so far, knock on wood, Florida has been lucky.

The state continues to get its property insurance house in order, but at some
point the luck will run out.

IMPACT OF HURRICANES

For a Category Four hurricane, such as Charley in 2004, roofs and exterior walls
can be damaged. Most trees will be snapped or uprooted and power poles downed.
Power outages can last months.

STORM SURGE

An abnormal wall of water can reach 20 feet and span hundreds of miles of
coastline. Storm surge is the greatest threat to life and property along the
coast.

STORM TIDE

A storm surge combined with a high tide and be devastating. Combined with high
winds, this can caused great property damage along hundreds of miles.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
Associated Press NOT IN FLORIDA: This is July 4 as Hurricane Arthur caused
flooding in the Outer Banks of North Carolina. Arthur struck North Carolina as a
Category 2 storm with winds of 100 mph and took about five hours to move across
the far eastern part of the state.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 515 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                              May 18, 2009 Monday

Active hurricane season not expected this year; U.S. Hurricane Centre predicts
13 named storms this year, eight of which could become hurricanes

BYLINE: Charles Perry

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 444  words


As the Atlantic hurricane season draws near, a consensus seems to be building
that this year will see an average or less than average number of named storms
this year.

About six weeks ago, the AccuWeather.com Hurricane Centre predicted there would
be fewer named storm making it ashore in the United States this year.

Joe Bastardi of State College, Pa., chief forecaster for the hurricane centre,
reminded that there were 16 named storms and eight hurricanes, five of which
were major ones -- that is, they were classified as Category 3 or higher
hurricanes on the Saffir-Simpson scale of storm intensity.

But this year, Bastardi said the centre is predicting there will be 13 named
storms, eight of which will become hurricanes. To be designated a name, a
disturbance has to reach tropical storm status, the next level below that of a
hurricane.

Last week, Colorado State University, which has been forecasting hurricane
activity for the past several years, announced they were calling for a near-
average, hurricane season for 2009.

They are predicting there will be 12 named storms in the Atlantic hurricane
season this year. They forecast that six of them will be hurricanes, two of
which will be intense ones.

The two Colorado State experts -- Dr. Phil Klotzbach and Dr. Bill Gray -- cited
several reasons for their prognostications for 2009 being an average hurricane
season, rather than an active one as they had suggested last December.

They noted that the sea surface temperature in the tropical Atlantic has cooled
considerably since that time. In fact, it is at its coolest level since July,
1994, they added.

The two Colorado professors explained that cooler than normal waters provide
less heat energy for developing hurricanes. In addition, an anomalously cool
tropical Atlantic is typically associated with higher sea level pressure values
and stronger than normal trade winds. They said this indicates a more stable
atmosphere with increased levels of vertical wind shear, which is "detrimental"
for hurricane development.

Tom Kines of State College, Pa., a spokesman for the AccuWeather.com Hurricane
Centre, also cited water temperatures in the Atlantic being cooler than normal
as a major factor in their forecast, as well, for less hurricane activity this
year.

In 2008, the Maritime provinces were hit with the remnants of various tropical
storms and hurricanes, even though there were fewer than normal named storms
moving up the Atlantic coast last year.

The hurricane season officially runs between June 1 and Nov. 30, although the
storms will occasionally occur before or after that date.

* Charles Perry's Weather appears daily in the Times & Transcript.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 516 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                           November 4, 2009 Wednesday

This year's hurricane season quiet; There were only two Atlantic hurricanes in
2009

BYLINE: Charles Perry

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 476  words


With one month left in the official hurricane season, it is shaping up to be one
of the quietest ever years for tropical storms in the Atlantic.

Tom Kines of State College, Pa., a meteorologist for AccuWeather, said the last
named storm this year was Tropical Storm Henri, which was way back in the first
week of October.

To be designated a name, a disturbance has to reach tropical storm status, the
level immediately below that of a hurricane.

This year, Kines said there were only eight named storms in the Atlantic, just
two of which developed into hurricanes -- Hurricane Bill and Hurricane Fred. He
said the norm is 10 named storms, six of which become hurricanes.

Last year, there were 16 named storms, eight of which became hurricanes and five
of which graduated to major hurricanes. The official hurricane season runs
between June 1 and Nov. 30.

Kines said the record year for tropical storms was in 2005, with a staggering 15
hurricanes developing in the Atlantic. And the quietest years ever for named
storms were in 1907 and 1914, he said, noting there were no hurricanes at all in
either of those years.

There is a full month left in the hurricane season, and of course, these storms
can occasionally, but rarely, develop in December (2005 being an example).

But the word "rarely" can also be applied to November. An average of less than
one named storm per year forms in the Atlantic in that month.

Kines said the biggest factor in the low number of named storms in 2009 is that
it is an El Niño year. He said there is always a lot of shearing action when
there is an El Niño and this generally means there will be fewer tropical storms
than average.

He also cited the cooler-than-normal water temperatures this year in the
Atlantic Ocean as a reason for the inactive hurricane season. Tropical storms
depend on warm water to develop and build up strength, he said.

At this time, Kines said there are no named storm or even tropical depression
(the level immediately below that of a hurricane) in the Atlantic. But there are
two "areas of low pressure" on which they are keeping an eye.

One of them, said the AccuWeather spokesman, is located off Bermuda and can
sustain wind gusts up to 56 to 64 kilometres (35 to 40 miles) an hour. But it is
likely to swing east and present no problems to the mainland United States or
Canada, he said.

Kines said the second area of low pressure is in the Bay of Campeche off the
east coast of Mexico. He said it is creating a lot of thundershower activity and
has more potential than the system off Bermuda.

But both low-pressure areas, the one off Mexico and the one off Bermuda, are
"long shots' in terms of ever reaching tropical storm status, said the
meteorologist. He said it is highly unlikely at this point that the Atlantic
will be spawning any more named storms this year.

* Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 517 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                             August 3, 2010 Tuesday

Experts still predict active hurricane season; n Slow start is no indicator,
says expert

BYLINE:

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 545  words


Although there have only been two named storms reported so far, hurricane
experts are still holding firm to their call for an active hurricane season this
year in the Atlantic.

For one thing, this is a La Niña year, Chris Fogarty of Halifax, manager of the
Canadian Hurricane Centre, said in a phone interview.

Fogarty explained that La Niña tends to weaken the upper level of winds over the
Atlantic Ocean, therefore allowing storms to form more readily.

Along with the La Niña effect, he said the Atlantic waters are warmer than usual
this year, providing another factor that favours the formation of named storms.

It is the opposite of El Niño activity which creates winds high in the
atmosphere, he said.

These winds greatly diminish the number of named storms, he said. Fogarty said
the winds produce a shearing action, literally knocking the tops off tropical
disturbances before they can develop into tropical storms or hurricanes.

Fogarty said it was an El Niño year in 2009, which helped account for the lower
than normal hurricane activity.

It was an unusually quiet season in 2009 for tropical storms in the Atlantic
Ocean and more particularly in eastern Canada, said the manager of the Canadian
Hurricane Centre. He said there were only eight named storms last year in the
Atlantic, two of which became hurricanes - Hurricane Bill and Hurricane Fred.

To be designated a name, a disturbance had to reach at least tropical storm
status, the level immediately below that of a hurricane.

This year, Fogarty said the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in
the United States is calling for 14 to 23 named storms, eight to 14 hurricanes
and three to seven major hurricanes.

Although the Canadian Hurricane Centre does not get into predicting numbers of
expected named storms, he said those numbers released by NOAA appear reasonable,
considering the circumstance affecting the Atlantic this year.

The hurricane season in the Atlantic officially runs from June 1 to Nov. 30,
although these storms can occur any time during the year.

So far this year, Fogarty said there have only been two named storms - Tropical
Storm Alex and Tropical Storm Bonnie. And both of them were on the low end of
tropical storms, he said.

But this does not alter predictions that 2010 will be a more active than normal
hurricane season in the Atlantic, he said. He reminded that the biggest time of
the season for hurricanes is just starting - namely, August and September.

For example, it was on Sept. 29, 2003, said Fogarty, that Hurricane Juan ravaged
Halifax.

He said the storm killed eight people, injured many others, left hundreds of
thousands of people without electricity and caused massive public and private
property damage.

So, a quiet start to the current hurricane season is no indication of the level
of hurricane activity we can expect this year, said Fogarty.

"Nobody can let their guard down this early in the season," he said. He
emphasized that the ideal ingredients are still in place for 2010 being a busy
year for tropical storms and hurricanes.

Atlantic Canadians are therefore encouraged to be ready for this prospect by
preparing themselves and their properties and following Environment Canada
hurricane bulletins, said Fogarty

n Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 518 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                              April 4, 2011 Monday

Active hurricane season expected; n Hurricane centre expecting at least 15 named
storms this year

BYLINE:

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 516  words


Another active hurricane season is being forecast for the Atlantic this year.

The AccuWeather.com Hurricane Centre is calling for 15 named storms, eight of
which will secure hurricane status and three of which will be a Category 3 or
higher hurricane.

In other words, those three would be considered major hurricanes, Jack Boston of
State College, Pa., senior meteorologist for AccuWeather, said yesterday in a
telephone interview. He said they would boast gale-force winds exceeding 110
miles (177 kilometres) per hour.

In a normal year, Boston said there are 10 named storms, six of which become
hurricanes and two of which develop into major hurricanes.

To be designated a name, a disturbance has to reach tropical storm status, the
level just below that of a hurricane.

Last year, there were 19 named storms in the Atlantic, 12 of which developed
into hurricanes and five of which strengthened into major hurricanes, said the
AccuWeather spokesman.

However, a lot of last year's tropical storms had little or no impact on the
land in the United States or Canada, said Boston. He said most of them curved
out to sea, missing landfall, altogether, or swung south to Mexico or Central
America.

Even though, number-wise, there is not expected to be as much hurricane activity
this year as there was in 2010, he said they are anticipating more hits on the
coastlines and inland this year.

If the tropical storms stay out at sea, they can create some high surfs along
the coasts, but little else, said Boston. As for ships, he said the crews know
where the hurricanes are and can steer around them.

It is when a hurricane makes landfall that it becomes devastating, causing
evacuations, possible loss of lives and massive destruction to properties, said
the AccuWeather spokesman. He said the effects of one of them can cancel out a
whole slew of tropical storms at sea.

For example, Boston said 2005 was one of the least active Atlantic hurricane
seasons in terms of numbers. But that was the year, he said, that Hurricane
Katrina struck and almost wiped the City of New Orleans off the map.

It was a major disaster in terms of both lives lost and buildings and homes
devastated, said the senior meteorologist. He said it would be pretty hard to
convince anyone in Louisiana and Mississippi that 2005 was a light hurricane
year.

In the Atlantic hurricane season, Boston said the areas, where the tropical
storms are most likely to make landfall, shift as the season progresses.

This year, they expect the early season threat for landfall will be in the
western Gulf of Mexico the southern part of the Caribbean, particularly along
the Texas and Louisiana coastline, said the AccuWeather spokesman.

In the mid to late season, Boston said they are in the eastern Gulf of Mexico
and the Caribbean. He said the biggest area of concern at that time will be from
the Florida Peninsula to the Carolinas.

However, another mid to late season concern for hurricane landfalls this year
will be the northern New England states and the Maritime provinces, said the
senior meteorologist.

n Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 519 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        The Patriot Ledger (Quincy, MA)

                          September 25, 2004 Saturday
                                  ROP Edition

Did you know... A whirlwind of hurricane trivia

BYLINE: Jen Wagner

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 541 words


Q In reporting on hurricanes, meteorologists refer to "sustained" winds of
such-and-such, depending on the various categories. Over what time period are
the wind speed measurements averaged? A To differentiate them from gusts,
sustained winds are defined by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration as a one-minute average wind measured at about 33 feet above the
surface. Q In what year did the United States suffer the most hurricanes? When
did the National Weather Service begin naming them? A The 1886 hurricane season
has been analyzed to be the busiest on record for the United States, according
to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Seven hurricanes hit the
United States that year. The next-busiest season was 1985, with six.

The 1886 hurricanes occurred before the naming system began in 1953. Q I seem to
remember an experiment in the 1950s or '60s to divert a hurricane by dropping
dry ice into it. Could such a thing actually work? A It's a "beguiling notion,"
the National Hurricane Center admits, but there's no chance it would work.

Numerous techniques to modify hurricanes - including seeding clouds with dry ice
- have been considered over the years. But, the hurricane center says, all share
the same shortcoming: They fail to appreciate the size and power of tropical
cyclones.

Other suggested techniques have included seeding clouds with silver iodide;
cooling the ocean with icebergs or cryogenic material; changing the radiational
balance in the hurricane environment by absorption of sunlight with carbon
black; using hydrogen bombs to explode the hurricane apart; and even using giant
fans to blow the storm away from land. Q Why are winds in the northeast quadrant
of a hurricane stronger than those elsewhere? A The National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration prefers to use the term "right side of the storm" as
the typical location of the strongest winds in a hurricane.

The right side is defined in relation to the storm's motion. If the hurricane is
moving to the west, the right side would be to the north of the storm; if the
hurricane is moving to the north, the right side would be to the east of the
storm.

As explained by NOAA, the strongest winds in a hurricane generally are on the
right side because the motion of the hurricane also contributes to its swirling
winds.

A hurricane with 90-mph winds while stationary would have winds up to 100 mph on
the right side and only 80 mph on the left side if it began moving at 10 mph. Q
I understand that the moisture carried up into hurricanes is mostly sea water.
If so, why isn't the rain produced by hurricanes salty? A It's possible that
rain produced by hurricanes could contain some degree of salinity because it has
drawn in droplets whipped off the ocean surface by high winds.

But hurricanes also draw in water that has condensed from water vapor that has
evaporated from the ocean surface, leaving most, if not all, of the salt behind.

Once hurricanes leave the ocean and move over land, the amount of salinity in
the rain decreases.

A spokesman at the National Hurricane Center in Miami said that, to his
knowledge, the amount of salinity in rain resulting from a hurricane never has
been measured, so statistics are unavailable.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2004 The Patriot Ledger


                          FOCUS - 520 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        Facts on File World News Digest

                                August 31, 2006

Atlantic Hurricanes;
Tropical Storm Ernesto Makes Florida Landfall

SECTION: Pg. 676E3

LENGTH: 151 words

Hurricane Season Forecasts Eased

 The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) August 8 announced
revised predictions for the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season, forecasting fewer
major storms and hurricanes than previously expected. The new estimates
predicted 12 to 15 named storms, including seven to nine hurricanes and three to
four that would reach Category 3 on the five-tier Saffir-Simpson scale of
hurricane intensity. Researchers at Colorado State University August 3 had
released predictions similar to those of NOAA, calling for 15 named storms,
seven hurricanes and three major hurricanes. [See 2006 Gulf Coast Hurricane
Disaster: Active Storm Season Predicted; Other Developments]


The revised forecast, though far less severe than the record 15 hurricanes
formed in 2005, remained more active than the annual average of 9.6 named
storms, 5.9 hurricanes and 2.3 major hurricanes.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 Facts on File, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 521 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                           October 5, 2005 Wednesday

Neither Bush nor global warming caused hurricanes

BYLINE: Walter Williams

LENGTH: 599 words


President Bush, in his post-Hurricane Katrina address to the nation, said, "And
to the extent that the federal government didn't fully do its job right, I take
responsibility." Accepting the blame for the federal response is one thing, but
I hope he doesn't shoulder the blame for the hurricane itself.

In a Sept. 9 speech to the National Sierra Club Convention in San Francisco,
former Vice President Al Gore told the audience that Hurricane Katrina and
global warming are related. He warned, "We will face a string of terrible
catastrophes unless we act to prepare ourselves and deal with the underlying
causes of global warming."

Our European allies, most of whom have signed the Kyoto Protocol, have been
scathing in their attacks on President Bush. "Katrina Should Be a Lesson to the
U.S. on Global Warming," read a headline of the German magazine Der Spiegel.
Jurgen Tritten, Germany's environment minister and a Green Party member, said,
"The American president is closing his eyes to the economic and human costs his
land and the world economy are suffering under natural catastrophes like
Katrina."

Writing in the Aug. 30 edition of the Boston Globe, Ross Gelbspan said, "The
hurricane that struck Louisiana yesterday was nicknamed Katrina by the National
Weather Service. Its real name is global warming." Bush, according to Gelbspan,
is to blame because he's taken his environmental policy from "big oil and big
coal."

Major categories 3, 4 and 5 hurricanes are relatively rare. If you check out the
Web site of the National Hurricane Center, www.nhc.noaa.gov/pastdec.shtml?,
you'll find that the most active hurricane decade was 1941-50 -- recording 24
hurricanes, with 10 of them being giant category 3, 4 and 5 hurricanes. The peak
for major hurricanes (categories 3, 4, 5) came in the decades of the 1890s,
1930s and 1940s -- an average of nine per decade. Of the 92 giant hurricanes
that have struck the U.S. mainland between 1851 and 2004, 61 of them occurred
before 1950, long before global warming was an issue.

Six noted tropical cyclone experts wrote a paper in the Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society titled "Hurricanes and Global Warming." Their three main
points were: No connection has been established between greenhouse gas emissions
and the observed behavior of hurricanes. The scientific consensus is that any
future changes in hurricane intensities will likely be small and within the
context of observed natural variability. Finally, the politics of linking
hurricanes to global warming threatens to undermine support for legitimate
climate research and could result in ineffective hurricane policies.

Stanley Goldenberg, a meteorologist at the Hurricane Research Division of the
National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration, says, "Katrina is part of a
well-documented, multidecadal scale fluctuation in hurricane activity. This
cycle was described in a heavily cited article printed in the journal Science in
2001." His colleague, Chris Landsea, agrees, saying, "If you look at the raw
hurricane data itself, there is no global warming signal. What we see instead is
a strong cycling of activity. There are periods of 25 to 40 years where it's
very busy and then periods of 25 to 40 years when it's very quiet."

About the connection between hurricanes and global warming, Goldenberg
concludes, "I speak for many hurricane climate researchers in saying such claims
are nonsense." The bottom line for Bush is that unless he's God, he shouldn't
accept the blame for Hurricane Katrina. Walter E. Williams is a professor of
economics at George Mason University.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2005 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                          FOCUS - 522 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 7, 2012 Saturday

Valley should prepare now for hurricanes

BYLINE: Laura B. Martinez, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 439 words


July 07--Law enforcement agencies, health care providers, emergency medical
personnel and others had a chance Friday to view Cameron County's new hurricane
awareness video, "Cameron Ready."

The video touched on what everyone should know about being "hurricane ready" for
the 2012 Atlantic hurricane season.

The 20-minute video featured Cameron County officials discussing how residents
should prepare if a hurricane or tropical storm sets its sights on South Texas.

Carlos Garcia, chief security officer for the Port of Brownsville, attended
Friday's presentation, noting it is always good to be up-to-date on the county's
emergency plans.

"From the standpoint of being a public official and being involved in public
safety, this is a presentation that was very informative to everybody that was
present," Garcia said. "Hopefully more people will have the opportunity to hear
a presentation like this so they will be better informed and make the best
decisions possible."

Hurricane season runs through Nov. 30. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration has forecast a 70 percent chance for nine to 15 named tropical
storms and four to eight hurricanes. Of the hurricanes, the NOAA said one to
three of them may become major hurricanes.

The NOAA forecast is similar to one released earlier by Accuweather that
predicted 12 named storms and five hurricanes, two of them major.

According to NOAA, an average or normal season has 12 named storms, six
hurricanes and three major hurricanes.

Humberto Barrera, Cameron County's Emergency Management coordinator, said
authorities have to sell the "product" to the general public and let people know
how important it is to be prepared for a hurricane.

"Because nothing hit us last year, it's harder to get people to prepare," he
said. "Our job is to sell the product. Our job is to convince people (to be
ready)."

Last year the Rio Grande Valley didn't see much activity during hurricane
season. Although Tropical Storm Don was forecast to make landfall in Cameron
County, it fizzled out at the last minute. Tropical Storm Arlene brought
much-needed rain to the area but not much else.

Steve Drillette, meteorologist-in-charge at the National Weather Service in
Brownsville, said it is important that everyone be prepared for a hurricane. It
only takes one storm to cause major damage, he said.

Drillette made reference to Hurricane Andrew in 1992. It made landfall in
Florida and caused 26 deaths and $25 billion in damage.

___ (c)2012 The Brownsville Herald (Brownsville, Texas) Visit The Brownsville
Herald (Brownsville, Texas) at www.brownsvilleherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120707-BV-Valley-should-prepare-now-for-hurricanes-0707-20120707

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2012 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 523 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                             October 8, 2017 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricanes of past 30 years unprecedented

BYLINE: Seth Borenstein, The Associated Press

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The monster hurricanes Harvey, Irma, Maria, Jose and Lee that have raged across
the Atlantic are contributing to what appears to be the most active period for
major storms on record. And the busiest part of the hurricane season isn't even
over.

An analysis of 167 years of U.S. storm data by the Associated Press found that
no 30-year period in history has seen this many major hurricanes, this many days
of those whoppers spinning in the Atlantic, or this much overall energy
generated by those powerful storms.

Scientists caution it is too soon to draw conclusions from the data. Storms in
the distant past may have gone unnoticed, which could make earlier generations
appear quieter than they were.

Some scientists say past hurricane data is so weak that it's impossible to
connect the recent activity to global warming.

But more intense storms are what scientists expect to see as the planet's
climate changes because warmer ocean water is fuel for hurricanes. And they say
it is important to better understand this intense period to save lives and
prevent worse future destruction.

Georgia Tech climate scientist Kim Cobb said it would be "foolish" for
policymakers to ignore the data. "We may not have as much data as we would like,
but we have enough to aggressively invest in a variety of defences for coastal
communities," she said in an email. "We face a triple threat of rising seas,
stronger winds, and literally off-the-charts rainfall totals."

The Atlantic hurricane season was more intense than normal in 2003, 2004, 2005,
2008, 2010, 2012 and 2016. The 2005 season, which included Katrina, Rita and
Wilma, was so active, forecasters ran out of names for storms.

Then came this year. Fuelled by warmer-than-normal ocean temperatures and ideal
wind conditions, September 2017 had more days with major hurricanes spinning and
more overall hurricane energy expelled than any month on record, according to
Colorado State University hurricane researcher Phil Klotzbach. Harvey spawned
record rainfall. Irma had record high winds in the open Atlantic. And Maria hit
the U.S. stronger than the earlier two.

The Associated Press looked at all major hurricanes - not just the small
fraction that hit the U.S. - and grouped them into 30-year periods to mirror the
30-year cycles climate scientists use to understand how the climate is changing.
The analysis found that in the period from 1988 to 2017: There have been 90
major hurricanes, an average of three a year. That's 48 per cent more than
during the previous 30 years. This hurricane season is at five and still
counting. During the past 30 years, major hurricanes have churned for an average
of 7.2 days. That's 65 per cent more than the average during the previous 30
years. There have been 18.8 major hurricane days so far this year. Scientists
use a measure called Accumulated Cyclone Energy, or ACE, that factors in wind
speed and storm duration to gauge hurricane power. The annual average ACE of the
past 30 years is 41 per cent more than in the previous 30 years. An average year
ACE is just shy of 100 and this year's ACE, with two months still to go, is
204.2.

Of the last 30 years, nine hurricane seasons were considered "hyperactive"
according to the definition used by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration and seven were above normal. Only seven years were below normal.

Was it just as busy for major storms in the 1930s or 1890s? The numbers say no,
but scientists won't draw conclusions because they fear a large undercount of
storms before the 1960s.

"There's no question that the storms are stronger than they were 30 years ago,"
said NOAA climate and hurricane scientist James Kossin. So what's going on?
Scientists talk about two important factors for long-term hurricane activity:
man-made climate change and a natural pattern of changes in the Atlantic.

The world's oceans go through long cycles as water circulates like a giant
conveyor belt. They last 20 to 30 years, carrying water with different levels of
salt and temperature. That cycle seems to coincide with hurricane activity,
Klotzbach said.

Klotzbach predicts that a period of high salinity and warmer water in the North
Atlantic that has been present since 1995 will soon fade - and take with it this
ultra-busy period for storms.

Other scientists dispute this. More frequent and more intense storms fit what
scientists expect to see accompany global warming, MIT hurricane and climate
professor Kerry Emanuel said.

Physics, computer simulations and numerous scientific studies show that as the
world warms, the strongest storms should get wetter and more intense, and
probably more frequent. Yet, the overall number of all named storms is likely to
drop because there will likely be fewer weaker ones, scientists say.

Climate scientist Stefan Rahmstorf of the Potsdam Institute in Germany said the
data showing increased intensity is clear enough for him: "The only caveat being
that the increase might be exaggerated somewhat because of undercounting early
storms."

What's happening with hurricanes - the frequency, the duration, and the energy -
is probably a combination of factors caused by both nature and man, Klotzbach
said: "a mish-mosh of everything."

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: David J. Phillip, The Associated Press Files; Floodwaters from
Hurricane Katrina in 2005 cover large parts of New Orleans.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Times Colonist
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 524 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Star Phoenix (Saskatoon, Saskatchewan)

                             June 17, 2006 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Laying blame for hurricanes: Some scientistspoint to global warming, others say
it's too early to confirm a link

BYLINE: Margret Brady, CanWest News Service

SECTION: WEEKEND EXTRA; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1990  words

DATELINE: EVERGLADES CITY, Florida


EVERGLADES CITY, Florida -- Broken concrete and debris litter the unkempt grass
outside the once-proud courthouse in Everglades City. The 78-year-old
neoclassical building was pummeled by 200 kilometre-per-hour winds when
Hurricane Wilma crashed ashore just north of the southwest Florida town last
October. The building's foundations sank after the town was flooded by a metre
of sludge and winds tore a chunk from the structure's roof.

Wilma was just one of several hurricanes that cut a swath of death and misery
through Florida and other U.S. Gulf Coast states last year. Hurricane
forecasters predict another fierce season this year.

Many environmentalists contend that the violence of last year's hurricanes was a
direct consequence of man-made global warming. After all, hurricanes are fuelled
by warm water so it's easy to point a finger at this. Last month, photos of
hurricane-caused devastation were shown in presentations at a climate-change
conference in Ottawa, organized by the Engineering Institute of Canada.
Delegates would have concluded logically that recent hurricane activity was
caused by global warming and there was little scientific doubt on the matter.

Yet several leading hurricane experts claim that research has failed to prove a
reliable long-term link between global warming and the frequency and intensity
of tropical storms. Early last year, one climate-change scientist angrily
withdrew from working on a report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) because prominent members of the international panel claimed the
trends were clearly linked. Dissenter Chris Landsea, then with the Hurricane
Research Division of the National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in
Miami, insisted that evidence strongly suggested the impact of global warming on
hurricanes was small. The recent series of bad hurricane years was part of a
natural cycle, he said.

The topic has become a scientific and political hot potato.

"I cannot in good faith continue to contribute to a process that I view as both
being motivated by preconceived agendas and being scientifically unsound,"
Landsea wrote in an open letter to the scientific community on global warming.

Landsea co-authored an article on hurricanes and global warming that was
published in November by the American Meteorological Society. The assertion that
global warming intensifies hurricanes is scientifically premature, the authors
argued. They concluded that a false assumption could lead to the implementation
of costly and ineffective policies to reduce hurricane impacts. The article did
not, however, question that climate change is under way.

The link between monster hurricanes and global warming was also questioned
recently in an article published in Geophysical Research Letters. Climatologists
from the University of Virginia studied water temperatures along the path of
strong Atlantic hurricanes over the past 25 years. They concluded that increases
in storm intensities must be related to other factors such as wind shear and
atmospheric moisture levels and not only to warmer oceans.

"It is too simplistic to only implicate sea-surface temperatures in the dramatic
increase in the number of major hurricanes," said Patrick Michaels, lead author
of the report. Like Landsea, he believes that natural oscillations in the
tropical environment are key to any increase in intensity. Although there will
be major hurricanes in the future, he does not expect them to be stronger than
in the past.

------

Chris Landsea is now science and operations officer with NOAA's National
Hurricane Center in Florida, a formidably built structure designed to withstand
Category 5 hurricanes, the highest on the scientific scale. Located on the edge
of the University of Miami's campus, where Landsea also teaches, the
satellite-dish topped building is dubbed "Bob's Bunker" after the centre's
former director Bob Sheets.

A native of Miami, Landsea became fascinated with hurricanes as a teenager when
he watched the dramatic cloud formations of Hurricane David as it swept past the
city. In 1992, when he was studying tropical cyclones at Colorado State
University, Hurricane Andrew tore the roof off his family home.

"The whole neighbourhood looked like it was bombed out," he says. "What I was
studying at school became very real to me when I saw the physical destruction
that hurricanes can do."

Last year, Landsea's home was struck by Katrina and Wilma. Katrina flooded his
house as it lumbered on to New Orleans. Later, Wilma uprooted his trees. Both
hurricanes knocked out power in the Miami area for days, although the generator
at the National Hurricane Center kept going.

Until recently, Landsea was one of NOAA's Hurricane Research Division's
"storm-chasers." These are the intrepid researchers who fly into or over
hurricanes to evaluate their strength. Even with vastly improved satellite
tracking and methods for cloud analysis, flying into hurricanes remains the most
reliable way to measure barometric pressure and wind speeds, says Landsea. Civil
authorities need to know if they are anticipating a relatively mild Category 1
hurricane or an extreme Category 4 storm that could flatten a mobile-home
community. This information is required to decide whether an evacuation -- a
very costly procedure -- is in order. It is also used to study hurricane
behaviour so that forecasting methods can be improved.

Landsea has flown into or over 20 hurricanes. Interviewed recently, he says "the
view inside the eye or outside the storm is pretty phenomenal." He always felt
safe on hurricane flights despite the turbulence. "Though it's best to be served
drinks after the flight and not during it," he quips.

He believes we are 11 years into a busy period that could continue for another
15 to 30 years in the Atlantic. Not good news for the residents of the Gulf
Coast states, the Carolinas, Mexico and the Caribbean. "Florida sticks out of
the continental U.S. like a sore thumb," he says. "It's no wonder it is hit so
often."

The written history of Atlantic hurricanes goes back at least as far as
Christopher Columbus who experienced at least two of them. Over several
centuries, the Spanish Empire suffered staggering loses from these violent
storms, including the sinking of fleets of gold-laden galleons and entire
armadas. The numbers of dead are unknown, but it is recorded that many vessels
lost all hands.

Many slaves en route to the New World were drowned as well. Hurricanes formed
off the west coast of Africa follow much the same path as the slave ships that
traversed the ocean until the middle of the 19th century.

Compared with the detailed hurricane data now available, records of these
tropical storms are incomplete, but even during the period known as the "Little
Ice Age" (circa 1550 to 1850), hurricane-inflicted damage was clearly immense.

Landsea and his students at the University of Miami are analysing ship
observations dating back to 1850. They have discovered one or two tropical
storms per year that were missing from the existing hurricane database.

"We know of very distinct swings back and forth in the Atlantic of busy and
quiet periods," he says. These intervals last 25 to 40 years. The late 19th
century was very active and possibly worse than now. The next busy period ran
from 1926 to 1960. From 1970 until 1995, Atlantic hurricane seasons were
unusually quiet. This may have lulled people into a false sense of security. Not
surprisingly, this is when the building boom along the Florida coasts really
took off.

Typically, there are three to five hurricanes during a quiet year. About half of
these are major hurricanes (Category 3 or more). In a busy period those numbers
double.

The Department of Atmospheric Science of Colorado State University forecasts 17
Atlantic storms this year. They predict nine will be classified as hurricanes
and five of these will be intense. Euphemistically, this is called an "active
season." It is almost twice as active as the 1950-2000 average of about 10
storms, including six hurricanes, but not quite as busy as last year. However,
the same forecasters underestimated the storminess of 2005.

Recent studies may simply be too short-term to assess global-warming effects
properly. For example, a paper published in last month's Science magazine claims
to prove a link between global warming and hurricane intensity based on the
period 1970 to 2004. Researchers from the Atlanta-based Georgia Institute of
Technology studied data on Category 4 and 5 storms in six ocean basins,
including the North Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans. They concluded that the
rise in sea-surface temperatures was a major influence in hurricane formation.

However, Landsea says the fierce Atlantic hurricane period that ended in 1960
was excluded so the issue of hurricane cycles was not really addressed.

Hurricane specialists Philip Klotzbach and William Gray of Colorado State
University say that global numbers of hurricanes and their intensity have not
increased over the past three decades except in the Atlantic. They contend that
increases in Atlantic sea-surface temperatures are driven by changes in ocean
salinity unrelated to global warming. This hypothesis proposes a sort of oceanic
conveyor belt that moves at varying speeds. The colder, saltier waters of the
North Atlantic are denser than the less salty waters of the Southern Atlantic.
The colder water sinks because it is denser and the warmer water swells up,
transporting more warm water to the North Atlantic

When recent years are compared with an earlier active period (1950-64),
Klotzbach and Gray find little difference in hurricane frequency or intensity
although global surface temperatures were distinctly cooler during the earlier
cycle.

But as Landsea points out, quiet periods are not necessarily safe. Hurricane
Andrew, which inflicted more economic damage in the U.S. than any hurricane
before Katrina, occurred in a so-called quiet period. So did America's deadliest
storm, the Galveston hurricane of 1900 that killed at least 8,000 people.

Recent global modelling studies suggest that future climate change could
increase wind speeds by about five per cent by 2080. This would suggest a recent
change in wind speed of perhaps one per cent, says Landsea. If that were the
case, Katrina's peak winds of 285 kilometres per hour would be a few kilometres
per hour faster than average, an amount that would be virtually unmeasurable, he
says.

The economic burden of hurricanes has risen dramatically. Hurricanes in 2004
caused about $40 billion U.S. in damage to the continental U.S. The damage
caused by the great storms of 2005 may be closer to $100 billion. Improving
building codes and controlling urban sprawl in low-lying coastal areas would
limit economic losses far more effectively than trying to stem hurricane
formation by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, Landsea says.

---------

Meanwhile, Everglades City on the edge of Florida's Everglades National Park is
still reeling from last year's hurricane season. On a humid day there recently,
a lone picnic table stood abandoned and broken on the side of the virtually
shadeless town-centre circle. A fetid odour wafted from the portable toilets
nearby.

The small community had not experienced a direct hit since Hurricane Donna
destroyed 50 per cent of its buildings in 1960. That Category 4 storm churned up
half of the ecologically vital mangrove forest and killed 40 per cent of the
park's white heron population. Its impact was far worse than that of Hurricane
Wilma.

Mayor Sammy Hamilton hopes to have the old courthouse, now the city hall, open
in time for the community's Seafood Festival next winter. In the meantime, town
staff work in temporary trailers.

Everglades City is evocative of the small Texas town in Peter Bogdanovich's The
Last Picture Show. It is a town that time and the Florida building boom passed
by. Hurricanes, however, didn't.

(Ottawa Citizen)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Ho, Associated Press, Getty Images and Mikael Kjellstrom
(Kjellstram), Calgary Herald; Satellite image shows the latest tropical storm,
Alberto, over Florida.;
Colour Photo: Ho, Associated Press, Getty Images and Mikael Kjellstrom
(Kjellstram), Calgary Herald; Terry Krauss, VP and Meteorologist with the
Weather Modification Inc., seeds clouds in Hail Alley between Calgary and Red
Deer

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2006 The Star Phoenix, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 525 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                             May 25, 2013 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

U.S., Canada warned of major Atlantic hurricanes; Banner season likely this year

BYLINE: William Marsden, Postmedia News

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. C14

LENGTH: 393 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Seven months after hurricane Sandy ravaged the New England coastline from
Maryland to Connecticut, U.S. and Canadian climate scientists are predicting
another banner season for the giant storms.

That could be bad news for the residents and business owners of the northeastern
seaboard, many of whom are still rebuilding their shattered lives after Sandy
killed 42 people and, according to insurers, cost about $65 billion US in
destroyed homes and infrastructure.

The Canadian Hurricane Centre is also warning the Atlantic provinces of major
hurricane activity this season, primarily because of warmer ocean waters.

This year's hurricane season, which begins June 1 and which is expected to last
at least six months, will again be above normal, according to the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's hurricane centre.

NOAA predicts hurricanes in the Atlantic region will range from "active" to
"extremely active."

Scientists said there is a 70 per cent likelihood of 13 to 20 named storms, of
which seven to 11 could become hurricanes, with winds of 119 kilometres an hour
or higher, and three to six major hurricanes (178 km/h or higher).

These numbers are well above the 1981-2010 seasonal averages of 12 named storms,
six hurricanes and three major hurricanes for the Atlantic.

During the 2012 storm season, the number of named storms in the Atlantic region
was higher than average but the intensity was lower.

There were 19 named storms of which 10 became hurricanes.

Only one - hurricane Michael in September - was classified as major. Sandy was
just shy of the "major" category with winds up to 177 km/h.

NOAA says it does not make predictions of whether any of these hurricanes will
reach landfall because the path of hurricanes depends on daily weather patterns,
which cannot be predicted months or weeks in advance.

Scientists said the same atmospheric conditions are at play that have produced
increased Atlantic hurricane activity since 1995. These include a strong West
African monsoon, warmer tropical Atlantic and Caribbean waters, lower air
pressure and reduced wind shear.

As usual, the storms will incubate just above the equator off the west coast of
Africa and travel westward toward the Caribbean before turning north.

NOAA acting administrator Kathryn Sullivan warned that tropical storm and
hurricane impacts are not limited to the coastline.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Noaa, The Associated Press; Hurricane Sandy is seen in the centre
bottom. Climate scientists are predicting another banner giant storm season in
2013.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 Windsor Star, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 526 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                             May 25, 2013 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Atlantic hurricane season will pack a punch; Experts predicting major storms
along the North American coast

BYLINE: William Marsden, Postmedia News

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 310 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Seven months after hurricane Sandy ravaged the Atlantic coastline from Maryland
to Connecticut, U.S. and Canadian climate scientists are predicting another
banner season for the giant storms.

That could be bad news for the residents and business owners of the northeastern
seaboard, many of whom are still rebuilding their shattered lives after Sandy
killed 42 people and, according to insurers, cost about $65 billion US in
destroyed homes and infrastructure.

The Canadian Hurricane Centre is also warning the Atlantic provinces of major
hurricane activity this season, primarily because of warmer ocean waters. This
year's hurricane season, which begins June 1 and is expected to last at least
six months, will again be above normal, according to the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration's hurricane centre.

NOAA predicts hurricanes in the Atlantic region will range from "active" to
"extremely active." Scientists said there is a 70 per cent likelihood of 13 to
20 named storms, of which seven to 11 could become hurricanes, with winds of 119
km/h or higher, and three to six major hurricanes (178 km/h or higher). These
numbers are well above the 1981-2010 seasonal averages of 12 named storms, six
hurricanes and three major hurricanes for the Atlantic.

During the 2012 storm season, the number of named storms in the Atlantic region
was higher than average but the intensity was lower. There were 19 named storms
of which 10 became hurricanes. Only one - hurricane Michael in September - was
classified as major. Sandy was just shy of the "major" category with winds up to
177 km/h.

NOAA says it does cannot predict whether any of these hurricanes will reach
landfall because their paths depend on daily weather patterns. Scientists said
the same atmospheric conditions are at play that have produced increased
Atlantic hurricane activity since 1995.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Eva Hambach,  AFP, Getty Images Files; A sign warns drivers in advance
of the arrival of hurricane Sandy in Washington, D.C. in October 2012.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 The Vancouver Sun, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 527 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                 Ottawa Citizen

                             May 25, 2013 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

2013 shaping up as another bad year for hurricanes in Canada, U.S.; Experts see
70% chance of 13 to 20 named storms

BYLINE: William Marsden, Postmedia News

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. E16

LENGTH: 441 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Seven months after hurricane Sandy ravaged the Atlantic coastline from Maryland
to Connecticut, U.S. and Canadian climate scientists are predicting another
banner season for the giant storms.

That could be bad news for the residents and business owners of the northeastern
seaboard, many of whom are still rebuilding their shattered lives after Sandy
killed 42 people and, according to insurers, cost about $65 billion US in
destroyed homes and infrastructure.

The Canadian Hurricane Centre is also warning the Atlantic provinces of major
hurricane activity this season, primarily because of warmer ocean waters. This
year's hurricane season, which begins June 1 and is expected to last at least
six months, will again be above normal, according to the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration's hurricane centre.

NOAA predicts hurricanes in the Atlantic region will range from "active" to
"extremely active." Scientists said there is a 70-per-cent likelihood of 13 to
20 named storms, of which seven to 11 could become hurricanes, with winds of 119
kilometres an hour or higher, and three to six major hurricanes (178 km/h or
higher). These numbers are well above the 1981-2010 seasonal averages of 12
named storms, six hurricanes and three major hurricanes for the Atlantic.

During the 2012 storm season, the number of named storms in the Atlantic region
was higher than average but the intensity was lower. There were 19 named storms
of which 10 became hurricanes. Only one - hurricane Michael in September - was
classified as major. Sandy was just shy of the "major" category with winds up to
177 km/h.

NOAA says it does not make predictions of whether any of these hurricanes will
reach landfall because the path of hurricanes depends on daily weather patterns.

Scientists said the same atmospheric conditions are at play that have produced
increased Atlantic hurricane activity since 1995. These include a strong West
African monsoon, warmer tropical Atlantic and Caribbean waters, lower air
pressure and reduced wind shear.

As usual, the storms will incubate just above the equator off the west coast of
Africa and travel westward toward the Caribbean before turning north.

NOAA acting administrator Kathryn Sullivan warned that tropical storm and
hurricane impacts are not limited to the coast. "Strong winds, torrential rain,
flooding and tornadoes often threaten inland areas far from where the storm
first makes landfall," she said. Joe Nimmich, associate administrator at the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, warned Americans to prepare themselves for
a difficult season. "Preparedness today can make a big difference down the
line."

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2013 Ottawa Citizen, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 528 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                      The Halifax Daily News (Nova Scotia)

                          November 30, 2005 Wednesday

Epsilon: final entry in record books

BYLINE: cindy day

SECTION: THE WEATHER PAGE; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 244  words


Arlene got the ball rolling on June 8, and today Epsilon, the 26th named storm
of the season, is churning in the Atlantic. At midnight tonight, the 2005
hurricane season will expire. It'll go down as the busiest hurricane season in
history, breaking the 1933 record of 21 tropical storms and hurricanes in a
season. There were a record 26 named storms this year, 13 of which were
hurricanes.

The 13 hurricanes also broke the record of 12 set in 1969; of those, seven were
major hurricanes. And of those seven, an unprecedented three reached Category 5
status, with a fourth reaching the greatest possible wind speed within Category
4 of the Saffir-Simpson scale.

This season has been remarkable for its early beginning and number of storms as
well as the intensity of the hurricanes, including the most intense hurricane on
record for the Atlantic. Hurricane Katrina became the most expensive U.S.
hurricane yet, and the deadliest one to hit the U.S. since 1928.

Although the six-month Atlantic hurricane season officially ends at midnight
tonight, tropical storms and hurricanes can develop in December. Last year,
Tropical Storm Otto formed on the last day of the season and lasted until Dec.
3. According to the U.S. National Hurricane Center, the latest hurricane to
strike the U.S. was Nov. 30, 1925, near Tampa, Fla. The only months on record
not to have an Atlantic hurricane are February and April.

cindyday@globaltv.ca

Cindy Day is a meteorologist with Global TV.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2005 The Halifax Daily News, a division of Transcontinental Media
                                   Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 529 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            August 9, 2006 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Fewer Storms, But Stay Vigilant

BYLINE: NEIL JOHNSON, The Tampa Tribune

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 763 words


NOAA NOW PREDICTS LESS HURRICANE ACTIVITY

By NEIL JOHNSON

The Tampa Tribune

TAMPA - Warming water in the Pacific and shifting winds high in the atmosphere
may slightly tame the tropics this hurricane season.

Scientists with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on Tuesday
said they now think this hurricane season will produce slightly fewer tropical
storms and hurricanes than they forecast in May.

Three tropical storms have formed since the season's start on June 1. None
became hurricanes. However, the most active part of the season runs from
mid-August into October.

NOAA's new forecast reduced the number of tropical storms and hurricanes by one
from its May prediction. Forecasters now expect 12 to 15 tropical storms and
seven to nine hurricanes.

The revised forecast also reduced the expected number of Category 3 or higher
hurricanes to perhaps as few as three, down from earlier predictions of four to
six.

That's significant because over the years the monster hurricanes accounted for
about 20 percent of the storms but caused more than 80 percent of the damage, a
NOAA study found.

NOAA's prediction however, still puts the 2006 season above the long-term
average for storm activity going back to 1850.

Climatic conditions favorable for hurricane development that started in 1995
remain in place, said Gerry Bell, NOAA's lead seasonal hurricane forecaster.

So why do forecasters now expect fewer storms than they did in May?

Credit goes to a shift in water temperatures near the International Dateline in
the Pacific Ocean.

Until June, the water was slightly cooler than normal. That reduced the powerful
winds five miles above the earth that blow from the west across the Caribbean
and western Atlantic.

Called shear, those winds blowing in the face of approaching storms can distort
their shape and chop the tops from tropical depressions trying to grow into
hurricanes. Reducing those winds allows more storms to form.

Since June, though, the water in the Pacific has warmed slightly, Bell said,
meaning the winds increased.

Those winds caused Tropical Storm Chris to fizzle last week from being forecast
as the season's first hurricane to just a mass of clouds and rain.

Also, an area of high pressure over the southeastern United States that remained
stuck in place through most of last year's hurricane season has not developed as
expected.

Winds blowing from the east around the southern edge of that high pressure
helped reduce shear and worked to guide storms toward the U.S. coastline.

Another less important factor in reducing the number of storms is that water in
the Atlantic is only slightly warmer than normal. Warm water is the fuel for
storms.

Water in the Atlantic is ½ to 2 degrees above normal compared to 2 to 3 degrees
in 2005.

"There was an extensive area of juiced-up conditions last year," Bell said.

NOAA's new forecast follows the prediction last week of William Gray, Colorado
State University professor, who said there will be fewer storms this year than
in his May forecast.

Gray, who pioneered seasonal forecasts starting in 1984, now predicts 15
tropical storms will form and seven will become hurricanes. That's down from 17
storms and nine hurricanes.

No forecasters expect a repeat of the horrific 2005 season when a record 28
storms formed and 15 became hurricanes.

Last season was a combination of climatic factors that proved a perfect recipe
for hurricanes, Bell said.

Cooler water in the Pacific combined with the high pressure area that stubbornly
refused to move and the huge expanse of warmer water in the Atlantic knit
together to make the tropics a perfect incubator for hurricanes, Bell said.

Last year, Gray and NOAA forecasts in August fell far short of the actual number
of storms, showing the difficulty to accurately predict hurricane activity
spreading over months.

"We knew those were evolving but there was no way to predict it would turn into
record activity," he said.

(CHART) STORM PREDICTIONS

NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION

May: 13 to 16 tropical storms, 8 to 10 hurricanes, 4 to 6 major hurricanes

August: 12 to 15 tropical storms, 7 to 9 hurricanes, 3 to 4 major hurricanes

WILLIAM GRAY

May: 17 tropical storms, 9 hurricanes, 5 major hurricanes

August: 15 tropical storms, 7 hurricanes, 3 major hurricanes

Long-Term Average: 11 tropical storms, 6 hurricanes, 2 major hurricanes

Sources: NOAA, Colorado State University

Reporter Neil Johnson can be reached at (352) 544-5214 or
njohnson@tampatrib.com.

Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CHART
.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 530 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            November 27, 2006 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricane Predictions Off Track As Tranquil Season Wafts Away

BYLINE: NEIL JOHNSON, The Tampa Tribune

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 596 words


DRY DUST, EL NIÑO WINDS STIFLE STORMS AT SEA

By NEIL JOHNSON

The Tampa Tribune

It was not the hurricane season we expected, thank you.

With cataclysmic predictions that hurricanes would swarm from the tropics like
termites, no one thought 2006 would be the most tranquil season in a decade.

Barring a last-second surprise from the tropics, the season will end Thursday
with nine named storms, and only five of those hurricanes. This year is the
first season since 1997 that only one storm nudged its way into the Gulf of
Mexico.

Still, Florida was hit by two tropical storms, Alberto and Ernesto. But after
the pummeling of the previous two years, the storms barely registered on the
public's radar.

So what happened? Lots.

Storms were starved for fuel after ingesting masses of dry Saharan dust and air
over the Atlantic Ocean. Scientists say the storm-snuffing dust was more
abundant than usual this year.

In the season's peak, storms were curving right like errant field goals. High
pressure that normally hunkers near Bermuda shifted far eastward, and five
storms rode the clockwise winds away from Florida.

Finally, a rapidly growing El Niño, a warming of water over the tropical Pacific
Ocean, shifted winds high in the atmosphere southward. The winds left developing
storms disheveled and unable to become organized.

As they say about the stock market: Past results are no indication of future
performance.

This year's uneventful season provides no assurance that next year will be as
calm:

oThe Atlantic remains in a 20- to 30-year cycle of high hurricane activity that
started in 1995. Water temperatures are above normal.

oEl Niño probably won't be around to decapitate storms.

oThere's no promise that the Saharan dust will be as abundant.

(CHART) BY THE NUMBERS

9: The number of named storms this year

17: The number of named storms predicted May 31 by a team at Colorado State
University led by Professor William Gray

45 mph: The wind speed when Tropical Storm Alberto hit the Florida Panhandle
near Adams Beach on June 13, the strongest winds over Florida all season

56 percent: The average homeowner rate increase Citizens Property Insurance
Corp. requested even after no hurricanes struck Florida

27 percent: The Citizens rate increase approved to start Jan. 1

$100 million: Estimated damage in the United States from Tropical Storm Ernesto

0: The number of storms that formed in October, the first time since 2002 that
no storms formed that month. Also, no Category 4 or 5 storms formed this year
for the first time since 1997.

Tribune maps

DIFFERENT SEASONS

The 2006 hurricane season was far different than the record-setting season of
2005.

2006 storms

(1) Tropical Storm Alberto

(2) Tropical Storm Beryl

(3) Tropical Storm Chris

(4) Tropical Storm Debby

(5) Hurricane Ernesto

(6) Hurricane Florence

(7) Hurricane Gordon

(8) Hurricane Helene

(9) Hurricane Isaac

2005 tropical storms and hurricanes

(1) Tropical Storm Arlene

(2) Tropical Storm Bret

(3) Tropical Storm Cindy

(4) Hurricane Dennis

(5) Hurricane Emily

(6) Tropical Storm Franklin

(7) Tropical Storm Gert

(8) Tropical Storm Harvey

(9) Hurricane Irene

(10) Tropical Storm Jose

(11) Hurricane Katrina

(12) Tropical Storm Lee

(13) Hurricane Maria

(14) Hurricane Nate

(15) Hurricane Ophelia

(16) Hurricane Philippe

(17) Hurricane Rita

(18) Hurricane Stan

(19) Tropical Storm Tammy

(20) Hurricane Vince*

(21) Hurricane Wilma

(22) Tropical Storm Alpha

(23) Hurricane Beta

* Hurricane Vince started off the coast of Portugal

Source: National Weather Service

Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: MAP 2 CHART
.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 531 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        The Augusta Chronicle (Georgia)

                            October 10, 2005 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

BLAME BUSH? NOT SO FAST

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Walter Williams column; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 593 words


President Bush, in his post-Hurricane Katrina address to the nation, said, "And
to the extent that the federal government didn't fully do its job right, I take
responsibility." Accepting the blame for the federal response is one thing, but
I hope he doesn't shoulder the blame for the hurricane itself.

In a Sept. 9 speech to the National Sierra Club Convention in San Francisco,
former Vice President Al Gore told the audience that Hurricane Katrina and
global warming are related. He warned, "We will face a string of terrible
catastrophes unless we act to prepare ourselves and deal with the underlying
causes of global warming."

Our European allies, most of whom have signed the Kyoto Protocol, have been
scathing in their attacks on President Bush. "Katrina Should Be a Lesson to the
U.S. on Global Warming," read a headline of the German magazine Der Spiegel.
Jurgen Tritten, Germany's environment minister and a Green Party member, said,
"The American president is closing his eyes to the economic and human costs his
land and the world economy are suffering under natural catastrophes like
Katrina."

WRITING IN THE Aug. 30th edition of The Boston Globe, Ross Gelbspan said, "The
hurricane that struck Louisiana yesterday was nicknamed Katrina by the National
Weather Service. Its real name is global warming." President Bush, according to
Gelbspan, is to blame because he's taken his environmental policy from "big oil
and big coal."

Major categories 3, 4 and 5 hurricanes are relatively rare. If you check out the
website of the National Hurricane Center (www.nhc.noaa.gov/pastdec.shtml?),
you'll find that the most active hurricane decade was 1941-50 - recording 24
hurricanes, with 10 of them being giant category 3, 4 and 5 hurricanes. The peak
for major hurricanes (categories 3, 4 and 5) came in the decades of the 1890s,
1930s and 1940s - an average of nine per decade. Of the 92 giant hurricanes that
have struck the U.S. mainland between 1851 and 2004, 61 of them occurred before
1950, long before global warming was an issue.

Six noted tropical cyclone experts wrote a paper in the Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society titled Hurricanes and Global Warming. Their three main
points were: No connection has been established between greenhouse gas emissions
and the observed behavior of hurricanes. The scientific consensus is that any
future changes in hurricane intensities will likely be small and within the
context of observed natural variability. Finally, the politics of linking
hurricanes to global warming threatens to undermine support for legitimate
climate research and could result in ineffective hurricane policies.

STANLEY GOLDENBERG, a meteorologist at the Hurricane Research Division of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, says, "Katrina is part of a
well-documented, multidecadal scale fluctuation in hurricane activity. This
cycle was described in a heavily cited article printed in the journal Science in
2001." His colleague Chris Landsea agrees, saying, "If you look at the raw
hurricane data itself, there is no global warming signal. What we see instead is
a strong cycling of activity. There are periods of 25 to 40 years where it's
very busy and then periods of 25 to 40 years when it's very quiet."

About the connection between hurricanes and global warming, Goldenberg
concludes, "I speak for many hurricane climate researchers in saying such claims
are nonsense." The bottom line for President Bush is that, unless he's God, he
shouldn't accept the blame for Hurricane Katrina.

Creators Syndicate

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Williams mug

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2005 Southeastern Newspapers Corporation


                          FOCUS - 532 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            August 31, 2013 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricanes absent as season hits midpoint

BYLINE:  By Jorge Milian  and Alexandra Seltzer     Palm Beach Post Staff
Writers

SECTION: LOCAL & BUSINESS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 770 words


Today marks halftime of hurricane season and, so far, the monster storms have
posted a giant goose egg.

Six tropical storms have formed since the season began June 1, but none has
mustered the muscle -- at least 74 mph -- to be classified a hurricane.

Hostile environmental conditions in the Atlantic have served as a spoiler to the
tropical systems rolling off the coast of Africa.

For only the 26th time since 1851, the month of August will come and go without
the year's first hurricane developing.

So is it time to relax?

"Absolutely not," warned Dennis Feltgen, spokesman for the National Hurricane
Center in Miami. "We've been very fortunate. But are we going to be blessed
through the rest of the season? Don't count on it."

Robert Molleda, the warning coordination meteorologist for the National Weather
Service, points out that the worst may be yet to come.

"September and October are two months in the hurricane season in which,
historically speaking, South Florida has been hit the most," Molleda said."We
don't want (the lack of hurricane development) to let people's guard down."

Still, South Floridians can't be blamed for letting out a collective sigh of
relief with August nearly in the rearview mirror and no hurricanes to worry
about.

The month is one of the season's most tropically active, and some powerful
storms have pummeled the state during August.

Andrew was the third and last Category 5 hurricane to hit the United States in
the 20th century, causing catastrophic damage in southern Miami-Dade County on
Aug. 24, 1992.

The last time a hurricane did not form in August was in 2002, when Gustav
developed on Sept. 11, 2002, making landfall in North Carolina, where it killed
one person. Since continuous satellite imagery of the Atlantic Basin began in
the 1960s, hurricanes have failed to develop in August in only five years.

Aug. 10 is the average date the first Atlantic hurricane arrives, according to
the National Hurricane Center. The record for the latest-arriving first
hurricane is Oct. 8, 1905.

"That's a record I'd love to beat," Feltgen said.

On Aug. 8, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration released its
updated season forecast, calling for an above-average outlook that includes
13-19 named storms, 6-9 hurricanes and 3-5 major hurricanes (Category 3 or
higher).

That forecast was just slightly below the pre-season outlook released in May.

During the 30-year period from 1981-2010, the average hurricane season produced
12.1 named storms, 6.4 hurricanes and 2.7 major hurricanes.

The United States hasn't endured landfall from a major hurricane since Wilma,
rated a Category 3 when it hit South Florida on Oct. 24, 2005.

Factors including wind shear and dry air have combined to cut down storms this
year.

But veteran hurricane watchers say that ocean temperatures remain favorable for
tropical development and a possible shift in atmospheric conditions could result
in a burst of hurricane activity at the beginning of September, which starts
Sunday.

Historically, September has dwarfed all other months in tropical storm activity.

Records show that from 1851 to 2010, 560 tropical storms formed in September
compared with 370 in August and 329 in October.

"That's why we definitely need to be cognizant and aware of what's going on even
with the slow start to the season," Molleda said.

Currently, there are two tropical waves in the Atlantic, although it is too soon
to tell if either will become the season's first hurricane.

"The big emphasis on this is: It doesn't matter when the first hurricane forms,"
Feltgen said. "If we get just one storm and it hits you, then it's a really bad
year. The overall numbers when it comes to preparation don't amount to a hill of
beans. It only takes one."

jmilian@pbpost.com aseltzer@pbpost.com Twitter: @alexseltzer

Late start for hurricanes

Since continuous satellite imagery over the entire Atlantic Basin was developed
in the mid-60s, the season's first hurricane has developed on Sept. 1 or later
in five years:

Date Hurricane

Sept. 2, 1988 Debbie

Sept. 3, 1967 Arlene

Sept. 9, 2001 Erin

Sept. 10, 1984 Diana

Sept. 11, 2002 Gustav

BY THE NUMBERS 2002

Last year no hurricanes formed in August

5 years

Since the 1960s, years no hurricanes began in August

Aug. 10

Average date for first Atlantic hurricane

Oct. 8, 1905

Latest-arriving first 'cane

Late start

Since continuous satellite imagery over the entire Atlantic Basin was developed
in the mid-'60s, the season's first hurricane has developed Sept. 1 or later in
only five years:

LeftAlign.82LeftAlign.163Sept. 2, 1988: Debbie

Sept. 3, 1967: Arlene

Sept. 9, 2001: Erin

Sept. 10, 1984: Diana

Sept. 11, 2002: Gustav

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2013 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 533 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                              May 25, 2014 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Experts re-evaluate strength of storms back to 1851;
Experts re-evaluating strength of storms back to 1851;
Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale

BYLINE:  By John Nelander   Special to the Daily News

SECTION: HURRICANE; Pg. 2S

LENGTH: 578 words


The upgrading of the powerful 1949 hurricane that hit Palm Beach to a Category 4
is just one piece of the re-analysis effort underway at the National Hurricane
Center. Experts are taking a look at each season going back to when
record-keeping began in 1851.

"We've been working on this for more than a decade now, and we've revised
exactly 100 years' worth of hurricane seasons," said Chris Landsea, science and
operations officer for the National Hurricane Center. "We have about 50 more
seasons to go. Once we reach 2000, I think the records are pretty good."

Landsea and other researchers examined data from ships, newspaper accounts and
other weather observations. They identified an average of about two tropical
storms per year, mostly encountered by ships. But the reports often weren't
pieced together at the time.

The researchers took blocks of years from 1851 on, but they jumped ahead for a
new look at two famous storms -- Hurricane Camille, which struck the Gulf Coast
in 1969 and Hurricane Andrew, which hit South Florida in 1992. Camille was
downgraded in March from peak winds of 190 mph to 175 mph; that kept it as a
Category 5, however. Andrew was upgraded about a decade ago from a Category 4 to
a Category 5.

Looking at data from 1900 to 1950 -- including Camille and Andrew -- the
researchers found that half the hurricanes did not require any change in
category, while a quarter were upgraded and a quarter were downgraded.

"There hasn't been a systematic change up or down," Landsea said.

Why is the National Hurricane Center going through all the effort? Researchers
know that if you're looking at hurricane season trends, you must compare apples
to apples, he said.

"Before satellites existed, there were storms over the open ocean we didn't know
about," said Landsea. "The records we're revising provide more evidence that
there are swings in activity but not any trend."

There is evidence, for example, that when the Atlantic warms up by about a
half-degree Fahrenheit, it's a busy period; conversely during quiet periods, the
Atlantic cools off. That's what has happened this year -- a large section of the
tropical Atlantic, where storms often form, is cooler than normal.

"Also, you're seeing changes in the atmosphere," he added. "There's less wind
shear tearing apart storms during the active periods, and there's less sinking
and drying [air] so hurricanes and tropical storms can intensify.

"We're not really sure why last year was quieter than normal, so we still have a
lot to learn."

The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale categorizes hurricanes on a scale of one
to five, based on the storm's sustained wind speed. Hurricanes reaching Category
3 and higher are considered major hurricanes because of their potential for
significant loss of life and damage. The categories indicate only wind speed and
do not account for possible damage resulting from related storm surge, flooding
or tornadoes.

Category 1 hurricanes have sustained winds of 74 to 95 mph. These very dangerous
winds will produce some damage.

Category 2 hurricanes have sustained winds of 96 to 110 mph. These extremely
dangerous winds will cause extensive damage.

Category 3 hurricanes have sustained winds of 111 to 129 mph. Devastating damage
will occur.

Category 4 hurricanes have sustained winds of 130 to 156 mph. Catastrophic
damage will occur.

Category 5 hurricanes have sustained winds of 157 mph or higher. Catastrophic
damage will occur.

Source: National Hurricane Center

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2014 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 534 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           October 24, 2015 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Mexico storm slashes Wilma's record;
Before it hit 10 years ago, Wilma was most intense storm recorded by hurricane
center; Patricia now is.

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 905 words


An incredibly powerful hurricane that lashed the west coast of Mexico overnight
is the strongest storm ever measured by the National Hurricane Center with 200
mph winds and a central pressure that shattered the previous record held by
2005's Hurricane Wilma.

Until Friday, Wilma, which barreled into Palm Beach County 10 years ago today,
held the title for the most intense storm recorded by the NHC with a central
pressure of 882 millibars.

But Hurricane Patricia, a "potentially Â­catastrophic" cyclone, was measured at
879 millibars before it moved toward landfall between the resort towns of Puerto
Vallarta and Manzanillo.

"It's hard to find something to say other than, 'Wow,'~HOA~128~128~" said Bob
Henson, a meteorologist and blogger for WeatherUnderground, about Hurricane
Patricia. "It kind of speaks for itself. It's a phenomenal record."

Patricia is not expected to affect Florida. The forecast is for it to dissolve
over the weekend and move toward Texas as a low-pressure system.

Air pressure is a measure of a hurricane's intensity, the amount of power in the
vacuum formed by winds roaring toward the eye. The lower the pressure, the more
powerful a storm.

"I was sitting here yesterday watching it and I said, 'My God, this thing is
incredible,'" said AccuWeather hurricane expert Dan Kottlowski about Patricia.
"It went from barely a hurricane to a Category 5 in 24 hours."

That kind of intensification is rare, but it's a characteristic also shared by
Wilma, which jumped from a tropical storm to a Category 5 with 172 mph winds in
a day's time. The official post Â­mortem report on Wilma described the increase
as "a remarkable, explosive strengthening episode."

Although Hurricane Wilma was a Category 5 storm with winds that topped out at
185 mph on Oct. 19, 2005, it weakened to a Category 4 before making landfall on
the island of Cozumel two days later.

When Wilma reached Southwest Florida on Oct. 24, it was a Â­Category 3 storm
with 120 mph winds. It hit at the border of Palm Beach County as a strong
Category 2.

Palm Beach County Emergency Manager Bill Johnson said he empathizes with what
Mexico will deal with in the aftermath of a hurricane as strong as Patricia. He
endured Hurricane Andrew's Â­Category 5 winds in 1992, hunkering down as his
house blew apart around him.

"Any hurricane makes my heart hurt for the people who suffer through them,"
Johnson said. "It's a good reminder that we have 37 more days left of hurricane
season."

Hurricane experts compared Patricia's Â­satellite imagery to Wilma's as it sped
Friday toward Mexico .

Wilma was renowned for having an eye of just 2 miles in diameter. Kottlowski
said Patricia's eye was measured at 1.7 miles in diameter at one point.

"I call it crazy. It's just incredible," Â­Kottlowski said. "This will be a
well-studied storm when it's all said and done."

With gusts of up to 245 mph and sustained winds of 200 mph, Patricia was
compared to a 15- to 20-mile-wide EF-4 to EF-5 tornado -- the strongest on the
Enhanced Fujita tornado scale.

Mexican officials declared a state of emergency in dozens of cities near the
coast and urged residents to evacuate to shelters. Storm surge could reach 25
feet, according to AccuWeather meteorologists.

The National Hurricane Center confirmed that Patricia is the strongest storm on
record in areas the center monitors, which include the Atlantic and eastern
North Pacific.

But there is a caveat. Good measurements for hurricane strength didn't really
begin until the mid-1960s in the Atlantic and later in the Pacific. It's
possible storms such as the Labor Day Hurricane of 1935 that raked the Florida
Keys as a Category 5 storm had a lower central pressure than measured, Henson
said.

And Kottlowski Â­pointed out that typhoons in the western Pacific, which aren't
monitored by the National Hurricane Center, have had lower central pressures.
Typhoon Tip, which formed in 1979, had a pressure reading of 870 millibars.

"Until recently, until planes were equipped to carry more fuel and were able to
fly into these storms, we didn't have great data," Kottlowski said.

Hurricane Patricia was able to gain so much strength because it grew over an
area of the Pacific with very warm waters that run deep, feeding it constant
heat instead of pulling up cold waters from well below the surface.

It's also an El NiÃ± o year, which means there is less wind shear in the Pacific
to cut down storms.

"Patricia is at the top, as far as hurricanes go," Henson said. "It's hard to
overstate that."

kmiller@pbpost.com

hurricane patricia

Location: 19.5 Ë[#x161]N 104.9 Ë[#x161] W

Wind speed: 160 mph

Direction: NNE at 15 mph

As of 8 p.m. Friday

Latest information: Storm2014.com

Most intense hurricanes

Top five hurricanes ranked by central pressure:

1. 2015, Hurricane Patricia, 879 mb.

2. 2005, Hurricane Wilma, 882 mb.

3. 1998, Hurricane Gilbert, 888 mb.

4. 1935, Labor Day Hurricane, 892 mb.

5. 2005, Hurricane Rita, 895 mb.

What winds of 200 mph will do

According to the NHC, winds from a Category 5 storm -- 157 mph or higher -- will
cause catastrophic damage.

"A high percentage of framed homes will be destroyed, with total roof failure
and wall collapse. Fallen trees and power poles will isolate residential areas.
Power outages will last for weeks to possibly months. Most of the area will be
uninhabitable for weeks or months," the NHC says of a landfalling Category 5
system.

To put it in context, Patricia's winds are equal to the speed of a bullet train.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 535 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           December 2, 2015 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Florida survives 10th straight year without hurricane strike;
But streak may be over, officials warn residents.

BYLINE:  By Jorge Milian   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 573 words


The experts were right: Hurricane season was a dud.

Colorado State University climatologist Phil Klotzbach predicted in April that
the six-month Atlantic season would be "pretty boring" and the forecast proved
accurate.

There were 11 named storms, four hurricanes and two major hurricanes in 2015,
all below average numbers. The average season consists of 12 named storms, six
hurricanes and three major hurricanes (Category 3 or stronger), according to the
National Hurricane Center.

More importantly for residents of the Sunshine State, no hurricanes hit Florida
for a record 10th straight year. The previous record was five years.

"Not to have a direct hit by a hurricane in the state of Florida for 10
consecutive years is remarkable," said Dennis Feltgen, meteorologist and
spokesman for the National Hurricane Center. "But I guarantee you that streak is
going to end and we have to be prepared for it to end in 2016."

There's no secret to what kept locals safe from a monster storm this year. The
global atmospheric force El Nino was one of the most potent on record, producing
strong vertical wind shear that snuffed out potential storms in the Atlantic
basin before they could form.

El Nino is expected to peak this winter before dropping off during the spring,
Feltgen said.

"It remains to be seen for 2016 whether El Nino will disappear completely
whether we're at the tail end of it or we'll be going back to La Nina (which
enhances hurricane formation in the Atlantic basin)," Feltgen said. "It's too
early to tell."

One certainty is that Floridians are on an unprecedented lucky streak. In the
past 10 years, 64 hurricanes have formed in the Atlantic and not one has struck
the state. Even during past stretches of below-normal hurricane seasons, an
average of one storm hit the state every two-plus years, according to the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

"We've been fortunate that when these individual hurricanes have been around,
the weather pattern has been such that it didn't come our way or, if they did
come our way, they fell apart before reaching land," Feltgen said.

The past three years have each resulted in below-average numbers of named storms
and hurricanes. There were 12 hurricanes from 2013-15, matching the total number
of hurricanes in 2010.

The United States has been experiencing an active hurricane cycle since 1995,
experts say. That run has included killer storms like Floyd, Wilma and Katrina.
But the reduced number of storms over the past three years has raised questions
whether that busy period has ended.

Despite the reduced hurricane activity and lack of strikes on Florida, Feltgen
said that residents must avoid feeling that "it always hits somewhere else."

"When you have a 10-year streak, you get the usual suspects -- complacency and
denial," Feltgen said. "On top of that, you have the 2 million people who have
moved to Florida since Wilma (2005) hit us. That's a lot of hurricane
inexperience. We have to remain focused because this streak is going to end."

jmilian@pbpost.com Twitter: @jorgemilian1

Quieter than usual season

This year was among the less active Atlantic seasons in recent history,
especially when compared to years like 2010 and 2011. Here's a look at the past
10 years in storms -- none of which have hit Florida.

Year Named storms Hurricanes Major hurricanes

2006 10 5 2

2007 15 6 2

2008 16 8 5

2009 9 3 2

2010 19 12 5

2011 19 7 4

2012 19 10 2

2013 14 2 0

2014 8 6 2

2015 11 4 2

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 536 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                              May 28, 2017 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

'Coy' El Niño makes hurricane forecast a gamble;
Early prediction calls for below-average season, which begins Thursday.

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller     Daily News Staff Writer

SECTION: HURRICANE; Pg. 1S

LENGTH: 649 words


After building to a record-challenging virility in 2015, El Niño is playing coy
this year, making the job of seasonal hurricane forecasting an even bigger
gamble than normal.

Colorado State University storm expert Phil Klotzbach, who spoke last month at
the National Hurricane Conference in New Orleans, said El Niño is sending
signals that it could go either way -- make an appearance by fall, or be a
complete no-show.

The intentions of the hurricane-repelling climate pattern are watched closely by
meteorologists who know its presence is climatologically tied to below-average
storm seasons, which is what Klotzbach is forecasting.

"In my view, it's on a knife's edge right now," Klotzbach said about El Niño.
"We need a moderate El Niño to really get a hurricane killer."

When released April 6, the CSU forecast called for a slightly below average
season in the Atlantic basin as the possibility of weak to moderate El Niño
conditions build. With that climate pattern in mind, CSU forecast 11 named
storms, four hurricanes and two major hurricanes of Category 3 or higher.

The New Orleans hurricane conference drew emergency managers, scientists and
municipal leaders from hurricane prone areas nationwide. About 1,400 emergency
managers, experts and leaders also came to the annual Governor's Hurricane
Conference, which was held earlier this month at the Palm Beach County
Convention Center.

The conferences were held as the 25th anniversary of Hurricane Andrew
approaches.

It was dark when Andrew hit South Florida on Aug. 24, 1992, throwing debris and
making noises people had never heard before. Ears popped. Glass shattered.

"And then you have Bryan Norcross, who is on the air, saying take a mattress and
go into your bathroom and cover your head," said Eric Salna, associate director
of Florida International University's Extreme Events Institute. "Debris is
flying, and then people heard the horrific sounds of their roof being peeled
off. They thought they were going to die."

Norcross is now a Weather Channel hurricane expert, but was a local
meteorologist in Miami during Andrew. He is credited with saving lives as he
walked people through the storm.

"Ask people if they've ever been in a storm and what it was like," Salna said.
"It's very impactful."

Hurricane Andrew happened during a weak El Niño year, proving the point
forecasters always emphasize -- it only takes one storm.

"A seasonal hurricane forecast is not a preparedness tool," Klotzbach said.

During the super strong El Niño two years ago, the tropical Atlantic spun up 11
named storms with no Florida landfalls.

This past year, during a La Niña, there were 15 storms, including Hurricane
Hermine, which came ashore in Florida's Panhandle, and Category 5 Hurricane
Matthew, which could have devastated South Florida if its eye wobbled 60 miles
west instead of jogging east.

To kick off an El Niño this year, Klotzbach said strong westerly winds are
needed over the Pacific to blow a buildup of warm waters near Indonesia toward
South America. The shift in water temperatures changes thunderstorm patterns,
which affects upper-air wind flow in a way that shreds hurricanes in the
Atlantic.

Klotzbach is predicting 11 named storms, four hurricanes and two major
hurricanes of Category 3 strength or higher. He'll issue a revised hurricane
forecast Thursday.

"Nobody can tell you that there will be no hurricanes or that this year they
won't impact you," said Craig Fugate, former Florida emergency manager and FEMA
director under President Barack Obama. "All the seasonal forecasts, all that
nonsense, comes down to the basic fact that storms happen, storms make landfall,
and you are either prepared or not."

-- kmiller@ pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

D uring the super strong El Niño two years ago, the tropical Atlantic spun up 11
named storms with no Florida landfalls. This past year, during a La Niña, there
were 15 storms.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2017 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 537 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                            September 4, 2005 Sunday
                                  ALL EDITION

Stay or go -- a life-or-death decision;
One expert says people at risk shouldn't rely on wind speed as the best measure
of a hurricane's intensity.

BYLINE: By CATHY ZOLLO cathy.zollo@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 876 words


The chorus of many who didn't flee Hurricane Katrina was, "We survived Camille.
We'll survive Katrina."

For too many, it was a fatal mistake.

Though Katrina was rated a Category 4 hurricane at landfall and 1969's Hurricane
Camille was a Category 5 storm, Katrina's punishing winds and 25-foot storm
surge may be responsible for more death and property damage than Camille.
Katrina scoured miles of coastline from Louisiana to Alabama with what
scientists say was the highest storm surge ever recorded in the United States.

Katrina's destruction highlights a question over how to measure hurricane
intensity -- and how to deliver the most accurate warnings to people in a
storm's path.

For decades, hurricane intensity has been rated chiefly by wind speed. Storms
with the highest winds were rated Category 5. But AccuWeather's Joe Bastardi, an
occasional critic of the National Hurricane Center, says atmospheric pressure at
the center of the storm is a better indicator of a hurricane's strength.

When Katrina made landfall, its pressure was 920 millibars, making it the
third-strongest U.S. hurricane on record, slightly stronger than 1992's
Hurricane Andrew and trailing only a 1935 hurricane in the Florida Keys and
Camille.

"You had a bunch of people (in the storm's path) say, 'OK, it's starting to
weaken. Don't worry about it,' " Bastardi said.

Before Katrina made landfall, government and private forecasters alike were
adamant that residents must evacuate the coast. Though the National Hurricane
Center reported that Katrina's intensity peaked 20 hours before it came ashore,
dropping from a Category 5 storm to a Category 4 by the time it made landfall,
Hurricane Center Director Max Mayfield compared it to being hit by a truck
rather than a train.

The difference of opinion between Bastardi and the National Hurricane Center
matters if individuals would have made different decisions -- and been less
likely to ignore forecasters -- if they had more information.

Measuring a storm

Using only wind speed to measure a hurricane's strength is an oversimplification
and can have devastating results, Bastardi says.

Winds vary at different points in a storm and at different times, he says, and
aerial reconnaissance might not capture the strongest winds.

Using a storm's atmospheric pressure and comparing that to previous storms of
similar size and pressure is more accurate to figure potential damage, he says.

Atmospheric pressure -- the weight of the atmosphere over a specific point on
the earth -- is given in millibars, a metric measurement. The lower the pressure
at the surface the more intense the storm because, in simple terms, it shows how
much lift there is in the storm's center. Lift leads to a storm building skyward
and makes it more powerful.

Normal atmospheric pressure at sea level is roughly 1,013 millibars. When
Katrina made landfall, its pressure was 920 millibars.

Based on that, Katrina was as strong as Category 5 Hurricane Andrew, which
demolished a wide swath of South Florida in 1992. Andrew was 921 millibars at
landfall.

The Saffir-Simpson scale that rates hurricanes from 1 to 5 includes a range of
atmospheric pressure and storm surge in determining each category. But wind
speed trumps both when deciding what category is assigned.

While wind speed has a lot to do with how much damage an area sustains from a
storm, the size of the storm also determines damage. A more compact hurricane,
such as Camille, might have higher wind speeds than a much larger storm, such as
Katrina, at the same pressure. But the bigger storm would scour a much wider
area.

Bastardi suggests that forecasters look at previous storms, their pressure and
size at landfall and what kind of damage they delivered to characterize an
active storm. He said he'll be using that method by next hurricane season.

National Hurricane Center officials say Bastardi should follow the scientific
method and put his theory out there for testing.

"We certainly welcome other ideas in the marketplace of ideas," said Hurricane
Center spokesman Frank Lepore. "... Write it up, then publish it, and then give
other scientists a crack at it. Eventually, the truth comes out."

'Dead wrong'

The Hurricane Center uses wind speed to determine a hurricane's strength, or
category, because it's easy for people to understand, Lepore said. There's no
discussion about making any changes, he said.

"What relevance does millibars pressure have to the average person on the
street?" he said. "This general notion of being able to characterize the effects
of the storm is for emergency managers."

Still, many people base decisions to stay or go on a hurricane's category,
rather than what local emergency managers have to say.

Robert Bates, a retired Venice schoolteacher who grew up in Pass Christian,
Miss., where Camille made landfall, said that was true for Katrina.

Bates' family and the family home survived the 1969 storm.

Perched 24 feet above sea level, the house didn't survive Katrina.

Not much of Pass Christian did.

Bates' family evacuated for Katrina, but he said many people who have lived
there for decades decided to stay based on the storm's Category 4 rating.

"Their thinking was 'If I can survive Camille, I can surely survive Katrina,' "
Bates said. "... They were dead wrong."

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC, MAP
 Joe Bastardi of AccuWeather says atmospheric pressure at the center of the
storm is a better indicator of a hurricane's strength. STAFF GRAPHIC / JENNIFER
F.A. BORRESEN Don't judge the power of a hurricane by it's wind speed Wind
speeds can vary at different points in a storm at different times. Also, a
bigger storm with slower wind speeds can cut a wider swath of destruction. Some
forecasters think using atmospheric pressure to inform the public about
potential damage is more accurate. * Atmospheric pressure at sealevel in the
center of the hurricane is measured in millibars. (Graphic available on
microfilm) STAFF MAP/ JENNIFER F.A. BORRESEN Similar storms Katrina's path
(2005) Category at landfall: 4 Winds: 140 mph Storm surge: 20 feet Pressure: 920
Camille's path (1969) Category at landfall: 5 Winds: 100 mph Storm surge: 24
feet Pressure: 909 (Map available on microfilm)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2005 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.


                          FOCUS - 538 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                            November 27, 2005 Sunday
                                  ALL EDITION

Warm water makes for hot season;
Elevated ocean temperatures also helped guide long-range forecasters to greater
accuracy

BYLINE: By CATHY ZOLLO cathy.zollo@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1194 words


Year of blown-away records

The most named storms: 25

Tropical Storm Arlene was the first, making landfall on June 11 at the
Florida-Alabama border.

The most hurricanes: 13

Hurricane Dennis was the first, coming ashore July 10 in the Florida Panhandle
as a Category 3 storm.

The most Category 5 hurricanes: 3

Hurricanes Katrina, above, Rita and Wilma grew into monsters with winds topping
156 mph.

The worst damage: estimated $130 billion

The water may have receded from New Orleans, but the city faces a long,
uncertain recovery.

With a death toll of 2,745 and damage topping $130 billion, the hurricane season
that officially ends Wednesday was the busiest and most destructive on record.

That didn't surprise long-range forecasters, whose accuracy for 2005 is a record
in itself.

By early August, they were unanimously predicting a hyperactive year for
hurricanes, and they were dead-on.

Final tally: 13 hurricanes and 25 named storms, eclipsing the previous records
from 1969 (12 hurricanes) and 1933 (21 named storms).

The British forecasting group Tropical Storm Risk did the best for the year,
calling for 11 hurricanes and 22 named storms.

Like most forecasters today, the British group relied on a variety of
atmospheric and oceanic conditions, including sea temperatures and trade-wind
strength, to make its predictions.

"We know that if we can predict those environmental fields perfectly for August
and September, we will get a very accurate forecast for hurricane activity,"
said Mark Saunders, lead scientist for Tropical Storm Risk and a professor at
University College London.

The use of such oceanic and atmospheric indicators as a tool for predicting a
season's hurricane activity was pioneered in the 1980s by William Gray, head of
the Tropical Meteorological Project at the University of Colorado.

On Aug. 5, Gray's team forecast 10 hurricanes, six of them intense -- a Category
3 or above, with sustained winds of at least 111 mph -- and 20 named storms.

"As the season approached, we consistently increased our forecast, and by early
August, we were predicting activity at near-record levels for the year," said
Gray, who studied and trained while in the Air Force and at the University of
Chicago.

Gray bumped up his numbers after factoring in the large number of early storms
-- seven named storms by the end of July -- and sea-surface temperatures in the
Atlantic that were close to the highest on record.

Most long-range forecasters attribute the busy early season to a few factors,
among them unusually warm water in the Atlantic, Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico.

Also, the Pacific's El Nino, which produces strong westerly winds, was in
neutral. Those westerlies usually snuff out storms that try to form in the early
season.

"The conditions were close to perfect," said Tom Berg, founder of
HurricaneAlley.net, a hurricane tracking and information Web site. "When there
were already so many in July, you had to assume that it wasn't going to slow
down much."

Along with warm ocean temperatures and favorable winds, forecasters say the
early and active season was partly due to the Madden-Julian Oscillation, or MJO.

The MJO is a wave-like pattern of rising and falling air that girds the Earth in
the tropics. During the 2005 season, the MJO ran like clockwork in 45-day
cycles, bringing rising air, which builds storms, to the Atlantic basin about
every six weeks.

Several long-range forecasters now try to predict increasingly specific storm
targets, such as what areas of the coast will see the most action in a given
year.

Gray and his team, for example, rate sections of coast based on the history of
hurricanes for that area.

For 2005, they gave Southwest Florida a 1 in 3 chance for a hit.

Berg, and Joe Bastardi of AccuWeather, a private weather company, did Gray's
team one better, predicting not only that the Southwest Florida coast would be
hit by a hurricane, but it that it would come late in the season.

Bastardi predicted a Category 2 or 3 storm. Category 3 Hurricane Wilma rolled
ashore south of Naples on Oct. 24.

But Bastardi also said the Carolinas would see intense action during the 2005
season.

Hurricane Ophelia came closest, buffeting the Outer Banks with hurricane-force
winds, but it never made landfall.

Virtually all long-range forecasters predict increased hurricane activity in the
Atlantic for the next 10 years or so.

Some say global warming is fueling a natural upswing in hurricane activity by
heating the oceans, but Gray says it's part of a much larger and natural climate
cycle.

Gray, who has been chasing and researching the monster storms since the 1950s,
was the first to link hurricane activity to a decades-long cycle of rising and
falling water temperatures in the Atlantic.

This current warm phase of the so-called Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation, or
AMO, is what's driving the elevation of sea temperatures, he believes.

Warm and cold cycles of the AMO depend on how fast Atlantic surface waters move
north past Greenland and cool down in the Arctic before heading south.

The faster the water moves, the less time it has to cool, and warmer water is
better for hurricane formation.

Beyond putting coastal residents on edge, long-range forecasters say their
predictions are useful for businesses and governments in their decision making.

"If the insurance industry had acted upon the forecast, they could have taken
out extra insurance coverage to reduce their losses," said Saunders, of the
British forecasting team.

A record-setting season of storms

25 named storms -- The most named storms in a single season, breaking the old
record of 21 named storms set in 1933.

13 hurricanes -- The most hurricanes in a single season, breaking the old record
of 12 hurricanes set in 1969.

7 hurricanes Category 3 or stronger -- Ties the single- season record for
intense hurricanes set in 1950.

Three Category 5 hurricanes (Katrina, Rita, and Wilma) --

The most Category 5 hurricanes recorded in a single season, breaking the old
record of two Category 5 hurricanes set in 1960 and 1961.

Seven named storms made landfall (Arlene, Cindy, Dennis, Katrina, Rita, Tammy
and Wilma) -- Ties the 2005 season for second place for landfalling storms
behind the 1916 and 2004 seasons, where eight named storms made landfall.

The 2005 season was the most damaging in history for the United States --
Insured damage estimates for the 2005 season are nearly $70 billion, shattering
the old records set in 1992 and 2004, which were each approximately $25 billion
(adjusted to 2005 dollars) in insured damage. Total damage is estimated at $130
billion.

Source: The University of Colorado's Tropical Meteorological Project

How close were the forecasters?

The season:

25 named storms

13 hurricanes

What the various forecasters predicted:

NOAA: The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Climate Prediction
Center: 18-21 named storms, 9-11 hurricanes

University of Colorado Tropical Meteorological Project:

20 named storms, 11 hurricanes

Hurricane Alley.net:

18-22 named storms,

4 hurricanes

AccuWeather:

18 named storms

2006 storm names

Alberto

Beryl

Chris

Debby

Ernesto

Florence

Gordon

Helene

Isaac

Joyce

Kirk

Leslie

Michael

Nadine

Oscar

Patty

Rafael

Sandy

Tony

Valerie

William

Source: NOAA

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Hurricane Season 2005

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 4
 ASSOCIATED PRESS ARCHIVE / PENSACOLA BEACH (Photo of person putting up sign)
NOAA / HURRICANE DENNIS (Radar photo of Hurricane Dennis) NOAA / HURRICANE
KATRINA (Radar photo of Hurricane Katrina) ASSOCIATED PRESS ARCHIVE / NEW
ORLEANS (Photo of damage in New Orleans)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2005 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.


                          FOCUS - 539 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                             June 1, 2006 Thursday
                                  ALL EDITION

It's here;
Experts see another busy hurricane season, if not as intense as '05, and it
begins today;
Fear gives boost to storm-protection business

BYLINE: By PATRICK WHITTLE patrick.whittle@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 640 words


Dale Venlos didn't spend much money on hurricane protection before Hurricane
Charley.

But after the 2004 storm ripped apart his Harbour Heights home in Charlotte
County, Venlos spent $50,000 on storm-resistant windows alone.

"I have a much better sense of security now than I had before," he said. "A lot
of our friends have moved, and we feel secure."

The vigilance of Floridians like Venlos has propelled the hurricane preparation
industry to new heights.

Some experts estimate that Americans will spend six to eight times more on
hurricane protection in 2006 than in 2003.

A 12-day "sales tax holiday" for hurricane products, which ends today, has saved
Floridians approximately $41 million. That figure tops last year's total and
suggests that buyers spent several hundred million dollars on prevention.

Capitalizing on fear is the key to selling hurricane gear, said Bart Weitz,
executive director of the University of Florida's Miller Center for Retailing.

"The fear has a positive effect on generating sales if it's a relatively modest
amount of fear," Weitz said. "If it's too much, people say 'I can't deal with
it' and they ignore the whole thing."

The hurricane protection industry has grown in part because buyers have more
options. Scores of new products hit the market after Charley.

Charlotte County residents Bill and Delores Kunder spent about $2,000 in 2005 on
a product called Storm Stoppers. The recent invention shields windows with
corrugated plastic instead of traditional plywood.

Like many residents, the Kunders opened their wallets after Hurricane Charley.

South Carolina-based consumer research firm America's Research Group reported
that 30 percent of Floridians have made their homes more storm-safe in the last
three years.

Two-thirds of those residents made improvements out of necessity while they
rebuilt after a hurricane, the agency reported.

Britt Beemer, chairman of the research group, said the 30 percent figure is
higher than any point in the past 20 years.

"Floridians historically have always responded more to hurricane warnings than
any other state in the nation," Beemer said, adding that storm protection "is a
multimillion-dollar industry."

Venlos, the Harbour Heights resident, sustained about $150,000 in damage to his
home.

It only made sense to rebuild stronger, Venlos said. He bought storm-resistant
doors and garage doors and a generator to go along with his new windows.

"We were unprepared" before Charley, Venlos said. "I stayed in the house for the
last hurricane, and I'd stay in again."

Exactly how much money Floridians spend on hurricane prevention annually is a
subject of debate.

Floridians saved an estimated $40 million during a 12-day "sales tax holiday" in
2005, said Bill Herrle, vice president of the Florida Retail Federation. Other
estimates placed the savings closer to $10 million.

But hurricane products are sold year-round. And household items like bottled
water and canned food factor into the total, said Weitz, the director of the
Florida retailing center.

Even the International Hurricane Protection Association, based in Palm Beach
County, isn't sure how much money Floridians spend on hurricane protection.

But Thomas Johnston, vice president of the trade association, said sales have
increased exponentially since Hurricane Charley.

"When you have Katrina and Wilma both coming through Florida, people are well
aware now, and they are putting their money where it needs to be," Johnston
said.

Some tax-exempt products

Note: sales tax holiday ends today

* Flashlights and portable, self- powered light sources, $20 or less

* Portable radios, two-way radios, weather-band radios, $50 or less

* Tarps, $50 or less

* Gas containers, $25 or less

* Batteries, $30 or less

* Non-electrical food storage coolers, $30 or less

* Portable generators, $1,000 or less

* Cell phone batteries, $60 or less

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
 STAFF PHOTO / CHIP LITHERLAND / chip.litherland@heraldtribune.com Bill Kunder
inspects the automatic hurricane shutters at his Charlotte County home. The
windows at left are covered by "Storm Stoppers," which shield with corrugated
plastic instead of traditional plywood. STAFF MAP / PETE SMITH A record-breaking
season In addition to all these atmospheric records, 2005 will go down in the
annuals of hurricane history as being the most destructive. An estimated $130
billion in damage was reported. 28 The most named storms in one season 15 The
most hurricanes in one season 4 The most major hurricanes to hit the U.S. 4 The
most category 5 hurricanes 882 mb The most powerful storm on record, Hurricane
Wilma, with a record low pressure reading. (Map available on microfilm)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.


                          FOCUS - 540 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                           October 20, 2007 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Reduce your risk while travelling during hurricane season; Off-season holidays
can save you a bundle, providing you don't get caught in a storm

BYLINE: Debbie Olsen, For Calgary Herald; CanWest News Service

SECTION: TRAVEL; Pg. L10

LENGTH: 692  words


Do you remember Wilma? Mitch? Dean? When the storm approaching your holiday spot
has a name, it's never a good sign.

Despite forecasts of a busier than average hurricane season, the idea of a cheap
family vacation on a tropical beach was just too appealing for us -- especially
when we found a last-minute airfare deal to Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, for $199
plus tax per person.

With off-season rates for hotels and tours, we saved a bundle on the cost of our
vacation. Add to the fact that we

didn't have to fight other tourists for coveted beach-front lounge chairs and
our late summer vacation seemed almost perfect.

At least, until we heard the hurricane reports. Nothing short of a perfect storm
could ruin our perfect holiday.

Fortunately for us, the hurricane in question was headed towards the other side
of the country.

While hundreds of vacationers were frantically trying to exit Cancun before
hurricane Dean hit the Yucatan Peninsula in late August, our family was relaxing
on a beach. By the time Dean travelled inland to reach Puerto Vallarta, the
Category 5 hurricane had been downgraded to little more than a remnant low.

In its weakened state, it could no longer be described as a perfect storm and
yet Dean's heavy rains wreaked havoc on the city of Puerto Vallarta. Businesses
shut down and traffic flow was hindered for the better part of a day in the
downtown areas of the city.

Although it made our vacation less than ideal, we only spent one day hiding out
from the rain and enjoyed six days of sun, sand and surf. Sometimes a
last-minute deal during hurricane season can work out well.

You take a chance when you are travelling to tropical locales during hurricane
season, but there are a few things you can do to reduce your risk and protect
your vacation investment.

Know the season

The Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30 and the eastern
Pacific hurricane season runs from May 15 to Nov. 30, but the peak season is
from mid-August to late October. The Atlantic basin includes the Atlantic Ocean,
Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico. The eastern Pacific basin extends to 140
degrees west.

Different places, different risks

Some destinations have a higher incidence of hurricanes and named storms than
others.

Puerto Vallarta has a lower risk of named storms than Cancun, for example.
Bermuda and Miami have approximately a one-in-four annual risk of being affected
by a hurricane. The odds for Nassau, Bahamas, are about one-in-five.

The islands of the western Caribbean are less likely to be affected by
hurricanes than those of the eastern Caribbean. The southernmost Caribbean
islands (Aruba, Barbados, Bonaire, Grenada, Trinidad, Tobago) are rarely hit by
hurricanes.

A recent Dow Jones Island Index assessing hurricane risk rated Curacao as the
Caribbean island least likely to be hit by a hurricane, followed by Bonaire,
Grand Cayman, Barbados and Aruba.

For a look at the return frequency of hurricanes in the United States, visit
www.nhc.noaa.gov/HAW2/english/basics/return.shtml.

Trip insurance

In most cases, when a severe hurricane is expected, airlines begin booking
passengers on whatever flight they have to get them out.

The problem comes when the prediction is not precise. Airlines will generally
not change your flights without significant fees unless they are fairly certain
there is an imminent risk.

Some passengers who tried to leave Cancun ahead of hurricane Wilma in 2005 were
charged hundreds of dollars in additional fees.

Trip cancellation and interruption insurance costs about five per cent of the
cost of your entire trip, but it can refund your money if your trip is delayed
due to severe weather or for other reasons.

It also provides protection from other unforeseen problems.

Some tour companies and resorts offer their own hurricane insurance programs.
It's a good idea to inquire about hurricane insurance policies before you book
your vacation.

WHAT'S IN A NAME

Have you ever wondered why some storms have names and how those names are
chosen? For information on the history of naming storms or to view a list of
storm names, visit the National Hurricane Center website,www.nhc.

noaa.gov/aboutnames.shtml.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Greg Olsen, Special to the Calgary Herald, Canwest News service;
Hurricane season unfortunately coincides with off-season holiday times and rates
in many tropical locales. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2007 Edmonton Journal, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 541 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            April 4, 2007 Wednesday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

BRIEF RESPITE FROM STORMS OVER, FORECASTERS SAY

BYLINE: STEPHEN NOHLGREN, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 690 words



HIGHLIGHT: Multiple factors point to a year more like 2004 or '05 for Florida.


Ocean temperatures, dust in Africa and the shape of high-pressure systems all
indicate that Florida could soon expect another round of submerged
neighborhoods, blue tarp roofs and FEMA trailers.

That's the grim outlook predicted Tuesday by three separate research groups that
updated their 2007 hurricane forecasts.

Global climate signals "raise images of 2004 and 2005," said Ken Reeves,
forecasting director for AccuWeather.com, referring to hurricanes that clobbered
Florida and other gulf states two years running.

"That's the kind of hurricane season we have to worry about."

William Gray, longtime hurricane researcher at Colorado State University,
predicted that 17 storms would intensify enough to be named by the National
Hurricane Center. Of those, nine would reach hurricane strength, including five
major hurricanes, Gray's group said.

Gray predicted a 74 percent chance that a major hurricane would hit the United
States, up from an average of 52 percent.

Tropical Storm Risk Inc., a British company that serves the insurance industry,
also predicted 17 named storms and nine hurricanes.

Last year's modest hurricane season was probably just a respite in otherwise
stormy times, they agree.

Such forecasts, though, often miss their mark, particularly when they are made
in April, two months before the hurricane season begins.

In 2005, the Atlantic basin spawned a record 28 named storms, almost doubling
most expectations.

Last year, many forecasters predicted another busy season, but not a single
hurricane made landfall in the United States.

Atmospheric and oceanic modeling remains in its infancy.

Still, Tuesday's round of predictions brought broad agreement among groups that
sometimes see different patterns in the tea leaves.

The National Hurricane Center won't make its first official prediction until May
22, but generally agrees that 2007 should be busier than most years, said
meteorologist Dennis Feltgen.

"We remain in a very active hurricane cycle" that began in 1995, Feltgen said.
"We assume we will be in this for the next 10 to 15 years."

One key indicator is water temperature in the tropical Pacific. When it's warm,
it can cause El Nino conditions, which alter weather throughout the Americas and
tend to hinder Atlantic hurricanes.

Last year, both Gray's group and the hurricane center were caught by surprise by
a strong, late-developing El Nino. That's why their predictions of a busy season
never materialized, they said.

That warm Pacific water dissipated in December. Now, temperatures in the Pacific
are slightly cooler than normal, pointing to a possible La Nina, which
stimulates Atlantic hurricanes, said Phillip Koltzbach, one of Gray's
associates.

About 20 computer models track those Pacific effects, Koltzbach said, "and about
half are predicting La Nina and about half are neutral. Only one is predicting
El Nino."

Unlike other forecasters, AccuWeather.com correctly predicted a quiet hurricane
season last year for Florida and other states along the Gulf of Mexico.
AccuWeather.com focuses on landfalls and hurricane tracking more than on total
numbers of storms, said Reeves, the forecasting director.

Multiple factors point to a busy year for Florida and the gulf, he said.

Atlantic and gulf water temperatures are high, which feed big storms. Dust from
Africa, which can sap energy from potential storms, is more likely to stay in
Africa this year. And an Atlantic high-pressure ridge seems to be forming in an
elongated shape that pushes storms more toward Florida and the gulf rather than
up the Eastern Seaboard or out into the Atlantic, Reeves said.

"All the analogs really point to, after a breather last year, it's back to
above-normal conditions in the gulf," he said.

Forecast, reality

Here is a look at the early season forecasts from the National Hurricane Center
and researcher William Gray compared to how many named storms actually formed.

Year NHC Gray Actual

2007 n/a* 17 n/a

2006 13-16 17 10

2005  12-15  13 28
2004  12-15  14 15
2003  11-15  12 16


* The National Hurricane Center has not released its 2007 forecast.

Sources: National Hurricane Center, Colorado State University, Times archives.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Researcher William Gray predicts a 74 percent chance that a
major hurricane hits the U.S. CHART: Forecast, reality

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 542 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                               May 9, 2014 Friday

Hurricane Hunters return to St. Croix

BYLINE: The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 326 words


May 09--ST. CROIX -- The Hurricane Hunters are back.

Members of the 403rd Wing of the Air Force Reserve 53rd Weather Reconnaissance
Squadron -- the Hurricane Hunters -- are on St. Croix this week, getting
equipment and supplies in place and at the ready for Atlantic hurricane season,
which starts June 1.

The Hurricane Hunters fly WC-130J aircraft into tropical cyclones and
disturbances to gather data that the National Hurricane Center then uses to
determine the status of a storm and make predictions.

Based at Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi, Miss., the Hurricane Hunters
typically deploy to St. Croix several times throughout the hurricane season,
using the island as a forward base from which they can investigate storms
spinning across the Atlantic or the Caribbean.

Every May, they pre-position supplies and spare parts so that when the National
Hurricane Center calls on them, everything is ready for them to fly their
missions off St. Croix.

Lt. Col. Roy Deatherage, mission commander and a meteorologist who has been
coming with the Hurricane Hunters to St. Croix since 1996, said they average
four deployments to St. Croix each summer, but the number of deployments and the
amount of time spent here varies according to the situation.

A deployment could last from two days to two weeks, he said. While deployed,
members of the unit stay in local hotels and eat in local restaurants.

They can investigate storms in the Atlantic as far as 700 miles east of the
island, according to Deatherage.

The 2014 Atlantic hurricane season is expected to bring below-average tropical
cyclone activity.

The Colorado State University hurricane forecasting team of Phil Klotzbach and
William Graywith predict there will be nine named storms and three hurricanes,
one of them major.

___ (c)2014 The Virgin Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) Visit The Virgin
Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) at www.virginislandsdailynews.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140509-1VI-Hurricane-Hunters-return-to-St-Croix-0509-20140509

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2014 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 543 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             July 6, 2017 Thursday

Hurricane experts increase storm count

BYLINE: Jonathan Austin, The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 453 words


July 06--Hurricane prediction experts at Colorado State University have
increased their estimates on the number of tropical storms they expect in the
Atlantic this summer.

"We have increased our forecast and now believe that 2017 will have
above-average activity," wrote research scientist Philip Klotzbach in the third
Atlantic Basin forecast of the season.

This third update to the annual Atlantic Seasonal Hurricane Activity and
Landfall Strike Probability now predicts 15 named storms, eight of which will be
Atlantic hurricanes. Three of those are expected to be major hurricanes, the
report noted.

According to the Department of Atmospheric Science at Colorado State, there is a
52 percent chance this year of a major hurricane tracking into the Caribbean.
The average of such in the last century has been 42 percent.

The university developed many of the methods currently used for seasonal
hurricane forecasts.

The university's initial 2017 forecast, released in April, expected 15 named
storms, four hurricanes, and two major hurricanes.

Klotzbach and associated professor Ann Manning say the increased tropical
weather predictions are based on the fact that the chance "of a significant El
Niño in 2017 have continued to diminish, and most of the tropical and
subtropical Atlantic remains anomalously warm."

That means the probability for major hurricanes increases, they said.

A major hurricane is defined as one rated category 3,4 or 5 on the Saffir --
Simpson hurricane wind scale.

A Category 3 storm registers winds of 111 -- 129 mph. A Category 4 storm
registers winds of 130 -- 156 mph. A Category 5 storm has winds of or greater
than 157 mph.

"The lack of El Niño conditions typically leads to a lower shear environment in
the tropical Atlantic, while a warmer-than-normal tropical Atlantic provides
more fuel for developing tropical cyclones," Klotzbach said in the report.

Speaking to The Daily News, Klotzbach said the only comparable years in which
the university increased its hurricane prediction by four "ended up being very
active seasons."

Those years were 1995 and 2005, he said. The former is the year Hurricane
Marilyn hit the Virgin Islands, while 2005 saw the most active Atlantic
hurricane season in recorded history.

Klotzbach said the revised prediction does not suggest this season will be as
notable as 1995 or 2005.

Residents should "be prepared. Obviously, it just takes that one storm to make
it an active season for you," he said.

-- Contact Jonathan Austin at 340-714-9104 or email jaustin@dailynews.vi

___ (c)2017 The Virgin Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) Visit The Virgin
Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) at www.virginislandsdailynews.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20170706-1VI-Hurricane-experts-increase-storm-count-0706-20170706

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2017 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 544 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The Edge Malaysia

                               September 26, 2005

My Say: Bush inherits the wind

BYLINE: Jeffrey Sachs

LENGTH: 887 words


The most shocking statement in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina was President
George W Bush's remark that "I don't think anybody anticipated the breach of the
levees" that protect New Orleans from flooding. New Orleans is a city mostly
below sea level, and must be protected by levees to keep water out. Concern that
the levees might break in the midst of a powerful hurricane was widespread among
scientists, engineers, and emergency-preparedness experts. Yet Bush apparently
did not know of these concerns, even days after the hurricane destroyed the
levees and flooded the city.

There is a simple fact on display here, one that goes well beyond this
particular hurricane, and even this particular president. There is a deep
disconnect in American politics between scientific knowledge and political
decisions. Bush bears much responsibility for this. He has proven to be one of
America's least knowledgeable presidents when it comes to science - and one of
the most ready to turn science into a political issue.

In recent months, Bush has undermined biological theories of evolution in favour
of Christian fundamentalist dogmas. He disdains climate science and public
health science when it conflicts with the beliefs - and interests - of his core
supporters. Simply put, Bush's record on science policy is miserable.

Climate scientists have warned for years that global warming caused by man-made
emissions of greenhouse gases will generate more extreme storms. While there is
no scientific way to link a particular hurricane such as Katrina to the
long-term trend - in the sense that Katrina might have been bad luck rather than
a sign of manmade climate change - the energy of hurricanes throughout the world
has been rising markedly.

Bush, alas, led an aggressive effort to discredit climate science rather than to
respond to its findings. He called for delays in reducing greenhouse gas
emissions that cause global warming, which in turn causes the energy of
hurricanes to rise.

According to the underlying science that Bush ignores, hurricanes take their
energy from the warmth of seawater. That is why hurricanes occur in hot tropical
regions, and at the end of the summer months, when the sea surface temperatures
are at their annual maximum. Man-made global warming raises not only air
temperatures, but sea-surface temperatures as well. Higher sea-surface
temperatures translate into more powerful storms in the world's oceans.

Hurricanes are measured according to three dimensions - frequency, intensity,
and duration. The frequency of hurricanes has not changed much, if at all. The
big changes are in hurricanes' intensity and duration.

Intensity measures a hurricane's force, which includes wind speeds, and there
has been some recorded increase. The biggest change, however, has been in the
duration of hurricanes: How many days each hurricane lasts.

Duration has risen markedly around the world. The total energy of a hurricane is
found by multiplying the intensity of the hurricane by its duration. This, too,
has risen sharply, and more is in store as temperatures rise.

Scientists and engineers who work on climate change stress that governments need
to adopt two main responses. The first, called "mitigation", means reducing the
amount of man-made climate change.

This can be done by changing the world's energy system to limit emissions of
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere - the main driver of man-made climate change.
One option is a shift to non-carbon energy sources, such as renewable energy
(solar and wind power) and nuclear energy. Another option is to combine
carbon-based energy (coal, oil, and gas) with new technologies that prevent the
emission of airborne carbon.

The second response to climate change, called "adaptation", requires that we
ready ourselves for the climate change now underway and the increased climate
change to come in future years. This means preparing for hurricanes that are
more powerful in both intensity and duration.

An attentive national government would surely have realised that the Gulf region
of the US is more vulnerable to high-energy hurricanes. Indeed, Hurricane
Katrina was the third most intense hurricane ever to make landfall in the US.
Such a government would have taken more action to strengthen levees.

The Bush administration's negligence is especially shocking given the remarkable
amount of scientific expertise that exists in the US. Somehow, scientists have
been pushed aside by political operators. But the US government's failings are
matched in many parts of the world, and certainly in the poorest countries,
where scientific expertise is scarce, and where many governments do not have
scientific advisory councils to turn to for guidance.

Hurricane Katrina is a wake-up call, not only for the US but for the world. We
are entering a period when good science is vital for our survival. On a crowded
planet with threats to our climate, oceans, forests, food production, and water
supply, and with global travel and high population densities increasing the risk
of worldwide disease epidemics, we must turn to the best of our scientific and
engineering knowledge to find a safe passage. - Project Syndicate

Jeffrey Sachs is professor of economics and director of the Earth Institute at
Columbia University

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2005 The Edge Communications Sdn. Bhd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 545 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The Edge Malaysia

                               September 26, 2005

My Say: Bush inherits the wind

BYLINE: Jeffrey Sachs

LENGTH: 887 words


The most shocking statement in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina was President
George W Bush's remark that "I don't think anybody anticipated the breach of the
levees" that protect New Orleans from flooding. New Orleans is a city mostly
below sea level, and must be protected by levees to keep water out. Concern that
the levees might break in the midst of a powerful hurricane was widespread among
scientists, engineers, and emergency-preparedness experts. Yet Bush apparently
did not know of these concerns, even days after the hurricane destroyed the
levees and flooded the city.

There is a simple fact on display here, one that goes well beyond this
particular hurricane, and even this particular president. There is a deep
disconnect in American politics between scientific knowledge and political
decisions. Bush bears much responsibility for this. He has proven to be one of
America's least knowledgeable presidents when it comes to science - and one of
the most ready to turn science into a political issue.

In recent months, Bush has undermined biological theories of evolution in favour
of Christian fundamentalist dogmas. He disdains climate science and public
health science when it conflicts with the beliefs - and interests - of his core
supporters. Simply put, Bush's record on science policy is miserable.

Climate scientists have warned for years that global warming caused by man-made
emissions of greenhouse gases will generate more extreme storms. While there is
no scientific way to link a particular hurricane such as Katrina to the
long-term trend - in the sense that Katrina might have been bad luck rather than
a sign of manmade climate change - the energy of hurricanes throughout the world
has been rising markedly.

Bush, alas, led an aggressive effort to discredit climate science rather than to
respond to its findings. He called for delays in reducing greenhouse gas
emissions that cause global warming, which in turn causes the energy of
hurricanes to rise.

According to the underlying science that Bush ignores, hurricanes take their
energy from the warmth of seawater. That is why hurricanes occur in hot tropical
regions, and at the end of the summer months, when the sea surface temperatures
are at their annual maximum. Man-made global warming raises not only air
temperatures, but sea-surface temperatures as well. Higher sea-surface
temperatures translate into more powerful storms in the world's oceans.

Hurricanes are measured according to three dimensions - frequency, intensity,
and duration. The frequency of hurricanes has not changed much, if at all. The
big changes are in hurricanes' intensity and duration.

Intensity measures a hurricane's force, which includes wind speeds, and there
has been some recorded increase. The biggest change, however, has been in the
duration of hurricanes: How many days each hurricane lasts.

Duration has risen markedly around the world. The total energy of a hurricane is
found by multiplying the intensity of the hurricane by its duration. This, too,
has risen sharply, and more is in store as temperatures rise.

Scientists and engineers who work on climate change stress that governments need
to adopt two main responses. The first, called "mitigation", means reducing the
amount of man-made climate change.

This can be done by changing the world's energy system to limit emissions of
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere - the main driver of man-made climate change.
One option is a shift to non-carbon energy sources, such as renewable energy
(solar and wind power) and nuclear energy. Another option is to combine
carbon-based energy (coal, oil, and gas) with new technologies that prevent the
emission of airborne carbon.

The second response to climate change, called "adaptation", requires that we
ready ourselves for the climate change now underway and the increased climate
change to come in future years. This means preparing for hurricanes that are
more powerful in both intensity and duration.

An attentive national government would surely have realised that the Gulf region
of the US is more vulnerable to high-energy hurricanes. Indeed, Hurricane
Katrina was the third most intense hurricane ever to make landfall in the US.
Such a government would have taken more action to strengthen levees.

The Bush administration's negligence is especially shocking given the remarkable
amount of scientific expertise that exists in the US. Somehow, scientists have
been pushed aside by political operators. But the US government's failings are
matched in many parts of the world, and certainly in the poorest countries,
where scientific expertise is scarce, and where many governments do not have
scientific advisory councils to turn to for guidance.

Hurricane Katrina is a wake-up call, not only for the US but for the world. We
are entering a period when good science is vital for our survival. On a crowded
planet with threats to our climate, oceans, forests, food production, and water
supply, and with global travel and high population densities increasing the risk
of worldwide disease epidemics, we must turn to the best of our scientific and
engineering knowledge to find a safe passage. - Project Syndicate

Jeffrey Sachs is professor of economics and director of the Earth Institute at
Columbia University

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2005 The Edge Communications Sdn. Bhd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 546 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                           September 5, 2013 Thursday

Still no hurricane in 2013 season

BYLINE: Dinah Voyles Pulver, Dinah Voyles Pulver dinah.pulver@news-jrnl.com

SECTION: WEATHER

LENGTH: 639  words


The 2013 Atlantic hurricane season may be headed for the record books, but not
in the way anyone expected when ominous early forecasts warned of a busier than
normal season.

While the number of storms is technically slightly ahead of average for this
midpoint of the season, not a single hurricane has formed, only the 18th time
since 1851 that the season's first hurricane hadn't appeared by early September.
The latest first hurricane on record is Oct. 8, 1905, but since 1960 and the
advent of modern satellites, the latest a first hurricane formed was Sept. 11,
2002.

That modern mark could be broken this year. A combination of dry air and wind
shear across the Atlantic region has prevented any of the seven storms this
season from mustering the towering, energy- producing inner cores needed to make
a hurricane.

Tropical Storms Chantal, Dorian and Erin all dissipated earlier this summer as
they ran into dry, stable sinking air, some from the Sahara and some from the
mid and upper layers of the atmosphere, said Dennis Feltgen, the National
Hurricane Center's public affairs officer.

Although the Hurricane Center was watching five different storm systems on
Thursday, none were given a high chance of becoming a tropical cyclone by Sept.
11, much less a hurricane.

The storms, such as Gabrielle which became a tropical storm ever so briefly
Thursday, are expected to encounter the same conditions that kept the other
storms at bay.

Typically, the first hurricane forms by August 10, Feltgen said, and by this
time in September, the Atlantic has seen at least three hurricanes, including
one major hurricane.

Pre-season outlooks warned there could be between 13 and 20 named storms in the
season that started June 1 and ends Nov. 30, with 7 to 11 hurricanes. The season
started with a bang, with the first named storm, Andrea, forming the first week
of the season and dropping several inches of rain across Volusia and Flagler
counties.

The Hurricane Center and seasonal forecasters who specialize in predicting the
likely number of hurricanes and cyclones that might crop up in a season can't
really explain why the dry air and wind shear were such a surprise this summer.

"We're a bit at a loss to explain why the shear has been so strong," said Phil
Klotzbach, an architect of one of the leading seasonal forecasts with Dr.
William Gray. He speculated it could be warmer than normal waters just north of
the equator in the eastern Pacific, which are creating El Nino-like conditions.

But, as the systems dancing across the Atlantic on satellite monitors this week
indicated, experts said the signals seem to be pointing to an upswing in
activity.

The surface wind pressures are changing across the Atlantic Ocean and the dry
air isn't as widespread, Klotzbach said Thursday. In addition, sea level
pressures are below normal across the Atlantic, a sign of instability at low
levels in the atmosphere, he said.

It would be "a mistake to believe that the second half of the season will
resemble the first half," warned Feltgen.

Meanwhile, the late hurricane formation has researchers hitting the history
books searching for other comparisons to this season.

In the modern satellite era, there have been only two seasons besides 2002 when
the first hurricane formed after the first week of September, 1984 and 2001.

"In 2001, the first hurricane (Erin), did not form until Sept. 9th," Feltgen
said Wednesday. "The season ended with 15 named storms including 9 hurricanes, 4
of which become major hurricanes."

That season produced Gabrielle, which crossed Florida from the Gulf Coast in
mid-September, stalling just west of Daytona Beach and dropping up to 13 inches
of rain in the area, forcing abnormally high tides and flooding dozens of homes.

"With half of the season to go through yet," said Feltgen, "no one should let
their guard down."

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General Information

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2013 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2013 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 547 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                           November 29, 2014 Saturday

Dodging another 'cane season worth celebrating

BYLINE: Mark Lane, Mark Lane FOOTNOTE

SECTION: COLUMNS

LENGTH: 457  words


High on my list of days that should be holidays but aren't (the Day After
Thanksgiving, Election Day, Elvis' Birthday ...) isof Hurricane Season Day.

Particularly this year, the 10th anniversary of Florida's legendary Year of the
Hurricanes.

Hurricane season ends at midnight tonight and this year everyone can celebrate
the close of a light season. Only one storm made landfall on the East Coast.

The season's eight named storms were at the lowof what was expected last May,
when eight to 13 storms were predicted by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.

While a relief! But a relief that deprives us of one of the traditional
pleasures ofof Hurricane Season Day. Namely, the ritual mocking of May's
hurricane season estimates, which always seem more dire than what actually
happens.

(We who celebrateof Hurricane Season Day tend to pay little attention to the
revised August predictions. August hurricane season predictions are like betting
on a horse race after the first lap. It hardly seems sporting.)of Hurricane
Season Day gets observed more intensely in years where we've seen more
hurricanes head our way.

Years when you feel you've really dodged something. When you've watched the
hurricane-path map revisions for days, noting each wobble of the storm track.
Years when you joined your neighbors in panic-shopping the day before landfall.

Those are the years when you break out the good wine onof Hurricane Season Day.

And no year was more like that than 2004. A hurricane season whose 10-year
anniversary we toast on thisof Hurricane Season Day.

Four hurricanes hit Florida that year: Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and
Jeanne. In Daytona Beach, the highest sustained winds were 56 mph during
Hurricane Francis and the highest 2-minute- or-more gusts were 83 mph during
Charley.

These were no threat to our all-time record of 99 mph in Hurricane Donna, way
back in 1960, yet the hurricanes of 2004 were hugely memorable to everyone who
went through them.

My wood-frame house made noises during Frances that it never made before or
since. Like the whole place was audibly whining about being put through all
that.

The wind and rain sounded like a roller coaster overhead while oak branches
bounced off the roof or hit the ground with thuds and cracks.

Then, we spent the next few days without electricity, which I described at the
time as being like camping except you know where your stuff is. Here at The
News-Journal, we worked without air conditioning for more than a week. Every day
was informal Friday. Very informal.

When one has been through one or two weather events like that,of Hurricane
Season Day truly is something worth celebrating.

An observed holiday, even if it's not an official one.

Email: mark.lane@news-jrnl.com

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Commentary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2014 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2014 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 548 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                            October 6, 2016 Thursday

Volusia's hurricane history includes many storms, but none making landfall

BYLINE: Seth Robbins; Seth Robbins

SECTION: ISSN: 21587353

LENGTH: 649  words

DATELINE: Daytona Beach, Fla.

FULL TEXT

While no hurricane has ever made landfall in Volusia County since records have
been maintained, a number of storms have passed over or near enough to affect
the region. Here's a rundown.

1960: Hurricane Donna slammed into the Florida Keys in 1960 with wind speeds of
200 mph. It then struck southwest Florida, taking a northeasterly path as it
crossed the state until it reached Volusia and Flagler. It battered the the area
with wind gusts of 99 mph -- the highest ever recorded here -- and caused an
estimated $397 million in damage. The storm continued to travel up the eastern
seaboard, hitting every state from South Carolina to New York before finally
striking New England. According to the National Hurricane Center, Donna was the
fifth strongest hurricane of record to hit the United States, causing 50 deaths
and affecting more than 40 million people.

1964: Hurricane Dora appeared to be heading straight for Volusia County but
veered north, eventually smashing ashore in St. Augustine with peak winds of 125
mph. The Flagler Pier crumbled into the storm tossed surf, and it claimed the
Ormond Beach pier also. Total damage was estimated at $250 million and Volusia
County damages topped $2 million.

1979: Hurricane David moved inland south of Melbourne and then continued
northward along the Indian River to exit around New Smyrna Beach. Peak sustained
winds recorded as the hurricane went by were 40 mph, with gusts up to 55 mph,
but the damage was minimal.

1994: Hurricane Erin dropped less than an inch of rain on Daytona Beach, and the
highest sustained winds were 37 mph, with gusts up to 45 mph. The hurricane made
landfall near Vero Beach, two counties south of Volusia.

1996: Hurricane Bertha skipped past Florida's east coast, brushing along Volusia
and Flager. The hurricane finally made landfall in North Carolina, causing
extensive damage there. The storm, however, quickly lost strength as it moved up
the coast.

1999: Everyone feared the worst with massive Hurricane Floyd, a Category 4
hurricane that measured 600 miles wide and packed wind speeds of up to 155 mph.
But the storm turned north just hours before striking the coast and passed
within 80 miles of Flagler Beach. Still it was strong enough to rip apart the
end of Main Street pier in Daytona Beach.

2004: Hurricane Charley was the first of three storms to batter Volusia and
Flagler counties in 2004. Charley's top winds speeds approached 150 mph when it
made landfall near Fort Myers, eventually crossing the state and following the
Atlantic coast. The small but powerful Category 4 storm caused massive damage
from Deltona to Flagler Beach, ravaging Florida and spawning tornadoes as far
north as Virginia Beach. According to the Hurricane Center, the storm resulted
in 10 deaths and caused an estimated $15 billion in damage, making it the second
costliest hurricane in U.S history.

Next came Hurricane Frances, which made landfall on Florida's Treasure Coast and
slowly made its way across the peninsula. Though it lacked strength, its heavy
rains took a toll on Volusia and Flagler county residents who lost power for
days and weeks, and suffered severe flooding.

Finally Hurricane Jeanne arrived, taking a similar path to Frances but not
causing as much damage as feared. In the end, the total damage caused by the
three hurricanes in Volusia County was $560.2 million, while Flagler County
sustained a total of $23.2 million. The Federal Emergency Management Agency
declared 2004 the "most destructive hurricane season in Florida history," and
also announced that it was the biggest disaster relief effort in U.S. history at
that point, surpassing even 9/11.

SOURCES: "Florida Hurricanes and Tropical Storms/1871-1993: An Historical
Survey,'' by Fred Doehring, Iver W. Duedall and John M. Williams, published by
the Florida Sea Grant College Program; The National Hurricane Center; and
News-Journal files.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH US

ACC-NO: 45447

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 45447

                Copyright 2016 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                 Copyright 2016 Halifax Media Group Oct 6, 2016


                          FOCUS - 549 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                            October 6, 2016 Thursday

Volusia's hurricane history includes many storms, but none making landfall

BYLINE: Seth Robbins

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 647  words


While no hurricane has ever made landfall in Volusia County since records have
been maintained, a number of storms have passed over or near enough to affect
the region. Here's a rundown.

1960: Hurricane Donna slammed into the Florida Keys in 1960 with wind speeds of
200 mph. It then struck southwest Florida, taking a northeasterly path as it
crossed the state until it reached Volusia and Flagler. It battered the the area
with wind gusts of 99 mph -- the highest ever recorded here -- and caused an
estimated $397 million in damage. The storm continued to travel up the eastern
seaboard, hitting every state from South Carolina to New York before finally
striking New England. According to the National Hurricane Center, Donna was the
fifth strongest hurricane of record to hit the United States, causing 50 deaths
and affecting more than 40 million people.

1964: Hurricane Dora appeared to be heading straight for Volusia County but
veered north, eventually smashing ashore in St. Augustine with peak winds of 125
mph. The Flagler Pier crumbled into the storm tossed surf, and it claimed the
Ormond Beach pier also. Total damage was estimated at $250 million and Volusia
County damages topped $2 million.

1979: Hurricane David moved inland south of Melbourne and then continued
northward along the Indian River to exit around New Smyrna Beach. Peak sustained
winds recorded as the hurricane went by were 40 mph, with gusts up to 55 mph,
but the damage was minimal.

1994: Hurricane Erin dropped less than an inch of rain on Daytona Beach, and the
highest sustained winds were 37 mph, with gusts up to 45 mph. The hurricane made
landfall near Vero Beach, two counties south of Volusia.

1996: Hurricane Bertha skipped past Florida's east coast, brushing along Volusia
and Flager. The hurricane finally made landfall in North Carolina, causing
extensive damage there. The storm, however, quickly lost strength as it moved up
the coast.

1999: Everyone feared the worst with massive Hurricane Floyd, a Category 4
hurricane that measured 600 miles wide and packed wind speeds of up to 155 mph.
But the storm turned north just hours before striking the coast and passed
within 80 miles of Flagler Beach. Still it was strong enough to rip apart theof
Main Street pier in Daytona Beach.

2004: Hurricane Charley was the first of three storms to batter Volusia and
Flagler counties in 2004. Charley's top winds speeds approached 150 mph when it
made landfall near Fort Myers, eventually crossing the state and following the
Atlantic coast. The small but powerful Category 4 storm caused massive damage
from Deltona to Flagler Beach, ravaging Florida and spawning tornadoes as far
north as Virginia Beach. According to the Hurricane Center, the storm resulted
in 10 deaths and caused an estimated $15 billion in damage, making it the second
costliest hurricane in U.S history.

Next came Hurricane Frances, which made landfall on Florida's Treasure Coast and
slowly made its way across the peninsula. Though it lacked strength, its heavy
rains took a toll on Volusia and Flagler county residents who lost power for
days and weeks, and suffered severe flooding.

Finally Hurricane Jeanne arrived, taking a similar path to Frances but not
causing as much damage as feared. In the end, the total damage caused by the
three hurricanes in Volusia County was $560.2 million, while Flagler County
sustained a total of $23.2 million. The Federal Emergency Management Agency
declared 2004 the "most destructive hurricane season in Florida history," and
also announced that it was the biggest disaster relief effort in U.S. history at
that point, surpassing even 9/11.

SOURCES: "Florida Hurricanes and Tropical Storms/1871-1993: An Historical
Survey,'' by Fred Doehring, Iver W. Duedall and John M. Williams, published by
the Florida Sea Grant College Program; The National Hurricane Center; and
News-Journal files.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2016 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2016 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 550 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                            December 1, 2017 Friday

Footnote;
Happy End of Hurricane Season Day!

SECTION: FL NEWS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 542  words


If it were up to me, the last day of hurricane season, Nov. 30, would be a paid
and recognized holiday in Florida. A kind of a meteorological Thanksgiving Day.
Our own late-fall festival.

A day for Floridians to celebrate still being here.

A day for Floridians to be thankful for not seeing the sky through the kitchen
ceiling.

A day for Floridians to be thankful because the lights go on when they flick the
switch by the doorway.

Assuming you can do all those things, of course. There's still a lot of roof
work ongoing and it's easy to spot the occasional blue tarp from the street.
Fence builders remain booked. And you'll still come upon the occasional debris
pile put out late and missed by the city crews.

This season saw 17 storms that were given names. Ten of them were hurricanes.
Six were major hurricanes. Hurricanes were on the maps for 51 days.

"The 2017 season is the fifth most active on record to date in the basin, behind
1893, 1926, 1933 and 2005," the National Hurricane Center reported, in its End
of Hurricane Season Day summary.

Hurricane Irma was the strongest hurricane to hit near here since the legendary
2004 hurricane season. Its top gusts did not touch the 99 mph record set in 1960
by Hurricane Donna, but it felt quite strong enough.

And it arrived less than a year after 2016's Hurricane Matthew, which felt
unfair. We usually get more of a breather between storms. State Road A1A in
Flagler Beach is not supposed to fall into the ocean more than once over a year.
Annual hurricanes would be bothersome if they became a habit.

I moved the window plywood deeper into the pile of materials I might use someday
in the corner of the garage -- another traditional End of Hurricane Season Day
activity. It was getting dangerous where it had been leaning and fell on the
bicycle.

In keeping with the holiday tradition, I thought seriously about installing
actual hurricane shutters and decided that would be an excellent thing to do
someday in a future hurricane season.

After the disruption, destruction and plywood hefting of this active hurricane
season, it's easy to worry that people might become wary about moving to
Florida. That the housing market would suffer in a place that's regularly
featured on The Weather Channel. These are the kind of thoughts that intrude on
most End of Hurricane Season Day celebrations.

Not to worry. After the epic 2004 hurricane season, Florida experienced its
greatest real estate bubble since the 1920s. Sure, it was followed by the
greatest recession since the Great Depression, but it was breathtaking while it
happened.

And now, as we celebrate the 2017 End of Hurricane Season holiday, Realtor.com
ranks the Deltona-Daytona Beach-Ormond Beach metro area as the nation's
third-hottest real estate market with sales of existing single-family homes set
to rise 5.5 percent in 2018, and their median sales price shooting up 6 percent.

As long as we're not noticeably underwater, people still buy.

So on End of Hurricane Season Day, Floridians and would-be Floridians laugh at
danger. Hah, ha!

Laughing at danger is what the holiday is all about. That and finishing off the
stockpiled bottled water. Some households will need to bathe in the stuff to
empty it all.

mark.lane@news-jrnl.com

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 News-Journal Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 551 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                    The Wilson Daily Times (North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 27, 2009 Wednesday

Forecast calls for average hurricane season

BYLINE: Rochelle Moore, The Wilson Daily Times, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 364 words


May 27--Six hurricanes are predicted to form in the Atlantic Basin this year,
making 2009 an average season along the East Coast.

Altogether, 12 tropical storms are expected to form in the basin, which includes
the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea. Six of those storms are expected to
strengthen into hurricanes, of which two could become major hurricanes at
Category 3 or higher on the five-step Saffir-Simpson intensity scale. Category 3
hurricanes have sustained winds of 111-130 miles per hour.

The hurricane forecast is monitored and released each year by researchers with
Colorado State University. The predictions are based on a variety of
environmental factors, including past hurricane season activity.

The lower-than normal season, however, may not indicate whether a major disaster
could devastate communities, properties and lives, said Jeff Orrock, a warning
coordinator and meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Raleigh.

"This hurricane forecast is something that brings awareness but because of our
vulnerability, it doesn't matter if it's an active year or a quiet year for us,"
Orrock said. "The whole state really is so vulnerable to hurricane strikes. As
for the frequency of hurricane disasters, North Carolina is one of the leading
states in the country."

The 2009 forecast was reduced from 14 named tropical storms in December to 12 in
April. Hurricane season starts June 1 and lasts through Nov. 30.

The cooling of sea surface temperatures leads researchers to anticipate an
average hurricane season. Cooler waters tend to reduce the formation and
strength of hurricanes.

The 2008 Atlantic hurricane season was one of the busiest on record with 16
tropical storms, eight forming into hurricanes. Five were Category 3 or higher.

To see more of The Wilson Daily Times or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.wilsondaily.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, The Wilson Daily Times, N.C.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090527-ZW-HURRICANE-SEASON-20090527

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZW


                                 Copyright 2009


                          FOCUS - 552 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 3, 2009 Wednesday

Hurricane Berry strikes Brownsville during a preparedness drill

BYLINE: Ildefonso Ortiz, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 542 words


Jun. 3--As the 2009 hurricane season starts, emergency officials statewide are
working to prepare their respective cities for the possibility of a cyclonic
storm hitting the Texas coast.

Cameron, Hidalgo and Willacy counties worked in coordination with state
officials to run a mock hurricane drill that tested the readiness of first
responders and other emergency operations.

This year is the drill called for a Catergory 3 hurricane named Berry to strike
Brownsville with 120-mph winds and cause significant structural damage and
casualties both human and animal, said Cameron County Emergency Management
Coordinator Johnny Cavazos.

"Basically Dolly and Ike changed the way we look at Category 2 hurricanes,"
Cavazos said referring to hurricanes relatively low in the severity scale. "The
rules have changed."

Dolly and Ike where both Category 2 hurricanes; Dolly caused extensive water
damage in the Rio Grande Valley and Ike ravaged the Galveston area, he said.

"Everyone, from the National Weather Service to the local emergency management
officers, no longer takes Category 2 hurricanes lightly, anymore," Cavazos said.

County officials gathered at the Dancy Building while city of Brownsville
officials met at the public library for their parts in the mock drill.

"Hurricane season has started and we are preparing to deal with any storm that
may come to our shores," said Jeff Johnston, Brownsville's emergency management
coordinator. "That is the price to live in paradise; occasionally we get a
hurricane."

While both the county and city stage a yearly drill, this year the drill focuses
on a moderate hurricane causing a great deal of damage and the steps taken
during the aftermath, Cavazos said.

"The exercise this year is different because this year the city will face more
issues with post hurricane damages," Johnston said. "The scenario will visit the
scene five days after the hurricane strikes and deal with restoring power and
repairing flood damages."

Both the county and city emergency management officials said that citizens need
to do their parts and begin planning now for a hurricane.

"Because of Dolly and more recent thunderstorms people know which areas are
prone to flooding," Cavazos said. "If you know that you live in an area that is
prone to flooding you need to begin planning now. You need to make plans and
before a storm arrives you need to relocate to higher ground."

Johnston advised the public to begin compiling a hurricane preparedness kit,
which should include food and water for three days at least. The food should be
stored in watertight containers.

"The good thing about this hurricane is that no one gets hurt," Johnston said.
"We can find areas that need attention and fix them now and be better prepared
for a real situation."

The hurricane season began Monday and runs through Nov. 30.

To see more of The Brownsville Herald, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.brownsvilleherald.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Brownsville Herald,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20090603-BV-Hurricane-Berry-strikes-Brownsville-during-a-preparedness-drill-0603

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2009 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 553 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 1, 2016 Thursday

Minnesota: Tropical Storm Hermine Strengthens As It Approaches Florida

LENGTH: 322  words

DATELINE: New York



 Red Lake: Red Lake County of Minnesota has issued the following news release:



 Tropical Storm Hermine, in the Gulf of Mexico, is growing stronger as it
approaches the Florida coast, the National Hurricane Center says.





 The storm, which has been moving very slowly, is forecast to strengthen into a
hurricane before making landfall north of Tampa likely early Friday. It's then
predicted to pass overland toward the coasts of Georgia, South Carolina and
North Carolina, weakening as it goes.

 'Near-Normal' Atlantic Hurricane Forecast Could Mean More Storms

 The Two-Way

 'Near-Normal' Atlantic Hurricane Forecast Could Mean More Storms



 If the storm does become a hurricane before landfall, it would end a remarkable
streak -- it's been nearly 11 years since a hurricane made landfall in Florida.
Hurricane Wilma hit Florida in 2005; since then, not a single hurricane has made
landfall along the Florida coastline.



 It would also be the first hurricane to form in the Gulf Coast since 2013,
ending the longest streak of hurricane-free days recorded in the last 130 years.


 Yes, The U.S. Is On A Historic Lucky Streak In Dodging Major Hurricanes

 The Two-Way

 Yes, The U.S. Is On A Historic Lucky Streak In Dodging Major Hurricanes



 As a caveat to both those "droughts," however, we should note that storms that
are not hurricanes can cause devastating damage. And a recent article in the
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, addressing the frequency of
major hurricanes making landfall in the U.S., called the definition of such a
drought "largely arbitrary."



 Whether Hermine strengthens to a hurricane or not, The National Hurricane
Center warns of strong winds and a dangerous storm surge along Florida's Gulf
Coast, and says rain accumulation might cause flash flooding in any of the
affected states.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 554 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 26, 1998 Monday

Jamaica prepares for Hurricane Mitch

BYLINE: REUT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B13

LENGTH: 244 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


Hurricane Mitch strengthened yesterday, with sustained winds rising to 230
kilometres an hour as it crawled through the open waters of the western
Caribbean, according to U.S. forecasters.

Jamaica remained under a hurricane warning, while hurricane watches stayed in
place for eastern Cuba and the Cayman Islands. The U.S. National Hurricane
Centre in Miami said the Caymans, southwest of Cuba, would likely be placed
under a hurricane warning later yesterday.

Flooding related to heavy rain from Hurricane Mitch has already killed one
person and left thousands homeless in Panama, the country's civil protection
agency said.

Workers were trying to reconnect the Pan-American highway after swollen rivers
in Panama's western province of Veraguas also washed away a 40-metre section of
the four-lane road on Friday.

Hurricane force winds extended 70 kilometres from Mitch's core, while tropical
storm winds extended 230 kilometres, the forecasters said.

"Outer rainbands associated with the hurricane are affecting Jamaica and could
bring three to five inches (7.6 to 12.7 cm) of rain, greater amounts in higher
terrain, over the island in the next day or two," U.S. hurricane forecasters
said in an advisory.

In Jamaica, which has not been hit by a major hurricane in a decade, the
government called up reserve members of the Jamaica Defence Force and long lines
formed to buy supplies after the hurricane warning was issued. Several sporting
events were cancelled. Reuters

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1998 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 555 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 1, 1998 Tuesday

Hurricane season deadliest since 1780

BYLINE: Reuters; REUT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B29

LENGTH: 249 words

DATELINE: Washington


The hurricane season that formally ended yesterday was the deadliest since 1780
with more than 11,000 deaths reported, U.S. weather experts said.

Members of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration told a news
conference it was too early to make a reliable prediction for next year.

But Hugh Willoughby, an NOAA hurricane researcher, said "based on history, it
wouldn't be a surprise" if 1999 exceeded the average of 10 tropical storms a
year, with six of them becoming hurricanes.

This season spawned 14 tropical storms and 10 hurricanes -- well above average.
It was the first time this century that four hurricanes -- Georges, Ivan, Karl
and Jeanne -- were whipping the Atlantic region at the same time.

Most of the casualties this season were caused by Hurricane Mitch, the strongest
October hurricane of the century. At least 11,000 people were reported killed
but the precise toll may never be known.

National Hurricane Center director Jerry Jarrell described Mitch as a "monster
that will serve for generations as an example of what hurricanes are capable
of."

The worst Atlantic hurricane documented was The Great Hurricane of 1780, blamed
for killing 22,000 people in Martinique, St. Eustatius and Barbados.

The hurricane season in the Atlantic Ocean runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, but Mr.
Jarrell said: "The season isn't wrapped up. We have Hurricane Nicole out there."

At 10 a.m. EST, Nicole had maximum sustained winds of 120 kilometres an hour and
was threatening the Azores Islands.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1998 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 556 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 30, 1999 Tuesday

Hurricane season ends today

BYLINE: Reuters; REUT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. S7

LENGTH: 242 words

DATELINE: Miami


The busy 1999 Atlantic hurricane season that ends today generated an
unprecedented spate of powerful hurricanes and brought killer floods to the
United States but fell far short of last year's deadly toll.

The six-month hurricane season saw five Category 4 hurricanes -- Bret, Cindy,
Floyd, Gert and Lenny -- for the first time on record. Category 4 storms are the
second most powerful type, with winds of 212-249 km/h, capable of levelling
mobile homes and badly damaging houses.

In all, 12 tropical storms formed and eight became hurricanes. Circular tropical
weather systems become tropical storms and receive names when maximum sustained
winds reach 63 km/h, and become hurricanes when those winds hit 119 km/h.

"It's definitely an above-normal season. All five of the major hurricanes
reached Category 4 status," said Brian Jarvinen, a hurricane specialist at the
U.S. National Hurricane Centre. "We've never had five of them be Category 4.
That in itself was a record."

But while hurricane Floyd claimed about 70 lives in the United States and the
Bahamas, the 1999 season did not match the crushing toll of 1998 when hurricane
Georges killed 500 in a Caribbean rampage and Mitch took as many as 11,000 in
Central America.

From Floyd, which forced millions to flee their U.S. East Coast homes, to Lenny
-- a bizarre west-to-east storm in November -- the 1999 season was unusual and
heads into the record books as a lesson in the dangers of inland flooding.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1999 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 557 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 9, 1999 Thursday

Fewer hurricanes predicted in 2000

BYLINE: Reuters; REUT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. S7

LENGTH: 255 words

DATELINE: Miami


The year 2000 should bring some relief from the unprecedented spate of powerful
hurricanes that have plagued the Atlantic and Caribbean, but coastal residents
should not throw out their storm shutters, a noted storm forecaster said
yesterday.

William Gray of Colorado State University said he expects the six-month 2000
Atlantic hurricane season to be a moderate one, with 11 tropical storms, seven
hurricanes and three intense hurricanes.

The bad news for coastal zones is that the Gray forecasting team predicted a
busier year than the average of about nine tropical storms, six hurricanes and
three intense hurricanes.

But the Atlantic, Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico have been so hard hit in recent
years that the forecast still represents relief. The Atlantic storm zone has
just experienced the busiest five years of hurricane activity ever recorded.

The June 1-Nov. 30, 1999, Atlantic season had five Category 4 hurricanes --
Bret, Cindy, Floyd, Gert and Lenny -- for the first time on record. Category 4
storms are the second-most powerful type on forecasters' five-level
Saffir-Simpson scale, with winds of 212 to 249 kilometres an hour.

Overall, 1999 had 12 tropical storms in the Atlantic hurricane region, of which
eight became hurricanes and five became hurricanes of Category 3 or higher.

Mr. Gray said there was a 66 per cent chance that one or more intense storms
would come ashore somewhere along the entire U.S. coast from Brownsville, Texas,
to the Canadian border, in 2000, compared with a long-term average of 52 per
cent.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1999 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 558 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 3, 2005 Saturday

The 13,000-megaton storm;
An average hurricane releases energy equal to a million Little Boy atomic bombs.
Katrina was even more powerful, and the record-setting season has only just
begun. SIEGFRIED BETTERMAN reports

BYLINE: SIEGFRIED BETTERMAN

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F8

LENGTH: 1459 words


The 2005 hurricane season made it into the record books from the outset, taking
the title for the greatest number of tropical storms at the start of a season,
four in the first month. It also set the record for the most intense start.
Dennis, at the beginning of July, was the earliest Category 4 hurricane since
measurements were introduced; normally, storms of that intensity strike much
later.

And now "much later" has come much sooner than expected in the devastating guise
of Katrina - a Category 5 hurricane, the most intense of all. It is the
deadliest hurricane to hit the United States since Camille in 1969 and very
likely will be the most destructive and costly of all time.

What's ahead will probably set even more records. The U.S. National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration predicts double the number of tropical storms (as
many as 21 compared with the average of 10) and as many as 11 hurricanes (almost
double the average of six).

The extraordinary meteorological fury of the 2004 season, followed by this
year's unprecedented destruction, makes up what the NOAA calls "above normal"
activity. This is not understatement. In fact, we are simply in a cyclical
period of increased hurricane activity that began in 1995.

What we are experiencing is the result of a change in ocean and atmospheric
conditions called the Atlantic Multidecadal Mode. This is "a North Atlantic and
Caribbean sea surface temperature shift between warm and cool phases that lasts
25 to 40 years each," the NOAA says.

The last cycle of "above normal" activity occurred in late 1920s to the late
1960s. It was during this period that legendary Hurricane Hazel swept into
Ontario, devastating Toronto and causing the deaths of 81 people.

But what's normal for a hurricane season? And what's normal for a hurricane?
These cyclopean pinwheels vent such enormous quantities of energy that the only
way to get a grip on what's normal is to turn to what's not normal. Arguably,
the best measure available is the megaton weaponry of nuclear warfare.

It is just past 60 years since the atomic bomb dubbed Little Boy was detonated
over the Japanese city of Hiroshima. So devastating was the explosion that it
stands as the benchmark of humanity's horrific potential for destruction.

The bomb left a 150-metre-wide crater below the point of detonation and
destroyed about 60,000 buildings over six square kilometres. Eighty-five
thousand lives were instantly obliterated; 55,000 others were lost after months
of suffering the effects of the atomic blast.

That explosion was the equivalent of 12.5 kilotons of TNT, enough to fill 200
freight cars stretching down two kilometres of railway track.

However, in terms of the devastating power of hurricanes, Little Boy was as
nothing at all.

Of course, hurricanes don't pack all of their destructive force into a bomb's
narrow confines of space and time. They mete it out over an area that is,
typically, one million square kilometres - the size of Ontario or South Africa -
and over the course of days.

Still, the most intense activity is concentrated at the wall that rings the eye
of the hurricane, which can be 20 to 100 kilometres across.

From above, torrential rains pelt down as much as 2.5 metres of water in a
single day. From below, a storm surge whipped by violent waves can raise the
height of bodies of water by as much as nine metres and pull the sea inland by
16 kilometres. In between, winds tear at everything in their path at speeds of
up to 289 kilometres per hour.

Farther out from the eye, conditions are less intense, but violent nonetheless
and capable of enormous destruction even at the outer fringes of a fierce storm.

Taken over the entire cloud shield of an "average" hurricane, the energy
released daily in the form of rain and wind is the equivalent of about 13,000
megatons - almost equal to the destructive potential of all the weapons in the
Cold War missile silos in the United States and the former Soviet Union. That's
a million Hiroshima bombs exploded at a rate of more than 10 a second - 20
Little Boys for each of the 50,000 (estimated) cities on the planet.

The source of all this energy is truly unremarkable and innocuous. It's what
causes water ring stains on the cherished coffee table: evaporation.

Essentially, hurricanes are colossal heat engines that balance the heat
contained in the atmosphere with that in the ocean. They do this, simply enough,
by taking up energy in the form of water vapour from tropical surface waters and
making the air hotter and more humid.

If it seems an extraordinary thing that something as ordinary as the evaporation
of water could drive anything as powerful as hurricanes, consider the amount of
energy that is involved in the evaporation of even small volumes of water.

To raise the temperature of a 1.5-litre bottle of water by just one degree
Celsius requires little enough - the energy used by a 100-watt bulb in just one
minute will do it. This is so even when the rise in temperature is from 99
degrees to the boiling point.

However, taking water at 100 degrees from liquid form to vapour takes a lot more
energy - 6,000 times more. It takes so much more, in fact, that the energy
needed to evaporate 1.5 litres is as much as the energy released by one kilogram
of TNT.

The average rain cloud holds about 300,000 tons or the equivalent of 300 million
litres of water. The amount of energy required to evaporate all this water is
equal to almost 200 kilotons of TNT, or 15 Hiroshima bombs.

The formation of a hurricane requires about 100 million tons of water vapour
(100 billion litres of liquid water) per hour. It takes the equivalent of the
energy released by 50 megatons of TNT to evaporate that much water. That's per
hour, mind you. In a day, trillions of litres of water are taken up into the
atmosphere as vapour, requiring the equivalent of more than a thousand megatons
of energy.

If what goes up must come down, then all the energy taken up through the
evaporation of water must come down again. And it does - as the violent winds
and torrential rains that make hurricanes so massively destructive.

In the course of a season, over the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans, the
destructive energy released by hurricanes is staggering. On average, there are
45 hurricanes a year for a total of about 450 hurricane days. Together, they
amount to the equivalent of almost five million megatons of TNT. More than 3,000
times the Cold War nuclear arsenal. Almost 400 million Hiroshima bombs.
Annually.

But a hurricane's destructiveness is not about energy alone. In fact, the most
destructive hurricanes are not necessarily the most intense. Of the five
costliest hurricanes of all time in the Atlantic, only one was classified as
Category 5.

More important is where a hurricane makes landfall, that is, where the eye of
the hurricane crosses from water onto land. When this happens in populated and
developed areas, economic damage soars. Last year, Hurricanes Charley, Ivan,
Frances and Jeanne inflicted a collective economic toll in excess of $40-billion
(U.S.).

However, the deadliest of hurricanes have not struck the United States. Of the
45 hurricanes that occur in the average year, only six take place over the
Atlantic. The majority strike the Indian and Pacific Oceans.

The worst Atlantic death toll was the Great Hurricane of 1780, which caused as
many as 30,000 deaths in the Caribbean.

This figure is overwhelmed, all too often, by the number of deaths in the
Pacific and Indian Oceans. Over these bodies of water, hurricanes (referred to
as cyclones) that make landfall in highly populated areas have caused hundreds
of thousands of deaths. Most catastrophic of all was a 1970 cyclone that killed
500,000 people in Bangladesh.

The present hurricane season has really only just begun. The most intense part
is still to come.

Siegfried Betterman, a freelance journalist and former professor of mathematics
at George Brown College in Toronto, is writing a book on the extremes of
magnitude entitled Taking Measure.

Costly and deadly

The five costliest hurricanes of the Atlantic Ocean (in 2004 U.S.

dollars):

1. Great Miami Hurricane (1926, Category 4),

$70-billion

2. Andrew (1992, Category 5),

$26.5-billion

3. Charley (2004, Category 4),

$15-billion

4. Ivan (2004, Category 3),

$14.2-billion

5. Frances (2004, Category 2),

$9-billion

Five deadliest hurricanes:

1. Bangladesh (1970),

500,000 deaths

2. China (1881), 300,000

3. Haiphong, Vietnam (1881), 300,000

4. Bengal, India (1737), 300,000

5. Bangladesh (1876), 250,000

Information for damage figures from the National Hurricane Center and the
Hurricane Research Division of Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological
Laboratory.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2005 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 559 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         Contra Costa Times (California)

                           October 22, 2005 Saturday

For hurricane, a lot is in a name

BYLINE: By Joan Morris; CONTRA COSTA TIMES

SECTION: FEATURES

LENGTH: 540 words


WITH HURRICANE WILMA bearing down on Florida, threatening to do in that state
what Katrina did in Louisiana, we can't help but wonder. Wilma? Fred
Flintstone's wife? Pebbles' mom? Who names these things?

That would be the National Hurricane Center -- and a panel of experts -- that
maintains a list of male and female monikers approved for hurricanes and
tropical storms. For storms in the Atlantic, 21 names are chosen and allotted to
storms as they arise. Each hurricane-prone area has its own lists maintained
along the same lines.

Before Katrina came along, we had Arlene, Bret, Cindy, Dennis, Emily, Franklin,
Gert, Harvey, Irene and Jose. Wilma is the last on this year's list. If the
weather stirs up another before the end of the year, the center will switch to a
backup list of Greek letters, starting with Alpha.

Officials with the hurricane center say there's nothing particularly purposeful
about the selection of names. They are, after all, only a way of keeping track
of storms, and the names aren't meant to convey anything. But they do, at least
on a subconscious level.

Hurricane Wilma has already proven itself a killer storm. But any baby boomer
who hears "Wilma" is thinking about that long-suffering red-haired prehistoric
gal. And while we know that hurricanes are deadly serious, their names aren't.

Katrina sounds like a sweet-mannered nanny, and she turned out to be anything
but nurturing. Rita, that lovely meter maid, handed out far more than parking
tickets.

Next year's list isn't any better. Alberto, Beryl and Chris. Debby, Ernesto and
Florence. Gordon, Helene and Isaac. These top the list for any storms that are
brewed up next year.

With this year's unprecedented line of devastating hurricanes, and the fact that
more people are taking them seriously, perhaps it's time we got more realistic
about hurricane names. We need names that say "Ma Nature's got her butt-kicking
boots on and trouble's a'coming." We need hurricane names that have the ability
to remind us of what might lie ahead.

Since hurricane relief efforts are running into the billions this year, maybe
there's a fund we could tap into. Maybe we could take a page from the Bowl games
and start encouraging corporate sponsorship, with all money going to hurricane
survivors. We could have Hurricane Doritos, Hurricane iPod or Tropical Storm
Tropicana.

Joan Morris is a feature writer. Reach her at 925-977-8479 or
jmorris@cctimes.com

21ST CENTURY HURRICANE NAMES

At the very least, we need to find some names that are from this century. To
help the cause, we asked the Times Life in Perspective (LIP) board to suggest
names they'd select if they had the chance. Here's what the teenagers had to
say:



 Alfalfa



 Annihilation



 Another-Thing-to-Blame-Gas-Prices-On



 Antoinette



 Ariana



 Ayda, meaning "returning visitor" in Arabic



 Cruella



 Destruction



 Froida



 Henrietta



 Ida, the name of a mountain in Crete where Zeus is said to have been born



 Ichabod



 Inga



 Josh



 Julia



 Liza



 Llewellyn



 Madison



 Penelope



 Ruination



 Sebastian



 Wilhelm



 Zelda



 Zeus

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

             Copyright 2005 Contra Costa Times (Walnut Creek, CA)
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 560 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                             May 23, 2007 Wednesday

Weather agency predicts active hurricane season

BYLINE: By MARTIN MERZER McClatchy Newspaper

SECTION: NATIONAL

LENGTH: 485 words


MIAMI -- It's time to take the hurricane season seriously again: Government
forecasters Tuesday predicted above-average storm activity this season.

They said the tropics are expected to produce 13 to 17 named storms that grow
into seven to 10 hurricanes -- including three to five that become intense, with
winds above 110 mph.

The average season produces 11 tropical storms and six hurricanes, two of them
intense. The six-month season begins June 1.

"Remember, it takes just one hurricane to make it a bad year," said Conrad C.
Lautenbacher Jr., administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.

"We are in a period of more active hurricane seasons and an active season
increases the possibility of land-falling hurricanes," he said.

Scientists have developed no real skill in predicting where hurricanes might
strike, but the outlook for this year is not promising.

"Seasons like this one typically produce two to four landfalling U.S.
hurricanes," said Gerry Bell, NOAA's lead seasonal hurricane forecaster.

With that in mind, Bill Proenza, new director of the National Hurricane Center
in West Miami-Dade County, said residents of the hurricane zone must take the
forecast seriously.

"We're asking the U.S. population in coastal areas to join us in what has been a
very effective partnership with emergency managers, government officials and the
media by preparing yourselves, your businesses and your communities," Proenza
said.

Forecasters from Colorado State University also have predicted "a very active"
season with 17 named tropical storms that grow into nine hurricanes, including
five intense hurricanes.

It should be remembered, however, that long-range, full-season forecasts tend to
be less accurate than real-time forecasts of an actual storm.

At this time last year, government forecasters predicted that 13 to 16 tropical
storms would become eight to 10 hurricanes, four to six of them intense.

Fortunately, that was wrong. In actuality, 10 named storms grew into five
hurricanes, two of which were intense.

But, even if one season proves to be relatively mild, virtually all experts
agree that we are in the middle of a decades-long period of unusually active
hurricane seasons.

In addition, scientists say that La Nina conditions in the western Pacific are
likely to support hurricane development this year. The relatively cool sea
temperatures that mark La Nina suppress crosswinds that otherwise would tear
apart developing hurricanes.

"Unfortunately, the combination of La Nina and an active hurricane era is known
to produce active hurricane seasons," Bell said.

------

(c) 2007, The Miami Herald.

Visit The Miami Herald Web edition on the World Wide Web at
http://www.herald.com/

Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services.

----------

GRAPHIC (from MCT Graphics, 202-383-6064): 20070522 HURRICANES

ARCHIVE PHOTO on MCT Direct (from MCT Photo Service, 202-383-6099): Bill Proenza

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 The Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 561 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                           October 20, 2007 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Storms can ruin the perfect holiday; A tropical vacation can quickly turn into a
nightmare

BYLINE: Debbie Olsen, CanWest News Service

SECTION: TRAVEL; Pg. F2

LENGTH: 729  words


Do you remember Wilma? Mitch? Dean? When the storm approaching your holiday spot
has a name, it's never a good sign.

Despite forecasts of a busier-than-average hurricane season, the idea of a cheap
family vacation on a tropical beach was just too appealing for us -- especially
when we found a last-minute airfare deal to Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, for $199
plus tax per person.

With off-season rates for hotels and tours, we saved a bundle on the total cost
of our vacation. Add to this the fact we didn't have to fight off other tourists
for a coveted beach-front lounge chair and our late summer vacation seemed
almost perfect.

At least, until we heard the hurricane reports. Nothing short of a perfect storm
could ruin our perfect holiday.

Fortunately for us, the hurricane in question was headed towards the other side
of the country.

While hundreds of vacationers were frantically trying to exit Cancun before
hurricane Dean hit the Yucatan Peninsula in late August, our family was relaxing
on a beach. By the time Dean travelled inland to reach Puerto Vallarta, the
Category 5 hurricane had been downgraded to little more than a remnant low.

In its weakened state, it could no longer be described as a perfect storm and
yet Dean's heavy rains wreaked havoc on the city of Puerto Vallarta. Businesses
shut down and traffic flow was hindered for the better part of a day in the
downtown areas of the city.

Although it made our vacation less than ideal, we only spent one day hiding out
from the rain and enjoyed six days of sun, sand and surf. Sometimes a
last-minute deal during hurricane season can work out well.

- Hurricane-proof your vacation

You take a chance when you are travelling to tropical locales during hurricane
season, but there are a few things you can do to reduce your risk and protect
your vacation investment.

Here are a few tips if you plan to take advantage of low rates on flights and
hotels to a tropical destination this fall.

- Know the season

The Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30 and the eastern
Pacific hurricane season runs from May 15 to Nov. 30, but the peak season is
from mid-August to late October. The Atlantic basin includes the Atlantic Ocean,
Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico. The eastern Pacific basin extends to 140
degrees west.

- Playing the odds; different places, different risks

Some destinations have a higher incidence of hurricanes and named storms than
others.

Puerto Vallarta has a lower risk of named storms than Cancun, for example.
Bermuda and Miami have approximately a one-in-four annual risk of being affected
by a hurricane. The odds for Nassau, Bahamas, are about one-in-five.

The islands of the western Caribbean are less likely to be affected by
hurricanes than those of the eastern Caribbean. The southernmost Caribbean
islands (Aruba, Barbados, Bonaire, Grenada, Trinidad, Tobago) are rarely hit by
hurricanes.

A recent Dow Jones Island Index assessing hurricane risk rated Curacao as the
Caribbean island least likely to be hit by a hurricane, followed by Bonaire,
Grand Cayman, Barbados and Aruba.

For a look at the return frequency of hurricanes in the United States, visit
www.nhc.noaa.gov/HAW2/english/basics/return.shtml.

- Trip insurance

In most cases, when a severe hurricane is expected, airlines begin booking
passengers on whatever flight they have to get them out.

The problem comes when the prediction is not precise.

Airlines will generally not change your flights without significant fees unless
they are fairly certain there is an imminent risk.

Some passengers who tried to leave Cancun ahead of hurricane Wilma in 2005 were
charged hundreds of dollars in additional fees.

Trip cancellation and interruption insurance costs about five per cent of the
cost of your entire trip, but it can refund your money if your trip is delayed
due to severe weather or for other reasons.

It also provides protection from other unforeseen problems.

Some tour companies and resorts offer their own hurricane insurance programs.

It's a good idea to inquire about hurricane insurance policies before you book
your vacation.

- What's in a name?

Have you ever wondered why some storms have names and how those names are
chosen? For information on the history of naming storms or to view a list of
storm names for the next six years worldwide, visit the National Hurricane
Center website, www.nhc.noaa.gov/aboutnames.shtml

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Calgary Herald; red sky at night: It may be a sailor's delight, but the
cloud cover didn't forewarn hurricane Dean's arrival -- although it made for a
beautiful sunset the night before. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2007 Windsor Star, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 562 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                             July 9, 2008 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Heat may take steam out of storms: Study

BYLINE: Tom Spears, Canwest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 545  words


As the year's first hurricane spins across the Atlantic, research from the U.S.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration suggests that global warming may
not make hurricanes as severe as many people fear.

The past several years have seen more hurricanes than usual reaching North
America, including killers such as Katrina and Rita in 2005.

And one theory says hurricanes will become bigger, and more common, as the world
warms: hurricanes draw their energy from warm sea water in summer and in early
fall.

Warmer tropical seas will fuel bigger storms, so the theory goes.

Hurricane Bertha is already alarming many in the U.S. hurricane states.

The season's first hurricane has come early, though it's expected to weaken as
it approaches Bermuda.

Now a NOAA study suggests that the extra heat will indeed pump more energy into
the storms, but will also build up a phenomenon known to limit the storms --
wind shear.

Hurricanes develop as giant storm clouds that can reach 18 kilometres high.

But strong crosswinds at high altitude can shear the storms, literally cutting
the tops off them.

This reduces a storm's power.

The NOAA study examined the historical record of hurricanes reaching the U.S.
coast, and compared it to ocean temperatures.

It's a topic where scientists disagree sharply, partly because the era before
satellites has left an incomplete weather record.

"We looked at U.S. landfalling hurricanes because it is the most reliable
Atlantic hurricane measurement over the long term," said Chunzai Wang, a
physical oceanographer and climate scientist with NOAA's Atlantic Oceanographic
and Meteorological Laboratory in Miami and lead author of the study.

"Using data extending back to the middle 19th century, we found a gentle
decrease in the trend of U.S. landfalling hurricanes when the global ocean is
warmed up.

"This trend coincides with an increase in vertical wind shear over the tropical
North Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico, which could result in fewer U.S.
landfalling hurricanes."

For the article, Wang worked with Sang-Ki Lee of the Cooperative Institute for
Marine and Atmospheric Studies-University of Miami.

In terms of hurricane strength, Wang says, "the vertical wind shear is not the
only factor affecting Atlantic hurricane activity, although it is an important
one."

Other factors include atmospheric humidity, sea level pressure, and sea surface
temperature.

His analysis is published in a science journal called Geophysical Research
Letters.

The good news comes from a long distance away.

The energy driving these high-altitude winds actually comes from a warming trend
in the Indian and Pacific oceans.

Observations from 1854 to 2006 show a warming of sea surface temperature
occurring almost everywhere over the global ocean, with large warming in
tropical regions of the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian oceans, NOAA says.

Still, NOAA warns that overall, it expects bigger hurricanes in the future.

In a statement released June 19, the department warned that "hurricanes will
likely have increased precipitation and wind" in a warming climate, even after
wind shear is taken into account.

The U.S. National Hurricane Center has forecast 12 to 16 "named" storms this
season (i.e. tropical storms and hurricanes), and says six to nine will be
hurricanes.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2008 Windsor Star, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 563 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Forecasters Predict Active Hurricane Season

BYLINE: By ABBY GOODNOUGH and ANDREW C. REVKIN; Abby Goodnough reported from
Miami for this article, and Andrew C. Revkin from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, May 22


Government forecasters predicted Monday that 13 to 16 tropical storms would form
in the Atlantic Ocean during the six-month hurricane season that begins June 1,
far fewer than last year's calamitous season but still more than usual.

Of those storms, 8 to 10 are likely to become hurricanes, including as many as 6
major hurricanes, those of Category 3 strength or higher, said Conrad C.
Lautenbacher Jr., administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. Two to four hurricanes are likely to make landfall in the United
States this season, he said.

The heightened potential for storms comes from tropical waters that, while
cooler than last summer's, are still warmer than usual, along with favorable
wind patterns, Mr. Lautenbacher said. Much, however, will depend on
smaller-scale weather patterns that cannot be predicted this far in advance, he
said.

''Remember that it only takes one hurricane in your neighborhood to make it a
bad season,'' Mr. Lautenbacher said in a news conference at the National
Hurricane Center.

He and other forecasters and emergency officials urged the public to prepare
more scrupulously than last season, saying citizens should do a better job of
stockpiling supplies in advance, preparing evacuation plans and heeding
evacuation orders from officials.

Federal hurricane experts say the Atlantic Ocean is in a cycle of intense
hurricane activity that started in 1995, producing 28 named storms last year,
more than at any other time since the government began keeping records in the
mid-1800's.

Other experts, including some scientists working for the oceanic agency, say
that a decades-long global warming trend, linked by most climate experts to the
accumulation of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping emissions, may be playing
a role in increasing the power of hurricanes in recent decades.

While there is significant debate and little clear data on what forces, natural
or human, have played a role in recent seasons, many ocean and climate experts
say it is likely that warmer oceans will favor stronger storms in coming
decades.

Fifteen of last year's storms grew into hurricanes, the fiercest of which,
Hurricane Katrina, devastated New Orleans and the Mississippi Gulf Coast,
killing at least 1,100 people. Three others made landfall: Hurricane Dennis,
which hit the Florida Panhandle on July 10; Hurricane Rita, which made landfall
near the Texas-Louisiana border on Sept. 24; and Hurricane Wilma, which pummeled
South Florida on Oct. 24.

On average, the Atlantic hurricane season produces 11 named storms, with 6
becoming hurricanes, according to NOAA.

In what Mr. Lautenbacher called a ''silver lining,'' a weak La Nina condition --
a cooling of the tropical Pacific Ocean that often encourages stronger
hurricanes in the Atlantic -- has dissipated and will not be a factor this year.
But existing wind patterns could combine to reduce wind shear over the Atlantic,
thereby encouraging hurricane formation.

Wind shear occurs when winds at successively higher altitudes differ in velocity
or direction. This condition can shred tropical storms before they grow to
hurricane proportions. A storm is considered a hurricane when its winds reach 74
miles per hour.

A central paradox in hurricane forecasting is that while experts have become
adept at presaging a busy storm season, they still have not improved predictions
for whether hurricanes will strike land, or where they are most apt to strike.

Luck still largely determines whether a particular spot on a map, say the Outer
Banks of North Carolina or the Florida Keys, will suffer in a particular season,
said Kerry A. Emanuel, a hurricane expert at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

That uncomfortable reality is why forecasters tend to fall back on the standard
wisdom that anyone in a hurricane-prone region needs to prepare for the worst.

The seasonal forecasts swing on several sets of conditions in the atmosphere and
the tropical Atlantic Ocean: water temperature, the potential for wind shear,
and patterns in atmospheric pressure between Africa, where most tropical storms
are born, and the Americas, where they tend to go.

Several researchers, including Dr. Emanuel, have published papers in the past
year in which they claim to have found a big buildup in the power of hurricanes
in recent decades that can be explained only by human-driven global warming.

But a separate camp of scientists, including Max Mayfield, director of the
National Hurricane Center, and some other federal hurricane researchers,
contends that natural cycles in temperatures in the Atlantic and atmospheric
patterns above the sea surface caused a lull in midcentury and have contributed
to the surge in storminess since 1995.

While scientists remain divided on the cause of this intense period, emergency
officials were united Monday in stressing that people in hurricane zones were
responsible for their own safety and should move more quickly when told to flee.

''We have to somehow get that message across,'' said R. David Paulison, acting
director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. ''When you don't take care
of yourselves, it stops our first responders in the street from dealing with
people who really do need help.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: ''Forecasts and Results''The number of named Atlantic storms
last year was significantly more than scientists at the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration had predicted.Graphs track number of major
hurricanes, hurricanes, and tropical storms since 2002.(Source by NOAA)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 564 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                            October 23, 2015 Friday

NASA-NOAA's Suomi NPP satellite sees record-breaking Hurricane Patricia

LENGTH: 756 words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Washington: American Association for the Advancement of Science has issued
the following news release:



 the National Hurricane Center said that Hurricane Patricia had grown into a
monster hurricane. In fact, it is the strongest eastern north pacific hurricane
on record. NASA-NOAA's Suomi NPP satellite analyzed the temperatures and
structure within the storm as it passed overhead.





 On October 23, a Hurricane Warning was in effect from San Blas to Punta San
Telmo. A Hurricane Watch was in effect from east of Punta San Telmo to Lazaro
Cardenas and a Tropical Storm Warning was in effect from east of Punta San Telmo
to Lazaro Cardenas.



 When NASA-NOAA's Suomi NPP satellite passed over Patricia on October 23 at 0923
UTC (5:23 a.m. EDT) the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite or VIIRS
instrument that flies aboard Suomi NPP looked at the storm in infrared light.
Cloud top temperatures of thunderstorms around the eyewall were near minus 90
Celsius (minus 130 Fahrenheit). Recent microwave imagery shows hints of a
concentric eyewall developing. If the trend toward an eyewall replacement
continues, it would cause the intensity to at least level off later today.



 Two Records Broken



 The National Hurricane Center reported that Patricia is the strongest hurricane
on record in the National Hurricane Center's area of responsibility (AOR) which
includes the Atlantic and the eastern North Pacific basins. The minimum central
pressure estimated from the aircraft data, 880 millibars, is the lowest ever for
our AOR. The National Hurricane Center noted "It seems incredible that even more
strengthening could occur before landfall later today. The official forecast
shows only a little more strengthening before landfall."



 Latest Statistics and Location



 At 8 a.m. EDT (1200 UTC) on Oct. 23, the eye of Hurricane Patricia was located
near latitude 17.3 North, longitude 105.6 West. That's about 145 miles (235 km)
southwest of Manzanillo, Mexico and about 215 miles (345 km) south of Cabo
Corrientes, Mexico.



 Patricia was moving toward the north-northwest near 12 mph (19 kph) and a turn
toward the north is expected later this morning, followed by a turn toward the
north-northeast this afternoon. On the forecast track, the core of Patricia will
make landfall in the hurricane warning area today, October 23, 2015 during the
afternoon or evening.



 Maximum sustained winds remain near 200 mph (325 kph) with higher gusts. The
National Hurricane Center (NHC) said that Patricia is a category 5 hurricane on
the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale. Some fluctuations in intensity are
possible today, but Patricia is expected to remain an extremely dangerous
category 5 hurricane through landfall. Hurricane force winds extend outward up
to 30 miles (45 km) from the center and tropical storm force winds extend
outward up to 175 miles (280 km). The estimated minimum central pressure is 880
millibars.



 Winds, Rainfall, Storm Surge



 NHC said that Hurricane conditions are expected to first reach the hurricane
warning area this afternoon. Tropical storm conditions are beginning to spread
across portions of the warning area. Patricia is expected to produce total
rainfall accumulations of 8 to 12 inches, with isolated maximum amounts of 20
inches, over the Mexican states of Nayarit, Jalisco, Colima, Michoacan and
Guerrero through Saturday. These rains could produce life-threatening flash
floods and mud slides. An extremely dangerous storm surge is expected to produce
significant coastal flooding near and to the right of where the center makes
landfall. Near the coast, the surge will be accompanied by large and destructive
waves.



 Swells generated by Patricia are already affecting portions of the southern
coast of Mexico, and will spread northwestward during the next day or so. These
swells are likely to cause life-threatening surf and rip current conditions.



 NHC forecasters said that Patricia is heading for potentially catastrophic
landfall in southwestern Mexico later today. NHC Forecaster Pasch said "in
addition to the coastal impacts, very heavy rainfall is likely to cause
life-threatening flash floods and mud slides in the Mexican states of Jalisco,
Colima, Michoacan and Guerrero continuing into Saturday.



 Given the very mountainous terrain that Patricia should encounter after
landfall, the cyclone should weaken even faster over land than predicted by the
normal inland decay rate."



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 565 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           November 18, 2006 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricane Season Defies Predictions;
Atlantic Forecasts Were Way Off

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: A Section; A03

LENGTH: 538 words

DATELINE: MIAMI Nov. 17


The noted hurricane-forecasting team led by William Gray at Colorado State
University has not missed by this much in a long time.

Before this year's Atlantic hurricane season started, Gray and his protege,
Philip Klotzbach, predicted that it would be well above average. Instead, it has
been slightly below average as the Nov. 30 end of the season draws near  --  and
a mere whimper compared with the destruction caused by monster hurricanes  such
as Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005.

In a sort of mea culpa  by the  forecasting team Friday, Gray and Klotzbach said
that the late development of a hurricane-suppressing El Niño phenomenon, and
unusually dry conditions over the Atlantic, "complicated" their forecast.

It was the first time in eight years that they had failed to predict accurately
whether a season would be busier than average, they said.

"A variety of factors interact with each other to cause year-to-year and
month-to-month hurricane variability," Klotzbach said in the end-of-season
report. "It is impossible to understand how all these processes interact with
each other to 100 percent certainty."

The  team formed by Gray and  headed by Klotzbach is regarded as a leader in the
field of long-range hurricane forecasting, and their predictions are eagerly
awaited  --  and bet on  --  by traders in affected markets, such as energy and
insurance.

On May 31, they predicted that there would be 17 storms this year,  and that
nine would be hurricanes.

In the end, the 2006 season managed to produce nine tropical storms;  five
became hurricanes. None of the hurricanes hit the United States.

There are still two weeks to go, but the U.S. National Hurricane Center   said
there is little sign of  action in the Atlantic.

The Colorado State team was not alone in predicting that 2006 would be more
active than an average year, in which the Atlantic can be expected to spawn 10
tropical storms, of which six will strengthen into hurricanes.

No one foresaw what happened in 2005,  when 28 storms swarmed out of the
Atlantic, and 15 became hurricanes with winds of at least 74 mph. Among them,
Katrina killed 1,500 people along the Gulf Coast and swamped New Orleans, while
Wilma became the strongest Atlantic hurricane ever observed.

Long-range hurricane forecasting,  as with all long-range weather predictions,
remains a complex and error-prone task, experts say.

Yet hurricane experts also say that the failure of 2006 to live up to
expectations  left them scratching their heads.

"I think there is some mystery," said James Elsner, a geography professor at
Florida State University who has conducted research on hurricanes.

The unexpected formation of the El Niño phenomenon in the eastern tropical
Pacific was probably a chief factor.

An unusual warming of Pacific waters, El Niño years tend to create unfavorable
conditions over the Atlantic for the formation of hurricanes, which are fragile
despite their size and ferocity.

The experts also say that an unusual amount of sub-Saharan dust in the
atmosphere over the Atlantic may have deprived potential storms of the moisture
they would use as fuel.

But there are probably other factors at work that have yet to be identified.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 566 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 2, 2014 Tuesday
                                 Every Edition

Hurricane season ends quietly on Atlantic shores

BYLINE: Live Science

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. E02

LENGTH: 431 words

Hurricane season was quiet in the Atlantic, busy in the Pacific


The mellow 2014 Atlantic hurricane season ended Sunday, marking another year
without major hurricanes hitting the Eastern United States.

It has been a record-breaking nine years since a Category 3 or stronger
hurricane made landfall along U.S. coastlines. The last was Hurricane Wilma in
2005. (Sandy was not a hurricane when it hit the Northeast in 2012.)

The United States has never recorded a nine-year period without a hurricane
touching its shores. The prior record for the longest stretch was set during
around the time of the Civil War, according to Colorado State University
climatologists.

But in the eastern Pacific Ocean, tropical storm activity was busier than it has
been over the past 20 years. Fourteen hurricanes and six tropical storms have
formed since May 15, including Hurricane Amanda, a Category 4 storm and the
strongest May hurricane ever recorded in the East Pacific. [A History of
Destruction: 8 Great Hurricanes]

The Atlantic produced only eight named tropical storms this year, the fewest
since 1997, according to the National Hurricane Center. Six of those storms
strengthened into hurricanes, and two became major hurricanes. The overall storm
activity was 75 percent of the seasonal average between 1981 and 2010, according
to the Colorado State experts.

Hurricane Arthur was the only storm to make landfall in the United States this
season. The storm clobbered coastal North Carolina on July 4 with Category 2
winds of about 100 mph, causing $21 million in damage.

Of the two major Atlantic storms, Hurricane Edouard reached Category 3 strength
far out at sea, never threatening to touch shorelines. Hurricane Gonzalo was the
season's most powerful storm at Category 4, but the tempest weakened to Category
2 before making landfall in Bermuda and causing more than $200 million in
damage.

"The season was fairly quiet, as we predicted," said Gerry Bell, the lead
hurricane season forecaster at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's Climate Prediction Center.

The 2014 hurricane forecasts were more accurate than last year's predictions.
The 2013 hurricane forecast called for an above-average season, but the season
had one of the slowest starts on record and fewer storms than predicted.

"What really suppressed the season was the strong wind shear and atmospheric
instability across the Atlantic," Bell said.

-Live Science

Hurricanes from Above: See Nature's Biggest Storms

Storm Season! How, When & Where Hurricanes Form

50 Amazing Hurricane Facts

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 567 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       The Valdosta Daily Times (Georgia)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            August 24, 2017 Thursday

Forecasters: Hurricane season heating up

BYLINE: Terry Richards, The Valdosta Daily Times, Ga.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 337 words


Aug. 24--VALDOSTA -- With a hurricane in the Gulf of Mexico churning up concern,
forecasters say the second half of the Atlantic hurricane season could be more
active than originally feared, with South Georgia residents urged to be on the
lookout.

Hurricane Harvey quickly gained strength Thursday and was expected to hit the
Texas coast Friday evening as a Category 3 storm, packing winds from 111-129
miles per hour, according to the National Hurricane Center.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -- parent organization for
the National Weather Service -- originally predicted 11-17 named storms when the
hurricane season started in May. Now NOAA officially expects 14-19 named storms.

David Samuhel, senior meteorologist with the private forecasting firm
AccuWeather, said he would expect about 15 named storms to form.

"Just because we've reached the halfway mark in the season doesn't mean we've
had half our storms," he said.

The hurricane season, in fact, is expected to peak in mid-September, he said.

Valdosta sits only about 80 miles from the Gulf of Mexico, and residents need to
keep an eye on storms at this time of the year because of the increased chance
of a "recurve," Samuhel said.

Hurricanes in the northern hemisphere generally travel from east to west,
gradually spiraling northward, he said. On occasion, a hurricane can be absorbed
or influenced by other storm systems, causing hurricanes to turn eastward.

The last major hurricane to come close to South Georgia was Opal in 2001,
Samuhel said. Opal hit the Alabama coastline as a Category 4 storm before
heading north and east toward north Georgia, where thousands in the Atlanta area
were without power for as much as a week.

South Georgia itself escaped Opal's wrath, only receiving a few inches of rain.

Terry Richards is senior reporter at The Valdosta Daily Times.

___ (c)2017 The Valdosta Daily Times (Valdosta, Ga.) Visit The Valdosta Daily
Times (Valdosta, Ga.) at www.valdostadailytimes.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20170824-VD-Forecasters-Hurricane-season-heating-up-0824-20170824

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VD


                    Copyright 2017 The Valdosta Daily Times


                          FOCUS - 568 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   Philly.com

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                          September 6, 2017 Wednesday

5 reasons we're seeing these monster hurricanes

BYLINE: Frank Kummer, Philly.com

SECTION: LIFESTYLE

LENGTH: 1112 words


Sept. 06--Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, Jose, and possibly Katia: It's been an
extraordinary couple of weeks for highly destructive hurricanes and tropical
storms.

But why? Call it a storm of factors conspiring to batter the Atlantic region.

"It's a progression of conditions going across the Atlantic that are conducive
to hurricanes," explains Gerry Bell, lead scientist of the season hurricane
outlook team for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Oscar Schofield, chair of the department of marine and coastal sciences at
Rutgers, agrees.

"Both the atmosphere and ocean are just really primed to fuel big, large storms
right now," Schofield says. "And we still have a period of time this year left
for peak storm season."

Hurricane season in the Atlantic spans June 1 to Nov. 30.  The affected region
includes the Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea, and Gulf of Mexico. By the beginning
of September in an average year, we would expect to have had two hurricanes,
only one of which would be category 3 or greater in strength, according to the
National Hurricane Center.

Already, we've seen Harvey make landfall as a Category 4 and Irma reach Category
5, the top of the Saffir-Simpson hurricane wind scale.  Jose, once a tropical
storm in the Atlantic, grew into a hurricane Wednesday. Tropical Storm Katia,
now off the Gulf of Mexico,  is also expected to become a hurricane.

For this hurricane season, Bell and NOAA issued an updated outlook in August
that predicted above-normal activity with the possibility it would be an
extremely busy hurricane year. The agency predicted only a 10 percent chance of
a below-normal season.

Here are five reasons conditions are so ripe for hurricanes:

1. West Africa

Hurricanes that strike the Caribbean, Mexico and the United States start in West
Africa during monsoon season, which runs from June 15 to Sept. 30.  But this
year, West Africa is experiencing higher than normal activity, said Bell.

For example, on Wednesday, the Red Cross in the West African nation of Togo
reported it was making a second delivery of humanitarian supplies such as
mosquito netting, sleeping mats, and soap as heavy monsoon rains continued to
pound villages on the Mono River.

Families had been driven from their homes because of rising water levels.  Some
were being evacuated by canoes over fears a dam could burst.

Monsoons such as those hitting Togo can set up conditions that launch big
hurricanes here.

2. Warmer waters

The path in the Atlantic Ocean from Africa to the tropical Atlantic and the
Caribbean is running about one to two degrees warmer than normal.  That warmth
helped generate huge amounts of moisture in Harvey as it pounded the Texas
coast.

Warmer waters, which fuel hurricanes, accounted for about 3 percent to 5 percent
more moisture in the atmosphere.  That seemingly small amount can mean massive
amounts of rain in a storm the size of Harvey.  Climate scientists believe the
long-term trend will be warmer waters in the future because of greenhouse gases.

But for now, the Atlantic is in a long-term period of warm surface waters as
part of a pattern of weather conditions known as the Atlantic Multidecadal
Oscillation, or AMO, Bell explained.

"It's a climate pattern that can take place 25 to 40 years at a time," Bell
said. "It's been in its warm phase since 1995, so we're seeing a lot more
hurricanes. That's opposed to the '70s, '80s and early '90s when the pattern was
in its cold phases.  This is just a naturally occurring climate pattern."

It is uncertain whether human activity is a factor in the AMO.

But, as Schofield notes, warm water is not the only indicator of climate change.
Sea-level rise also plays a role, because it leads to increased flooding as
storms hit.

3. Wind patterns

Winds are among the most complex factors for hurricane formation. For hurricanes
to pick up strength as they move from Africa to the tropical Atlantic, the winds
must be favorable. And that's what's happening right now as trade winds form a
super conduit across thousands of miles of ocean.

The trade winds, so called because trading ships took advantage of them to sail
west to east, are weak right now.  Conversely, strong trade winds blow in
cooler, drier air that don't help storms gain strength.

But weak trade winds allow warmer tropical air in.  That's also fuel for
hurricanes.

At the same time, there is little vertical wind shear, which is the change in
wind speed and direction between 5,000 to 35,000 feet above ground.  Strong
vertical wind shear can rip a developing hurricane apart, or even prevent it
from forming.  It essentially knocks the storms from their vertical formation
and steals their energy.

Hurricanes tend to form only when there's weak wind shear.

4. Jet Stream

The African Easterly Jet Stream now also is encouraging hurricanes, Bell said.
The jet stream, essentially a river of air, sees its strongest winds in
September and is a critical factor in whether a storm strengthens.

The cloud systems associated with the Easterly Jet Stream move east to west
across Africa, about 10,000 feet in the atmosphere. The weaker trade winds allow
the cyclonic counter-clockwise rotation to begin. The jet stream fosters the
spin.

From there, the spin can intensify into tropical cyclones or hurricanes,
especially when the storms encounter very warm ocean temperatures.

5. Lack of an El Niño

Earlier this year, forecasters saw conditions forming for a possible El Niño.
An El Niño, caused by a warming of the waters in the Pacific, can have
far-reaching impacts,.

An El Niño can cause stronger wind shear in the Atlantic and other conditions.
Simply put, El Niño favors stronger hurricane activity along the Pacific, but
suppresses it in the Atlantic basin.

The lack of an El Niño has meant weak wind shear.

So favorable winds, warmer water and the lack of anything to impede tropical
cyclones have all conspired to produce monster storms.

Conditions will begin to change by late October when the water starts to cool,
Schofield said.  However, that does not mean the eastern seaboard, including New
Jersey, will be out of the woods.

NOAA data show that by October, the path of a tropical storm or hurricane is
more likely to sweep up along the eastern seaboard.  The most recent example,
Sandy, struck the east coast on Oct. 29, 2012.

By November, as the water continues to cool, most hurricanes simply head
northeast, away from the coast, and are drawn out to sea.

"We are finishing up summer and will still have warm water in October,"
Schofield said.  "So we have still got weeks of prime conditions that might fuel
other storms,"

___ (c)2017 Philly.com Visit Philly.com at www.philly.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20170906-PHI-5-reasons-we-re-seeing-these-monster-hurricanes-0906-20170906

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PHI


                                 Copyright 2017


                          FOCUS - 569 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                      News-Topic (Lenoir, North Carolina)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           September 9, 2017 Saturday

EDITORIAL: Hurricane costs may blow all away

BYLINE: News-Topic, Lenoir, N.C.

SECTION: COMMENTARY

LENGTH: 580 words


Sept. 09--Each updated forecast for Hurricane Irma keeps moving it farther and
farther west, but even if Caldwell County gets nothing much more than rain from
it, Irma will hit everyone's wallets -- not just everyone's in Caldwell County,
everyone's, everywhere in the U.S. The only question is how big a hit that will
be.

If Irma had followed the track that was forecast at the middle of last week,
coming ashore at Miami today as a Category 4 hurricane and moving north along
the entire eastern shore of Florida, ripping the beach communities the entire
way up to Savannah, Georgia, it probably would have been guaranteed to go down
as the most expensive hurricane in U.S. history.

Beachfront development is among the most expensive anywhere, and southeastern
Florida's includes the uber-wealthy enclaves of South Beach, Boca Raton and Palm
Beach (where President Trump's Mar-a-Lago sits facing the ocean), just to name a
few.

Irma is so large that all of those communities still may have some damage, but
nothing like they would have.

Now in the crosshairs, though, are places such as Fort Myers, Naples, Tampa and
St. Petersburg.

Remember also that we haven't even had time to total up the damage left behind
in Texas and Louisiana by Hurricane Harvey, which put more water over more area
than 2005's Hurricane Katrina, the nation's most-expensive hurricane, and we
already have two more hurricanes to worry about after Irma -- Jose, in the
Atlantic, and Katia, in the Gulf of Mexico. Plus, hurricane season has more than
two months left to go.

That would be why meteorologist Paul Douglas, founding CEO of both WeatherNation
and Broadcast Weather, told Chris Hayes on MSNBC's "All In" last week that 2017
is already shaping up to be the most expensive hurricane year since 2005, when
Katrina, Rita and Wilma combined to cause nearly $150 billion in damage.

Currently the second-most-expensive hurricane, at $45.5 billion in
inflation-adjusted 2010 dollars, is 1992's Hurricane Andrew, which hit Miami as
a Category 5 -- but while Andrew was a powerful hurricane, it was incredibly
compact. Its high winds didn't reach far out from the center of the storm.

Irma, by contrast, is nearly as wide as the state of Texas. No matter where it
hits, its reach will be massive. If it hits the west coast of Florida, the east
coast will still feel it. And its track as of Saturday would take it into the
Atlanta area too.

If this becomes one of the most expensive hurricane seasons in history, then one
of the most likely political casualties to follow would be the chance for any
kind of tax reform and budget reduction this year in Washington, D.C. Whether or
not you like President Trump or his budget priorities, it's unlikely that anyone
could deliver what was promised to be "the largest tax cut in history" while
simultaneously delivering one of the largest hurricane relief efforts in
history.

And that doesn't even count the relief for victims of wildfires this summer that
have burned millions of acres in California, Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Nevada,
Colorado, Wyoming and Montana.

A British statesman in the 1930s introduced the world to what he erroneously
believed was, or else just jokingly referred to as, a Chinese curse: "May you
live in interesting times."

This is shaping up as a most interesting year, and there's a long way to go.

___ (c)2017 the News-Topic (Lenoir, N.C.) Visit the News-Topic (Lenoir, N.C.) at
http://www.newstopic.net/ Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20170909-QL-EDITORIAL-Hurricane-costs-may-blow-all-away-0909-20170909

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QL


                           Copyright 2017 News-Topic


                          FOCUS - 570 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 Aljazeera.net

                           September 14, 2010 Tuesday

The birth of Hurricane Julia

LENGTH: 390 words


In the middle of the Atlantic, Hurricane Julia has just been born.
Atlantic storms are named in alphabetical order, alternating between male and
female. So Julia, beginning with the tenth letter of the alphabet, is the tenth
storm of the season.


Five of them have had wind speeds of over 119km per hour (kph), which is strong
enough to be classed as a hurricane.
This year the Atlantic Hurricane Season has been pretty active. It is certainly
more active than last year, when there were only nine named storms in the entire
season.
But it is by no means the most active season we have ever seen. The year 2005
was far worse; we actually ran out of alphabetical names and had to start with
the Greek alphabet.
It was also the season which gave us catastrophic Hurricane Katrina.
This year we have actually been quite lucky. Even though we have had plenty of
storms, most of them have steered clear of land.
Our newest hurricane, Julia, also looks like it should steer clear from land,
but it is not the only hurricane in the Atlantic at the moment. The other storm
is called Igor and this one is far stronger and causing far more concern.
Very powerful hurricane
The strength of a hurricane is measured using the Saffir-Simpson Scale, which
rates storms from 1-5. Hurricanes rated five on the scale are the most
destructive. With sustained winds of nearly 220kph, Hurricane Igor is category
four - a very powerful hurricane.
Its current track appears to be taking it straight towards Bermuda. If it makes
a direct hit, this would be disastrous. Not only would it bring flooding rains
and damaging winds, but also a storm surge, devastating for a small island with
a highest point of just 76 metres.
Fortunately there is time to prepare. Hurricanes actually move pretty slowly and
even though the winds rotating within the storm are shooting past at nearly
220kph, the whole storm is moving forward at only 15kph.
This means that the storm will not reach Bermuda until Sunday. There is time to
take precautions - to board up windows and stock up on food and water.
Of course, there is a chance that Igor may veer away and change its track. It
may miss Bermuda altogether. However, with more storms developing every week,
this will not be the last hurricane of the Atlantic Hurricane Season. And there
is no guarantee we are going to stay lucky.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 59


                  Copyright 2010 Aljazeera.net - Aljazeera.net
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 571 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                 June 1, 2002 Saturday 0 South Pinellas Edition

Hurricane jitters begin today

BYLINE: DAVID BALLINGRUD

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 510 words


Today is the first day of the 2002 hurricane season, so let's get right to it.

The National Hurricane Center in Miami reported Friday that satellite images
revealed a broad area of low pressure in the northwest Gulf of Mexico. It is
expected to drift westward. It is not showing signs of development.

And there's another one south of Cuba - an area of clouds, thunderstorms and
gusty winds - but it's not expected to organize into a tropical storm either.

It's that time again. The forecasters of the Hurricane Center are back on the
job.

"We're ready," said hurricane specialist James Franklin. The computer models
have been "tweaked" in the off season, he said, "and we've gotten much cleverer
about how to use satellite data."

For the next six months, from today until December, Floridians will live with
one ear tuned for news of dangerous storms. What better way to start the 2002
season than with a bit of good news?

Colorado State University forecaster William Gray on Friday lowered his
predicted number of 2002 storms. It's the second time he has trimmed the number
of expected storms since he issued his first forecast on Dec. 7.

At that time, he predicted 13 tropical storms, with eight of those becoming
hurricanes and four of the eight developing into intense, or major, storms. In
shorthand: 13,  eight and four.

In April,  he revised those numbers  to 12,  seven and three.

On Friday, noting that Atlantic sea surface temperatures have been cooler than
expected, he dropped all three categories again, to 11,  six and two. He also
said that El Nino conditions in the Pacific Ocean still might become strong
enough in late summer to inhibit the development of Atlantic storms.

The downward trend is good news, of course, but even Gray's latest and lowest
numbers would make up an average season, one with plenty of potential for
trouble.

"The public hasn't seen a land-falling hurricane in two seasons," said Max
Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center, "and we know from
experience, out of sight is out of mind."

In fact, Gray noted, the last 19 Atlantic hurricanes during the  past  2 1/2
years have not crossed the U.S. coastline, although some tropical storms have.

"We foresee (this year's) activity to be typical of the average hurricane
seasons between 1950-2001," said Gray, "but the probability of United States
hurricane landfall will be above average."

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  is the governmental parent
of the Hurricane Center. It has issued a season hurricane prediction, too.

The NOAA outlook is for normal activity, or perhaps slightly above normal: nine
to  13 tropical storms, six to eight hurricanes, two  or three of those
classified as major hurricanes (Category 3 or higher on the Saffir-Simpson
Hurricane Scale).

Hurricane forecast

GRAY'S LATEST FORECAST: 11 tropical storms, six developing into hurricanes and
two becoming major hurricanes.

NOAA's outlook: nine to 13 tropical storms, six to eight hurricanes, two or
three major hurricanes.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; William Gray (ran City & State, Metro & State)

                    Copyright 2002 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 572 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              June 6, 2004 Sunday

Storms, hurricanes left destructive mark in 2003

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1006 words


Isabel was the headliner, but hardly the only 2003 storm that made news in what
was a well above-average Atlantic hurricane season. Sixteen tropical storms
formed and seven became hurricanes. Three of those storms - Fabian, Isabel and
Kate - were major hurricanes.

A typical season has 10 tropical storms and six hurricanes. Forecasters say the
period from 1995-2003 represents the most active on record for Atlantic
hurricanes.

Seven of those seasons were above normal, and "we are concerned that this
increased activity will continue in the coming years," said Jim Laver, director
of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Climate Prediction
Center.

Forecasting changed in 2003 with the introduction of five-day forecasts. Max
Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center, said "in the case of
powerful Hurricane Isabel, these longer-range forecasts were useful for planning
purposes all along the East Coast."

Three-day forecasts improved significantly, said Naomi Surgi, advanced project
leader for hurricanes for NOAA's Environmental Modeling Center.

"These model forecasts made during the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season were the
most accurate three-day track forecasts ever. Hurricane Isabel's model forecasts
were the most accurate in terms of track and wave generation."

Here's a summary of each 2003 storm. Information was provided by NOAA:

1. Ana: The first tropical storm on record in April, Ana formed off Bermuda on
April 20.  It traveled north, then northwest before turning to the south and
eventually the east. Its winds reached 60 mph and its waves were blamed for two
deaths when a boat capsized at Jupiter Inlet, Florida.

2. Bill: This tropical storm formed in the Gulf of Mexico on June 29 and hit
Louisiana a day later with 60-mph winds. It produced five tornadoes and coastal
flooding and killed four in the southeastern United States.

3. Claudette: A tropical wave July 8 turned into a hurricane and hit the
Texas-Mexico border with 90-mph winds July 15. One person was killed.

4. Danny: This wave formed July 16 in the Atlantic and became a hurricane July
18 but never threatened land.

5. Erika: Tropical Storm Erika formed Aug. 14 off southwest Florida and moved
west, hitting 45 miles south of Brownsville, Texas, in Mexico, on Aug. 16. Two
people died. A post-storm review showed Erika was a hurricane with 75-mph winds
at landfall.

6. Fabian: Formed Aug. 27 and became a hurricane Aug. 29. Fabian peaked as a
category 4 storm with 145-mph winds and hit Bermuda with 115-mph winds Sept. 5,
causing four deaths. As it moved north it also claimed the lives of a swimmer in
North Carolina and three fishermen off Newfoundland.

7. Grace: Formed Aug. 30 in the west-central Gulf, Grace became a weak tropical
storm and hit near Galveston on Aug. 31, dumping 8 inches of rain over the area.

8. Henri: This storm was the closest call in 2003 for the bay area. Henri formed
Sept. 3, peaked with 60-mph winds Sept. 5 and then weakened before coming ashore
near Clearwater on Sept. 6 with 30-mph winds. Henri dumped 10 inches of rain
over portions of west-central Florida.

9. Isabel: A classic Cape Verde hurricane, Isabel formed Sept. 6 and was a
category 5 hurricane with 165-mph winds by Sept. 11. It remained a category 5
through Sept. 15, then weakened somewhat as it turned north-northwest. On Sept.
18, Isabel hit North Carolina's Outer Banks as a category 2 hurricane with
maximum winds of 105 mph. Storm surge flooding was 10 feet in North Carolina and
6 to 8 feet along the East Coast to New York. High waters in the Chesapeake Bay
and mid-Atlantic rivers were accompanied by rainfall of up to 11 inches. Sixteen
deaths were attributed to Isabel, 10 of them in Virginia.

10. Juan: On Sept. 25, Juan formed 300 miles southeast of Bermuda. It was a
hurricane by Sept. 26 and made landfall in Nova Scotia on Sept. 29 as a category
2 hurricane with 100-mph winds. Juan caused two deaths and has been called the
most destructive hurricane in Halifax's history.

11. Kate: Kate formed Sept. 25 and became a hurricane four days later,
eventually hitting 125-mph winds. Its path was easily the most bizarre of the
year. It started going northwest, switched to the northeast, turned to the west
and then south and west again for several days before turning north. It never
threatened the United States.

12. Larry: Formed in the Bay of Campeche, Larry became a tropical storm Oct. 1.
It went west, then south, hitting the state of Tabasco in Mexico with 60-mph
winds Oct. 5. Five flooding deaths were attributed to Larry.

13. Mindy: This storm formed off the northeast coast of the Dominican Republic
on Oct. 10 and briefly became a tropical storm. By Oct. 14, it had weakened to a
depression. It produced heavy rains over portions of Puerto Rico and the
Dominican Republic.

14. Nicholas: Never a threat to land, this storm formed Oct. 13 and peaked with
70-mph winds four days later before degenerating Oct. 23.

15. Odette: Odette formed Dec. 4 in the southwestern Caribbean, became a
tropical storm and slammed into the southwestern portion of the Dominican
Republic on Dec. 6 with 60-mph winds. It dumped huge amounts of rain, leading to
eight flood-related deaths in the Dominican. Odette merged with a front Dec. 7
and disappeared.

16. Peter: Peter formed in the far eastern Atlantic Dec. 7 and reached its peak
of 70-mph winds two days later. The storm moved south initially, then turned
around and went north and was eventually absorbed by a cold front.

2003 Atlantic hurricanes and tropical storms

1. Tropical Storm Ana

2. Tropical Storm Bill

3. Hurricane Claudette

4. Hurricane Danny

5. Hurricane Erika

6. Hurricane Fabian

7. Tropical Storm Grace

8. Tropical Storm Henri

9. Hurricane Isabel

10. Hurricane Juan

11. Hurricane Kate

12. Tropical Storm Larry

13. Tropical Storm Mindy

14. Tropical Storm Nicholas

15. Tropical Storm Odette

16. Tropical Storm Peter

Source: ESRI

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: HURRICANE GUIDE 2004

GRAPHIC: MAP; 2003 Atlantic hurricanes and tropical storms: Map of the Atlantic
Ocean region traces the paths taken by the major storm systems in 2003.

TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

                    Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 573 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                    September 20, 2017 Wednesday 3:52 PM GMT

UK's Caribbean territories braced for 'dangerous' Hurricane Maria;
Hurricane Maria arrived in the region less than two weeks after Hurricane Irma,
one of the most powerful storms in decades.

SECTION: UK; Version:1

LENGTH: 695 words


UK troops and residents are bracing themselves as "dangerous" Hurricane Maria
sweeps through the Caribbean towards British overseas territories already
battered by Irma.

After rolling by the British Virgin Islands during the early hours of Wednesday,
the US National Hurricane Centre (NHC) said the storm has decreased to a
category four as it begins to barrel towards the Turks and Caicos Islands.

The centre said preparations against a "life-threatening storm surge and
rainfall, flooding and destructive winds" should be "rushed to completion".

UK's Caribbean territories braced for 'dangerous' Hurricane Maria Code 1

Maria has already claimed at least one life, as officials on the French island
of Guadeloupe confirmed a person was killed by a falling tree, and another two
are missing after their boat sank.

Dominica, where Maria made landfall on Monday, lost nearly all its
communications as the storm knocked out phone lines and the island's broadcast
service, and 70% of properties lost their roofs according to reports.

International Development Secretary Priti Patel has described the situation as
an "unprecedented crisis" and stressed the UK Government is "working flat out".

UK's Caribbean territories braced for 'dangerous' Hurricane Maria twitter 2

The NHC said: "Little change in strength is forecast during the next 48 hours,
and Maria is expected to remain a dangerous major hurricane through Friday."

Emergency steps are being undertaken on the Turks and Caicos Islands to prepare
for the looming onslaught, with sustained wind speeds predicted to reach 140mph
from Thursday.

Relief workers are striving to secure debris left strewn after Irma, as loose
items have the potential to make the coming hurricane "more hazardous" if it is
picked up by high winds.

Brigadier John Ridge, second in command of the UK's Joint Task Force, said
officials are "continuing to track Maria" as it rolls through the Caribbean
region.

Ms Patel said: "This is an unprecedented crisis with two hurricanes of such
brutal force hitting the Caribbean in less than a fortnight.

"Families have lost their homes, lives have been ripped apart, and the victims
of Hurricane Irma are now facing the new threat of Hurricane Maria.

"But they should know, the UK Government is working flat out to put the right
supplies in the right places to cope with the fallout from this new hurricane."

Hurricane warnings remain in place for Turks and Caicos and the BVI.

The Foreign Office is advising against all travel to the BVI, as well as all but
essential travel to Montserrat, Turks and Caicos and Anguilla.

UK's Caribbean territories braced for 'dangerous' Hurricane Maria twitter 3

Hurricane Maria arrived in the region less than two weeks after Hurricane Irma,
one of the most powerful storms in decades.

Dominica suffered "widespread devastation"at the hands of Hurricane Maria, the
country's prime minister Roosevelt Skerrit said - forcing the closure of its
airport.

More than 1,300 UK troops are in the Caribbean after being sent to help with
relief and repair work after Irma.

An additional 42-strong military resilience team has also been deployed to the
BVI, ready to offer support and assistance after Maria.

UK's Caribbean territories braced for 'dangerous' Hurricane Maria twitter 4

Brig Ridge said secure buildings, ranging from hotels to government buildings
and shelters that are "as safe as possible", have been identified for the
military on to "hunker down in".

RFA Mounts Bay has moved out the way of the hurricane to safety, but the moment
the storm has passed through, the vessel will be "pushed back in again".

HMS Ocean, which is carrying another 60 tonnes of aid to complement 75 tonnes of
relief items which have already arrived, will drop anchor in the region this
weekend.

Foreign Office minister Sir Alan Duncan told BBC Radio 4's Today programme:
"This has been a fortnight of just relentless catastrophe."

He described suggestions that the UK could have reacted quicker to Hurricane
Irma as an "utterly unfounded accusation".

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2017 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 574 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                 Ottawa Citizen

                          September 17, 2005 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricane-season holiday need not be a disaster: Here's how to avoid being blown
away on vacation: Buy trip cancellation insurance before the hurricane is named

BYLINE: Camilla Cornell, National Post

SECTION: STZLE WEEKLZ: TRAVEL & LEISURE; Pg. K7

LENGTH: 423  words


Vacation packages to Mexico and the Caribbean are cheap right now, mainly
because the peak travel season to the tropics is a few months away.

But there's another reason for the bargain-basement beach vacations: Hurricane
season runs from June to November in the tropics. And, after seeing the images
of the devastation wreaked on the southern United States by hurricane Katrina,
getting hit by a hurricane while on vacation is an experience most would rather
avoid.

The good news is your chances of going head-to-head with one of nature's
monsters are actually pretty slim. The bad news? A hurricane can affect weather
patterns for kilometres around. Here are some tips to avoid being blown away on
vacation:

- Choose the right time to go: The peak of the hurricane season falls from the
beginning of September to mid-October.

- Pick a low-risk paradise: According to the Caribbean Hurricane Network
website, www.stormcarib.com, the islands least likely to be battered by
hurricanes are Aruba and Bonaire, which have only experienced one serious
hurricane since 1851. The next safest are Trinidad and Curacao. Topping the list
of the islands most often in a hurricane's path are Abaco (in the Bahamas, with
18 hurricanes) and Grand Bahama with 15. To find out how a potential vacation
location ranks, check out StormCarib's chart.

- Cruise around it: With sophisticated tracking systems, cruise ships are able
to avoid hurricanes by rerouting.

- Check whether your resort offers hurricane protection: Beaches/Sandals is one
of the major resort chains offering hurricane protection. Under the chain's Blue
Chip Hurricane Guarantee, if a hurricane hits while you are a guest at any
Sandals or Beaches resort, you will receive a free replacement vacation
(excluding air) to the resort of your choice.

Other chains that offer hurricane protection include SuperClubs (which even
guarantees sunshine for its Jamaican resorts), Club Med and Wyndham Resorts.

- Consider travel insurance: Trip-cancellation insurance may reimburse you
should you lose your vacation to a hurricane. The trick is to buy it before the
hurricane is named or it could be considered null and void.

- Choose travel agency wisely: On Aug. 4, online travel agency Expedia. ca
launched its Hassle-Free Hurricane Promise. Basically, the policy states that
any time the Canadian Hurricane Centre or the U.S. National Hurricane Center
issues a hurricane watch or warning, Expedia will allow its customers to rebook
for another date or destination, waiving any change or cancellation fees.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 575 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                          September 22, 2007 Saturday
                                HandleX Edition

Hurricane season waning in Atlantic

BYLINE: Michelle Boss

SECTION: I; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 601 words


We recently passed the climatological peak of hurricane season for the Atlantic
on Sept. 10. Though across the Inland Northwest, we are too far away to feel any
direct effects weatherwise from these types of storms, we are definitely
affected economically when such storms wreak havoc in other parts of the
country. In August, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration issued
an updated Atlantic hurricane season forecast. The outlook called for a likely
range of 13 to 16 named storms, with seven to nine hurricanes and three to five
major hurricanes (those of category 3 or higher). So far it has been a pretty
active month in the tropical Atlantic, with three named storms as of  Sept.

19. For the season there have been nine named storms, including Hurricane Dean
and Hurricane Felix which both had top winds of 165 mph. Fortunately, neither of
these category 5 hurricanes made landfall in the United States. Hurricane
Humberto, the first hurricane to hit the United States in 2 years, impacted
folks on the Texas and Louisiana coasts Sept. 13. Though it was a minimal
hurricane at landfall, with maximum winds of 85 mph, it surprised many,
including the forecasters at the National Hurricane Center. Humberto broke
records by growing from a tropical depression to a full-scale hurricane faster
than any other storm in history. Across the U.S. there have been 34 fatalities
so far this year which can be attributed either directly or indirectly to
tropical storms. Eighteen fatalities occurred as a result of tropical storm
Erin, which brought disastrous flooding to parts of Texas, Missouri and
Oklahoma.

Operating under the same umbrella agency, NOAA, as the National Weather Service,
the National Hurricane Center is responsible for issuing warnings and advisories
related to tropical storms and hurricanes. Forecasters at the NHC are constantly
tracking conditions in the tropical waters for signs of activity. Before a storm
becomes a hurricane, it starts as a tropical wave or disturbance. This is seen
as an area of organized thunderstorm activity over the warm ocean waters. When
certain air pressure criteria are met, and the sustained winds over the area are
between 23 to 39 mph, the disturbance is upgraded to a tropical depression. When
conditions reach tropical storm status, meaning maximum sustained winds of at
least 39 mph but less than 74 mph, the storm is given a name. The storm reaches
hurricane status (retaining its name) when winds reach 74 mph. Of all the
tropical storms that form across the oceans, only about half intensify to become
hurricanes.

The costliest hurricane to strike the United States was Katrina in 2005,
resulting in more than $80 billion in damages. It was not the deadliest
hurricane though, despite fatalities totaling more than 1,800. The deadliest
hurricane to ever strike the mainland U.S. was a category 4 unnamed storm which
killed more than 8,000 people in the Galveston, Texas, area in  September 1900.
The winner in the category of most intense hurricane to hit the U.S. goes to an
unnamed storm which struck the Florida Keys in 1935 and had a minimum central
pressure of 26.35 inches of mercury (Katrina was ranked third in this category).
Hurricane season continues until Nov. 30.

WELCOME RAIN

Locally, welcome rains arrived on Sept. 18 to end a previously rainless month.
Despite a morning of gray skies and showers, only .09 inches of rain was
measured in Coeur d'Alene, leaving the area still nearly 3 inches below normal
for yearly rainfall. Though showers also moved through the Spokane area, not a
drop fell at the Spokane airport.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Michelle can be reached at weatherboss@comcast.net

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                          FOCUS - 576 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                             June 7, 2012 Thursday
                                 SVoice Edition

Average hurricane season expected

BYLINE: RandyMann

SECTION: S; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 402 words


weather

'Near-normal' hurricane season expected

Randy Mann

Randy

Mann

An active tropical storm and hurricane season may be just around the
meteorological corner. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
which is based in Miami, is calling for a "near-normal" hurricane season.

The 2012 Atlantic hurricane season began on Friday, though there were already
two named storms before that. The average since 1981 is 12 named storms with six
becoming hurricanes during a season, which ends Nov. 30.

NOAA's Climate Prediction Center forecasts a 70 percent chance of nine to 15
named storms, which will have winds of 39 miles per hour or higher. Four to
eight of them have the potential to become hurricanes with winds of 74 miles per
hour or higher. One to three of those hurricanes are projected to be Category 3
or higher.

The past two years have tied for the third most active Atlantic hurricane
seasons with 19 named storms each. Also in third place are 1887 and 1996. The
record is 28 named storms, set in 2005 - Hurricane Katrina among them.

In 2011, there were seven hurricanes, with four Category 3 or higher. The only
hurricane to hit the U.S. was Irene, which caused significant damage along the
East Coast. Tropical Storm Lee led to record rainfall in the Northeast, a region
that was already severely affected by Irene. Both storms combined caused $20
billion in damage.

In 2010, there were 12 hurricanes with five reaching Category 3 or higher.

Ocean temperatures off the coast of Africa, where many tropical storms develop,
are near normal. Readings are slightly above average in the Gulf of Mexico. The
combination of the warmer waters and not having an El Nino, the warmer than
normal sea-surface temperature event along the equatorial regions, will likely
lead to another active tropical storm and hurricane season. During El Nino
years, there are often fewer hurricanes formed as the wind shearing effects
increase because of changes in upper-level wind flow patterns.

For the 2012 season, I see about 15 to 19 named storms with seven to nine of
them becoming hurricanes. Four or five of these potentially deadly storms are
expected to become major hurricanes, reaching at least a Category 3 status.
Colorado State University, also known for its hurricane predictions, is
expecting 13 named storms, five hurricanes, two of which will be major.

Contact Randy Mann at www.facebook.com/ wxmann.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2012 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                          FOCUS - 577 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                            August 8, 2002 Thursday

Milder hurricane season expected

BYLINE: Ken Kaye KNIGHT RIDDER

SECTION: A; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 445 words

DATELINE: FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla.


The hurricane season might not be that busy after all.

Expert prognosticator William Gray released an updated forecast Wednesday
calling for nine named storms, including four hurricanes and one major hurricane
with winds greater than 110 mph.

That's a considerable reduction from his forecast in late May, when he called
for 11 named storms, six hurricanes and two intense hurricanes.

In other words, in terms of numbers, he predicts a rather ho-hum season,
considering an average year has 9.6 named storms, six hurricanes and 2.3 major
hurricanes.

If the prediction held true, it would mean the United States has to watch out
for only six more storms, because three tame tropical systems already have
formed.

That includes Tropical Storm Cristobal, currently off the coast of North Florida
and forecast to move out to sea.

"Let's hope the next six are as easy as the first three," said meteorologist Jim
Lushine of the National Weather Service.

Gray said unexpected climatic fluctuations, including cooler sea temperatures
and a stronger El Nino, prompted the subdued forecast. El Nino is a warming of
the eastern Pacific Ocean that creates atmospheric chaos and inhibits hurricane
formation.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is expected to update its
forecast today, and it, too, likely will call for a slower-than-normal hurricane
season.

But officials of the National Hurricane Center in Miami-Dade County urge
residents not to put much weight on seasonal predictions -- and prepare in case
just one storm hits.

They note that Hurricane Andrew destroyed much of south Miami-Dade County during
an otherwise slow season in 1992. Similarly, Hurricane Donna devastated the Keys
and snaked through the state in 1960, when there were a total of six named
storms.

"The big concern we have is people look at numbers, and there's always the
possibility of a major hurricane impacting a land area in the United States or
the Caribbean," said hurricane specialist Richard Pasch.

Further, officials said, the meanest part of this season is still to come, as
hurricanes are most likely to form between mid-August and the end of October.
Hurricane season runs through Nov. 30.

Gray, a Colorado State University professor, said fewer hurricanes translate to
a reduced chance of one making landfall.

He now forecasts a 49 percent probability that one or more major hurricanes will
strike the U.S. coastline this year. He earlier had placed those odds at 63
percent.

He calls for a 28 percent chance of a major hurricane hitting the East Coast,
including the Florida peninsula, down from 42 percent in his previous
prediction.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: news

                       Copyright 2002 Contra Costa Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 578 of 881 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                           October 20, 2005 Thursday
                            All but Toronto Edition

'Why us?' Floridians ask as Wilma nears: Most intense Atlantic hurricane on
record

BYLINE: Sheldon Alberts, CanWest News Service

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 669  words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON - As Hurricane Wilma whipped itself into a Category 5 frenzy over the
Caribbean Sea, an exasperated Jeb Bush summed up the mood of storm-battered
Americans in two short words.

"Why us?" asked the Governor of Florida, a state hit by seven hurricanes in the
past 15 months.

Wilma morphed rapidly from a mildly menacing tropical storm into the most
intense Atlantic hurricane on record yesterday as it churned toward the tip of
Mexico's Yucatan peninsula. An air force reconnaissance plane recorded a minimum
pressure of 882 millibars in Wilma's eye, the lowest ever for an Atlantic storm.

Most forecast models suggest Wilma will weaken somewhat before making a sharp
turn northeast toward Florida this weekend, and may miss the U.S. coast
entirely.

Still, the storm seems likely to put an exclamation point on a record-tying
Atlantic hurricane season that has already destroyed one major U.S. city and
left dozens of other communities in rubble.

"We likely will have a major hurricane in the southeastern Gulf of Mexico, and
we're going to have to deal with it, like it or not," said Max Mayfield,
director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami.

"We had well over 1,000 lives lost in Katrina. If Wilma comes to the Florida
coast as a Category 3 or 4 hurricane, that potential for large loss of life is
with us here with this hurricane."

Mr. Mayfield's prediction was a bitter pill to swallow for residents along the
vulnerable U.S. Gulf Coast, who have been in a near-perpetual state of hurricane
alert since early June.

Wilma is the 21st named storm in a season that opened with tropical storm
Arlene, which struck the Florida panhandle on June 13 with 100 km/h winds.

Since then, the misery has grown with each new hurricane milestone. In July
alone there were five named storms, the most ever recorded.

Dennis, the first hurricane of the season, became the strongest storm ever
formed before August. It reached Category 4 status and struck Pensacola, Fla.,
with 190 km/h winds, killing 71 people in the United States and the Caribbean.

Then came Katrina, which reached Category 5 status and ranked as the third most
intense hurricane ever to make landfall in the United States. It flooded New
Orleans, laid waste to Biloxi and Gulfport, Miss., and prompted estimates of a
US$200-billion repair bill to rebuild the region.

Katrina killed at least 1,281 people, according to a tally yesterday, making it
the third deadliest in American history.

Hurricane Rita, which hit the Texas-Louisiana border last month, was less deadly
than Katrina but set its own record as the second-most intense Atlantic
hurricane on record.

It prompted an exodus of 2.8 million people from the Gulf Coast and wiped out
several small towns in southwestern Louisiana.

In all, there have been 11 Atlantic hurricanes this year and six "major" storms
of Category 3 or stronger. The number is more than double the average in a
hurricane season that extends from June 1 to Nov. 30.

The National Hurricane Center has now exhausted its list of 21 alphabetical
names planned for 2005. If more tropical storms form in the upcoming weeks,
officials will use names from the Greek alphabet, beginning with Alpha.

But Mr. Mayfield said he was not looking beyond Wilma, which is moving so slowly
it is confounding efforts to make an accurate prediction about its path.

"If this were the only hurricane of the season, this would be the event of the
year," he said.

Yesterday evening, Wilma's winds had dropped to 255 km/h from 280 km/h as it
wobbled across the Caribbean more than 450 kilometres southeast of Cozumel,
Mexico.

The current path of the storm put Cozumel and its resort twin, Cancun, under
threat of a direct hit. Hurricane force winds extended 85 kilometres out from
the eye of the storm.

Mr. Mayfield called Wilma "the most perplexing storm" of the year, but said its
most likely path would take it across southwestern Florida by late Saturday.
That storm track would threaten coastal areas still recovering from Hurricane
Charley in August, 2004.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Black & White
Photo: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Getty Images; A
satellite image taken yesterday shows Hurricane Wilma nearing Mexico's Yucatan
peninsula.; Black & White
Photo: Scott Gries, Getty Images; Workers clear the Gran Tlachco Theater after
the cancellation of the MTV Latin Video Music Awards yesterday in Xcaret,
Mexico. The awards show was cancelled as Hurricane Wilma, a Category 5 storm,
bore down on the Yucatan peninsula.; Graphic/Diagram: National Hurricane Center;
THE PATH OF WILMA: (See print copy for complete graphic/diagram.)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2005 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 579 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        Florida Keys Keynoter (Marathon)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 8, 2009 Wednesday

Forecast for 2009: 6 hurricanes, two major: Experts issue latest report at
annual summit

BYLINE: Kevin Wadlow, Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 511 words


Apr. 8--The latest outlook for the 2009 hurricane season looks very average,
says Colorado State University's tropical forecast team.

Cooling sea temperatures over the last few months slightly lower the chances of
hurricane formation, according to a report released Tuesday by Dr. William
Gray's team at the National Hurricane Conference in Texas.

An update of a December forecast lowers the predicted number of hurricanes by
one to six, and cuts the number of expected major hurricanes from three to two.
Major hurricanes are Category 3 or above, with winds speeds of at least 111 mph.

"We are calling for an average hurricane season this year -- about as active as
the average of the 1950-2000 seasons," said Phil Klotzbach, who has taken over
as the lead forecaster with the CSU team.

"It doesn't matter if the forecast says one, five or 17 hurricanes," Monroe
County Emergency Management Director Irene Toner said Tuesday. "In Monroe
County, we have to be ready for the first one."

The six-month hurricane season starts June 1. Long-term averages are 5.9
hurricanes and 2.3 major hurricanes per year.

The April forecast still calls for 12 named tropical storms, above the
historical average of 9.6 named storms dating back to 1950.

Gray said in a statement Tuesday, "We expect current weak La Nina conditions to
transition to neutral and perhaps weak El Nino conditions by this year's
hurricane season.

"If El Nino conditions develop for this year's hurricane season, it would tend
to increase levels of vertical wind shear and decrease levels of Atlantic
hurricane activity."

Weather factors in early 2009 are similar to conditions that occurred in five
years that had average hurricane activity.

The CSU forecast team listed probabilities a major hurricane making landfall on
U.S. soil:

--A 54 percent chance that at least one major hurricane will make landfall on
the U.S. coastline in 2009 (long-term average probability is 52 percent).

--A 32 percent chance that a major hurricane will make landfall on the U.S. East
Coast, including the Florida Peninsula (the long-term average is 31 percent).

"The hurricane team's forecasts are based on the premise that global oceanic and
atmospheric conditions -- such as El Nino, sea surface temperatures and sea
level pressures- -- that preceded active or inactive hurricane seasons in the
past provide meaningful information about similar trends in future seasons,"
according to a CSU report.

Preparations for hurricane season in Monroe County are not affected by the
forecasts, Toner has said. She notes that with the Keys in one of the most
active areas for hurricanes, residents must prepare for every hurricane season.

To see more of the Keynoter, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.keysnet.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090408-FK-Forecast-for-2009-6-hurricanes-two-major-0408

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FK


                      Copyright 2009 Florida Keys Keynoter


                          FOCUS - 580 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                      Foster's Daily Democrat, Dover, N.H

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 25, 2011 Thursday

Hurricane Irene could bring heavy winds, rain

BYLINE: Roni Reino, Foster's Daily Democrat, Dover, N.H.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 705 words


Aug. 25--DOVER -- Forecasters say the Granite State could see winds strong
enough to blow shingles off houses this weekend, if Hurricane Irene continues to
track over Boston.

"Worst case scenario, we could see gusts over 40 miles per hour and along the
immediate coast some could see sustained winds of 50 to 60 miles per hour," said
Accuweather.com meteorologist Eric Wilhelm.

Those kinds of winds are strong enough to send trash cans tumbling down streets
and "poorly built structures" could see damage. Although Wilhelm said it is
unlikely the winds will cause a lot of damage, people in the area should also be
aware that 3 to 5 inches of rain could fall along the coast within a span of six
or seven hours.

"Right now, the forecast track for (Hurricane) Irene does bring it right over
Boston Sunday evening," he said.

The hurricane is expected to hit the eastern Carolinas on Friday. Rain and wind
will increase across the easternmost tip of South Carolina and eastern North
Carolina on Friday night into Saturday.

Accuweather.com forecasters said Irene will likely strengthen into a powerful
Category 4 hurricane during its dangerous assault on the Bahamas into today. It
is currently being identified as a Category 3 hurricane and believed to still
have the intensity of a Category 1 hurricane by the time it hits New England
later this week.

While tropical storm-force winds howl farther inland, destructive winds of 100
to perhaps 130 mph will whip the Outer Banks in North Carolina on Saturday
afternoon and evening. Winds of these intense speeds can flatten trees and cause
significant damage to homes and buildings.

"However, if the center of Irene passes just east of the Outer Banks, the winds
will be much less," said AccuWeather.com Hurricane and Tropical Weather Expert
Dan Kottlowski.

The storm is still being deemed a Category 1 hurricane when it hits New England,
which could bring winds of up to 95 mph to the East Coast. The storm could track
more east, reducing winds to occasional gusts, and reducing the amount of rain
expected.

According to The Associated Press, Hurricane Irene is the first hurricane
expected to hit the United States in three years. The storm has already made its
way to the Caribbean.

The path of Irene is similar to the track of Hurricane Bob in 1991 -- the last
hurricane to make landfall in New England.

Wilhelm said the hurricane is expected to miss Florida and hit further north in
North Carolina on Saturday evening. Areas like Myrtle Beach could see some rain
and wind, but potentially will miss the eye of the storm.

"The track has moved to the east and they've extended the potential track
forecast into New England," said State Climatologist Mary Stampone.

Forecasts show New Hampshire could see potential flooding in low-lying areas,
she said. Hurricanes of the past that have reached New England have pushed
enough inland with winds to strike interior New Hampshire.

Keene and Manchester could see some strong winds and Stampone said there is the
potential that the Tri-City area, Durham and especially the Seacoast could see a
lot of rain.

"We should also be prepared for rough coastal seas," she said, adding those
heading to the beach this weekend should watch out for rough water. "Surfers
will love it."

Along the Northeastern coast line, Stampone said people could see rougher waters
on Friday and Saturday, with bigger waves on Sunday in the Gulf of Maine. She
does not expect Hampton and Rye to have "bad" waves due to the storm, as the
storm should hit harder in Cape Cod.

"We still have several days," Stampone said. "We probably won't know for sure
until the end of the week."

American Red Cross disaster staff are already working with New Hampshire state
emergency management partners to prepare shelters.

"We are checking the availability of our volunteers, reaching out to officials
in state agencies, communities and readying our supplies," said Ian Dyar,
Emergency Services Director for the American Red Cross in New Hampshire. "We
take these preparedness steps early so that we can respond quickly and
effectively when needed."

___ (c)2011 Foster's Daily Democrat (Dover, N.H.) Visit Foster's Daily Democrat
(Dover, N.H.) at www.fosters.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110825-1FD-Hurricane-Irene-could-bring-heavy-winds-rain-20110825

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1FD


               Copyright 2011 Foster's Daily Democrat, Dover, N.H


                          FOCUS - 581 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                  Western Mail

                            August 29, 2005, Monday

ORDER TO CLEAR NEW ORLEANS AS HURRICANE STORMS IN

SECTION: First Edition; NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 554 words


An immediate mandatory evacuation for the southern US city of New Orleans was
ordered last night as Hurricane Katrina bore down with winds up to nearly 175
mph and a threat of a massive storm surge.

Acknowledging that large numbers of people, many of them stranded tourists,
would be unable to leave, the city of 485,000 people set up 10 places of last
resort including the Superdome arena.

'There doesn't seem to be any relief in sight,' Louisiana governor Kathleen
Blanco said, joining city mayor Ray Nagin at a news conference.

The mayor called the order unprecedented, but said Katrina's storm surge would
likely top the levees that protect the city from the surrounding water of Lake
Pontchartrain, the Mississippi River and marshes.

The bowl-shaped city must pump water out even during normal times, and the
hurricane threatened pump power.

'We are facing a storm that most of us have long feared,' Mr Nagin said.

The governor said Interstate 10, which was converted yesterday so all lanes
headed one way out of town, was totally gridlocked.

At 11am local time (4pm UK time), the National Hurricane Centre said Katrina's
maximum sustained wind speed had stepped up to nearly 175mph, with higher gusts.

The hurricane's eye was around 225 miles south-south-east of the mouth of the
Mississippi River.

'This is a once-in-a-lifetime event,' the mayor said. 'The city of New Orleans
has never seen a hurricane of this magnitude hit it directly.'

The mayor said people who opted to go to the Superdome should come with enough
food and supplies to last three to five days.

A hurricane warning was in effect for the north-central Gulf Coast from Morgan
City, Louisiana, to the Alabama-Florida line, meaning hurricane conditions were
expected within 24 hours, the hurricane centre said.

Katrina had been blamed for nine deaths in South Florida.

The storm had the potential for storm surge flooding of up to 25ft, topped with
even higher waves, as much as 15 inches of rain, and tornadoes, the National
Hurricane Centre said.

Only three Category 5 hurricanes - the highest on the Saffir-Simpson scale -
have hit the US since record-keeping began.

The last was 1992's Hurricane Andrew, which levelled parts of South Florida,
killed 43 people and caused $ 31bn in damage.

The other two were the 1935 Labour Day hurricane that hit the Florida Keys and
killed 600 people and Hurricane Camille, which devastated the Mississippi coast
in 1969, killing 256.

The hurricane's landfall could still come in Mississippi and affect Alabama and
Florida, but it looked likely to come ashore this morning on the south-eastern
Louisiana coast, said Ed Rappaport, deputy director of the National Hurricane
Centre in Miami.

That put New Orleans squarely in the crosshairs.

'If it came ashore with the intensity it has now and went to the New Orleans
area, it would be the strongest we've had in recorded history there,' said Mr
Rappaport.

'We're hoping of course there'll be a slight tapering off at least of the winds,
but we can't plan on that.

'So whichever area gets hit, this is going to be a once-in-a-lifetime event for
them.'

He said loss of life was 'what inevitably occurs' with a storm this strong.

'We're in for some trouble here no matter what,' he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Newspaper

                    Copyright 2005 Western Mail and Echo Ltd


                          FOCUS - 582 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                            Daily Post (North Wales)

                            August 29, 2005, Monday

PEOPLE ESCAPE DEADLY STORM;
 NEW ORLEANS EVACUATED AS HURRICANE LOOMS

BYLINE: BY ED JAMES

SECTION: North Wales Edition; NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 493 words


AN immediate mandatory evacuation of New Orleans was ordered yesterday as
Hurricane Katrina bore down with winds up to nearly 175 mph and a threat of a
massive storm surge.

Acknowledging large numbers of people, many of them stranded tourists, would be
unable to leave, the city of 485,000 people set up 10 places of last resort
including the Superdome arena.

Louisiana governor Kathleen Blanco, joining city Mayor Ray Nagin at a news
conference, said: "There doesn't seem to be any relief in sight."

The mayor called the order unprecedented, but said Katrina's storm surge would
likely top the levees that protect the city from the surrounding water of Lake
Pontchartrain, the Mississippi River and marshes.

The bowl-shaped city must pump water out even during normal times, and the
hurricane threatened pump power.

"We are facing a storm that most of us have long feared," Mr Nagin said.

The governor said Interstate 10, which was converted on Saturday so that all
lanes headed one-way out of town, was totally gridlocked.

At 11am local time (4pm UK time), the National Hurricane Centre said Katrina's
maximum sustained wind speed had stepped up to nearly 175 mph, with higher
gusts. The hurricane's eye was around 225 miles south-south-east of the mouth of
Mississippi River.

"This is a once in a lifetime event," the mayor said. "The city of New Orleans
has never seen a hurricane of this magnitude hit it directly."

The mayor said people who opted to go to the Superdome should come with enough
food and supplies to last three to five days.

A hurricane warning was in effect for the north-central Gulf Coast from Morgan
City, Louisiana, to the AlabamaFlorida line, meaning hurricane conditions were
expected within 24 hours, the hurricane centre said.

Katrina was blamed for nine deaths in South Florida.

The storm had the potential for storm surge flooding of up to 25ft, topped with
even higher waves, as much as 15 inches of rain, and tornadoes, the National
Hurricane Centre said.

Only three Category 5 hurricanes - the highest on the Saffir-Simpson scale -
have hit the US since record-keeping began.

The last was 1992's Hurricane Andrew, which levelled parts of South Florida,
killed 43 people and caused $ 31 billion in damage.

The other two were the 1935 Labour Day hurricane that hit the Florida Keys and
killed 600 people and Hurricane Camille, which devastated the Mississippi coast
in 1969, killing 256.

The hurricane's landfall could still come in Mississippi and affect Alabama and
Florida, but it looked likely to come ashore this morning on the south-eastern
Louisiana coast, said Ed Rappaport, deputy director of the National Hurricane
Centre in Miami. That put New Orleans squarely in its path.

Mr Rappaport said. "We're hoping of course there'll be a slight tapering off at
least of the winds."

He said loss of life was "what inevitably occurs" with a storm this strong

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Interstate-10 westbound out of New Orleans is jammed with traffic as
residents evacuate ahead of Hurricane Katrina

TYPE: Newspaper

               Copyright 2005 The Liverpool Daily Post & Echo Ltd


                          FOCUS - 583 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                               walesonline.co.uk

                     September 9, 2017 Saturday 9:38 AM GMT

Hurricane Irma: When it is due to hit Florida and the advice if you are
travelling to America;
The Hurricane has increased in strength again and is once again a Category 5
storm

BYLINE: By Cathy Owen

SECTION: NEWS; Version:1

LENGTH: 794 words


The UK government has said they are working with US authorities to ensure the
safety of British expats and tourists in America as Hurricane Irma bears down on
the US mainland.

The historic storm regained its category five status overnight after data showed
its windspeeds had risen as it tore past Cuba.

The authorities in Puerto Rico, Florida, the US Virgin Islands, Georgia, North
Carolina and South Carolina have all declared a state of emergency.

Incredible view of Hurricane Irma from the air as it approaches the United
States

Officials in the Sunshine State warned "time is running out" to escape danger
areas, calling on anyone remaining there to follow the mandatory evacuation
orders.

The low-lying Florida Keys will be struck first when Irma arrives on Sunday and
authorities are reportedly considering withdrawing emergency teams from the
islands.

Meanwhile the last flights from major airports in Miami and Fort Lauderdale left
on Friday evening and the last services from Orlando and Tampa international
airports will be on Saturday evening.

Welsh tourists shelter in hotel theatre to escape Hurricane Irma

At 11pm on Friday, Hurricane Irma was located 200 miles southeast of Florida and
is travelling at around 13mph.

The catastrophic storm has left a trail of devastation in its wake on a host of
Caribbean islands.

Florida Governor Rick Scott warned: "Get inland for safety."

'Emptying' resorts and shops selling out of water - Welshman cuts Florida trip
short as Hurricane Irma approaches

The National Hurricane Centre says: "Severe hurricane conditions are expected
over portions of the Florida peninsula and the Florida Keys beginning Saturday
night.

"Irma is likely to make landfall in southern Florida as a dangerous major
hurricane, and bring life-threatening storm surge and wind impacts to much of
the state.

"A Hurricane Warning is in effect for southern Florida, the Florida Keys, Lake
Okeechobee, and Florida Bay, while Hurricane Watches have been issued northward
into central Florida."

The National Hurricane Centre (NHC) has forecast Irma will bring devastating
winds, rain and storm surges up to 12ft high.

Hopes the storm had weakened were dashed when an Air Force Reserve Hurricane
Hunter aircraft found sustained windspeeds had increased to nearly 160mph, with
gusts higher still.

Brock Long, head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, said: "Hurricane
Irma continues to be a threat that is going to devastate the United States in
either Florida or some of the Southeastern states."

Shocking pictures show the devastation caused by 185mph Hurricane Irma

He underlined that as many as 100,000 people could be left in need of shelter,
and urged local residents not to ignore evacuation orders.

Donald Trump is heading to Camp David to see out the storm.

Forecasters had further dire news for some of the Caribbean islands reeling in
Irma's wake as data suggested Hurricane Jose was "almost a category five" with
sustained winds up to 155mph.

Jose is expected to come close to the devastated northern Leeward Islands on
Saturday.

The NHC has issued hurricane warnings for the Commonwealth islands of Barbuda
and Antigua and British territory of Anguilla, while the British Virgin Islands
are on tropical storm watch.

Hurricane Irma travel advice as most powerful storm on record approaches

Aid and expertise is being provided to Britain's territories in the region in a
£32 million government cash injection.

Following a meeting of the Government's emergency Cobra committee, Mrs May said:
"I heard directly from our consul general in Miami about the support that is
being given to British nationals living in Florida and also British tourists in
Florida.

"We are, of course, working with the US authorities to ensure that every support
is available and everything can be done before Hurricane Irma reaches Florida."

Off the coast of the British Virgin Islands, the captain of the naval vessel
spearheading Britain's relief efforts described scenes of destruction.

Stephen Norris, commanding officer of Royal Fleet Auxiliary Mounts Bay, told the
Press Association: "I haven't seen anything on the scale of what we have seen
here.

A Welsh businessman has donated $1m to the Caribbean hurricane fund

"It is one of those storms which I think defies all expectations."

Engineers, marines and medics are being carried on board the ship, which
delivered six tonnes of supplies to Anguilla and carried out repair work before
moving to the British Virgin Islands.

The Foreign Office has set up a hotline for people affected by the disaster and
for people whose loved ones may be affected, on 020 7008 0000. If you are in
Florida or due to travel there, you can get updates on the Florida Disaster
websitehere.The Foreign Office is also regularly updating its websitehere.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBWM


                         Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 584 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                              April 6, 2008 Sunday

Warming and hurricanes not linked, some experts say

BYLINE: Martin Merzer McClatchy Newspapers

LENGTH: 900 words


ORLANDO, Fla. -- We're in a busy period of hurricane activity that will inflict
unimaginable damage, but global warming is not the cause, leading researchers
told the nation's foremost forecasters and other experts Friday.

Chris Landsea, a respected researcher and the National Hurricane Center's
science officer, told attendees of the National Hurricane Conference that there
is no conclusive evidence that global warming has significantly enhanced or
otherwise affected the number or intensity of hurricanes.

"Any trend we see due to global warming has very little impact, has caused very
tiny changes, and might actually be slightly reducing the activity we see in the
Atlantic," Landsea told the group, which numbered 2,100 earlier in the week,
though some left before the global warming session began.

But overall, hurricane seasons will remain relatively active and they will
become increasingly costly, researchers said.

Insurance experts warned Friday that the nation soon will absorb a hurricane
that causes more than $100 billion in damage, and Landsea has estimated that a
Category 5 hurricane could produce at least $140 billion in damage to south
Florida.

But that, he and others said, has virtually nothing to do with global warming.

Landsea noted that former Vice President Al Gore's award-winning "An
Inconvenient Truth," which has galvanized attention to global warming, is
promoted by a book cover and movie poster that show a hurricane emerging from a
smokestack -- and spinning in the wrong direction.

"So you might conclude that the hurricane science depicted in Mr. Gore's book
just might have some inaccuracies," Landsea said.

William Gray of Colorado State University, another leading hurricane researcher,
called any link between global warming and hurricanes "an absolutely phony
thing."

The issue has cleaved much of the hurricane research community, with one group
of scientists reporting strong relationships between global warming and recent
storm activity.

That contingent asserts that hurricanes have been forming twice as often as they
did a century ago and are growing stronger, mostly because of global warming
caused at least partially by humans.

"When you look at the numbers and the strong relationship to sea surface
temperatures and the reality of global warming, you end up with a causal link
that can't be denied," Greg Holland, a scientist at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., said last year.

Another group -- largely led by Landsea -- refutes those assertions, saying they
are based on faulty data. Like census takers who work only one side of the
street, these critics say, Holland and his colleagues simply missed many storms
of the past.

Many far-from-land storms escaped detection before hurricane hunter flights
began in the 1940s and satellite observations began in the 1970s, this
contingent says, so historical comparisons cannot be trusted.

"Our ability to monitor the Atlantic was much more limited than it is now,"
Thomas Knutson, a research meteorologist at a National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration laboratory in Princeton, N.J., told the group Friday.

The dispute has become so noteworthy and occasionally toxic that some are making
fun of it.

Earlier this week, Jeff Masters, a former federal hurricane researcher who now
serves as chief meteorologist of the Weather Underground, published a blog item
that began:

"A stunning new breakthrough in hurricane research has conclusively settled the
matter: Global warming is making Atlantic hurricanes and tropical storms more
frequent."

He said the research was accepted for publication "later this millennium in The
Journal of Irreproducible Results." Masters' lengthy satire was published
Tuesday -- April Fool's Day.

On Friday, Landsea said he was omitting from his presentation "all the
four-letter words for those with sensitive ears and eyes."

It is important to note, however, that almost everyone involved in this debate
agrees that the planet's seas and atmosphere have been warming.

"What we are seeing is consistent with what the global warming models are
predicting," Knutson said.

In fact, a study published Friday concludes that climate models showing a
warming trend of up to seven degrees during the next 100 years seem to be
accurate. The research by University of Utah scientists appears in the Bulletin
of the American Meteorological Society.

Virtually all experts also agree that we are in the middle of an active
hurricane period, even as more people flock to the coast.

The argument among hurricane researchers focuses narrowly on the effect, if any,
global warming has had and will have on hurricane development and intensity.

"Global warming is real and hurricanes are a heat engine," Landsea said. "The
question is how much is global warming going to influence hurricanes?"

The answer, Landsea and other skeptics say, is not much. They attribute the
upswing in hurricane activity during the last 13 years primarily to natural
cycles that tend to ebb and flow over the decades.

Those cycles reach back long before a warming atmosphere became an issue, will
continue in the future and have left us in the middle of a natural upswing in
activity, Landsea said.

"We're liable to see some very busy years in coming decades, not due to global
warming but due to natural oscillations," he said. "And the populations near the
coast are still going to be a big issue."

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2008 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                          FOCUS - 585 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                           September 1, 2005 Thursday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

2ND WIND FOR 'CANE SEASON?

BYLINE: BY PAUL H.B. SHIN DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 269 words


THE SECOND HALF of the hurricane season, which starts today, is shaping up to be
an even rougher ride, experts warned yesterday, with the potential for more than
twice the average number of major hurricanes threatening American shores.

"Many more storms are likely to form this season," said Brig. Gen.

David Johnson, director of the National Weather Service.

"It's too soon to tell precisely when and where these storms may hit, but don't
wait until your area is threatened to prepare for the hurricane," he said.

As many as four more major hurricanes packing sustained winds of more than 111
mph could spin out of the Atlantic by the end of this storm season, government
scientists said.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted this month that
there was a 95% to 100% chance of above-average hurricane activity this season,
which runs from June 1 through Nov. 30. The forecast called for 18 to 21
tropical storms, nine to 11 hurricanes and five to seven major hurricanes of at
least Category 3. In an average year, there are 10 tropical storms, six
hurricanes and two to three major hurricanes.

A named tropical storm has sustained winds of more than 39 mph. A hurricane
packs winds of more than 74 mph, and a major hurricane has winds of more than
111 mph.

Halfway through the hurricane season this year, the Atlantic already has spawned
11 named storms, including three major hurricanes - Dennis, Emily and now
Katrina.

Since 1995, there have been nine years of above-average hurricane seasons due to
a global cycle that flip-flops every 20 to 30 years, U.S. scientists said.

pshin@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CRAIG WARGA DAILY NEWS A couple gets some rest yesterday at Baton Rouge
River Center, a local arena that has been turned into a refugee shelter in
Louisiana's capital, about 70 miles from downtown New Orleans.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2005 Daily News, L.P.


                          FOCUS - 586 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                 Ottawa Citizen

                             July 9, 2008 Wednesday
                                 Early Edition

Global warming may cut severity of storms; The U.S. National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration says wind shear will literally chop the tops off
them, writes Tom Spears.

BYLINE: Tom Spears, The Ottawa Citizen

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 564  words


As the year's first hurricane spins across the Atlantic, research from the U.S.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) suggests that global
warming may not make hurricanes as severe as many people fear.

The past several years have seen more hurricanes than usual reaching North
America, including killers such as Katrina and Rita in 2005.

One theory says hurricanes will become bigger, and more common, as the world
warms: Hurricanes draw their energy from warm sea water in summer and early
fall. Warmer tropical seas will fuel bigger storms.

Hurricane Bertha is already alarming many in the U.S. hurricane states. The
season's first hurricane has come early, though it's expected to weaken as it
approaches Bermuda.

Now a study by the agency suggests the extra heat will indeed pump more energy
into the storms, but will also build up a phenomenon known to limit the storms:
wind shear.

Hurricanes develop as giant storm clouds that can reach 18 kilometres high. But
strong crosswinds at high altitude can "shear" the storms, literally cutting the
tops off them. This reduces a storm's power.

The study examined the historical record of hurricanes reaching the U.S. coast,
and compared it to ocean temperatures. It's a topic over which scientists
disagree sharply, partly because the era before satellites has left an
incomplete weather record.

"We looked at U.S. landfalling hurricanes because it is the most reliable
Atlantic hurricane measurement over the long term," said Chunzai Wang, a
physical oceanographer and climate scientist with the agency's Atlantic
Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory in Miami and lead author of the
study. "Using data extending back to the middle 19th century, we found a gentle
decrease in the trend of U.S. landfalling hurricanes when the global ocean is
warmed up.

"This trend coincides with an increase in vertical wind shear over the tropical
North Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico, which could result in fewer U.S.
landfalling hurricanes." For the article, Mr. Wang worked with Sang-Ki Lee of
the Co-operative Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Studies-University of
Miami.

In terms of hurricane strength, Mr. Wang says, "the vertical wind shear is not
the only factor affecting Atlantic hurricane activity, although it is an
important one." Other factors include atmospheric humidity, sea level pressure,
and sea surface temperature.

His analysis is published in a science journal called Geophysical Research
Letters.

The good news comes from a long distance away. The energy driving these
high-altitude winds actually comes from a warming trend in the Indian and
Pacific Oceans.

Observations from 1854 to 2006 show a warming of sea surface temperature
occurring almost everywhere over the global ocean, with large warming in
tropical regions of the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian oceans, the study says.

Still, the agency warns that overall it expects bigger hurricanes in the future.
In a statement released June 19, the agency warned that "hurricanes will likely
have increased precipitation and wind" in a warming climate, even after wind
shear is taken into account.

The U.S. National Hurricane Center has forecast 12 to 16 "named" storms this
season (i.e. tropical storms and hurricanes), and says six to nine will be
hurricanes.

- - -

Tom Spears

Can't get enough of Science? Then check out Dark matter at ottawacitizen.com

Dark Matter

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Getty Images; Hurricane Bertha continued to gain strength off the
southeast coast of Bermuda yesterday. The past several years have seen more
hurricanes than usual reaching North America, including killers such as Katrina
and Rita in 2005. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2008 Ottawa Citizen, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 587 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 Sunday Mirror

                            November 8, 1998, Sunday

THE GUINNESS BOOK OF AMAZING NATURE: HURRICANES

SECTION: FEATURES

LENGTH: 1753 words


Hurricanes are whirling tropical storms that can create giant waves up to 8
metres high

HURRICANES, typhoons and cyclones are all aspects of the same phenomenon. They
are different regional names given to strong tropical storms. These storms form
over the western Atlantic Ocean, the north-eastern Pacic Ocean and the
Caribbean. Hurricanes derive their name from the West Indian god called
'Hurakan' to whom local tribes would pray for mercy from deadly storms.
Hurricanes travel over sea and once they reach land they usually degenerate into
depressions.

Brewing a storm

Hurricanes develop when rising air currents form over warm oceanic waters
creating areas of intense low pressure. These form a well at the centre of the
warm, rising air.  As the air spirals upwards it cools, causing the water vapour
it carries to condense rapidly, forming banks of dense cloud and torrential
downpours of rain. The condensed water vapour releases massive quantities of
latent heat which further fuels the development of the hurricane. In releasing
this latent heat, hurricanes prevent the tropics from overheating.

Spinning an odd line Hurricanes usually originate between latitudes of 7 and 15
degrees either north or south of the equator. In the Northern Hemisphere they
generally start moving towards the west before curving north-west and later
north-east. In the Southern Hemisphere, the tracks are generally westward, then
south-west and eventually south-east. Initial speeds of hurricanes are about
16km/h but this can double or more, after recurving. There are considerable
variations from the basic pattern of behaviour.

The calm before the storm At the centre - or the 'eye' - of the storm there is
relative calm, with cloudless skies and wind speeds of about 24km/h. The
strongest winds rotate around the eye itself, where they can reach speeds of up
to 350km/h. The passing of the eye of the storm suggests that the storm is over,
but the brutal winds that follow from the opposite direction can be just as erce
as those in the rst wave. The eye itself measures about 25-40km across, becoming
smaller and more circular as the inowing winds spiral faster, causing some of
the most destructive winds of the hurricane to rage within a 100km radius of it.
Cloud banks swirling around the eye can reach heights of 13 to 16km above the
surface of the ocean.

Storm surges

The most destructive aspect of a hurricane is the storm surges that go with it.
Triggered by the combination of low air pressure and spiralling winds, vast
amounts of water are sucked up from the sea. This water eventually takes the
form of huge waves that can reach up to eight metres in height. When a hurricane
blows in from the ocean and hits land, the storm surge manifests itself as a
great wall of water. This can cause severe ooding. The storm surge is
responsible for 90 per cent of deaths, usually through drowning.

JARGON

CENTRAL DENSE OVERCAST A shield of cloud that forms in the eyewall of a
hurricane

CORIOLIS EFFECT

Name given to the influence of the Earth's rotation on the direction in which
hurricane winds spiral - to the right in the Northern Hemisphere, and left in
the Southern Hemisphere.

FACTFILE

What is the difference between hurricanes and twisters?

Twisters are much smaller, land-based vortices, whilst hurricanes are sea
-based. Twisters last for hours, hurricanes last for days...and leave behind
chaos like these wrecked boats in Miami after Hurricane Andrew (below).

Can hurricanes be prevented?

Experiments to date, such as seeding hurricanes, have been unsuccessful,
although it is possible to monitor and therefore prepare for them.

Force 5 hurricanes are normally expected once a century...but two hit the USA
within four years of each other, and caused damage estimated at $ 35billion

Measuring wind speed

The force of a hurricane can be calculated on two scales. The Beaufort Scale
measures wind speeds up to 118km/h which rate at the top of the scale as force
12. The Safr-Simpson scale is commonly used to track more powerful hurricanes.
The intensity of a hurricane is measured in ve levels. Level 1 measures 'weak'
winds of 120km/h whereas level 5 winds can reach 'devastating' speeds of over
250km/h.

Whirling dervish

The hurricane that hit Galveston, Texas, on Sept 8, 1900, was the most deadly
natural disaster ever to befall the USA. Reaching wind speeds of around 170km/h,
an estimated 10,000 to 12,000 people were killed, and around $ 20million worth
of damage caused. Following the disaster, measures were taken to protect the
city, specically by building a seawall. When its effectiveness was tested by
another hurricane in 1915, the death toll amounted to a comparatively modest
275, although the cost in damages rose to $ 50million.

Low down in Florida

On the night of Sept 2, 1935, large parts of North America, stretching from
Florida to North Carolina, were hit by the most vicious hurricane ever. The
'Labour Day' hurricane devastated large areas of the country, with islands in
the Florida Keys disappearing and hundreds of people going missing from many
coastal regions. Air pressure on the mainland reached a record low with
barometer readings dropping to 892mb. This is the lowest ever central pressure
recorded of any Atlantic hurricane. Winds travelling at devastating top speeds
wrought havoc, snapping tough metal and wooden structures, from trees to steel
railings. Local people who were able to respond to the hurricane warnings found
travel out of cities impossible: fallen trees littered the railway tracks and
many carriages had been derailed.

Belize blown away

Belize was almost wiped out by Hurricane Hattie and its ensuing storm surge on
Oct 31, 1961. Hattie's winds were blowing at a sustained speed of approximately
320 km/h, with waves of three metres, when it reached the city. Two thousand
people died and three-quarters of the city's buildings were badly damaged or
completely destroyed. As a result, the capital was moved 80km inland to a safer
site.

Betsy changes her mind

Hurricane Betsy began its erratic path of destruction on Aug 27, 1965.  On
course for the south-eastern Bahamas, it hovered just north of the capital
Nassau for 12 hours before heading towards Florida. Locals there were warned of
an imminent assault by the hurricane, but Betsy took an unexpected turn towards
the Gulf of Mexico, ending its violent outburst with tidal waves and ferocious
200km/h winds in New Orleans. The town was severely damaged, and those who had
refused to evacuate were killed by the oodwaters that swept through the city,
devastating the historic French Quarter and leaving over 50,000 people homeless.

Five out of five

Statistically, Force 5 hurricanes are only expected to occur once every 100
years, and yet two have struck within the last decade: hurricanes Gilbert and
Andrew. The gigantic Hurricane Gilbert, which began its assault on the
Caribbean, Mexico and Texas between Sept 12 and 19, 1988, with winds gusting up
to 330km/h, killed over 350 people, left 750,000 homeless and caused at least $
10billion worth of damage. Gilbert blew through Jamaica with sustained wind
speeds of 280km/h and a storm surge whose waves were six metres high, depositing
up to 0.5 metres of rain in only eight hours.  Such was the intensity of Gilbert
that its zone of rain stretched for 1,000km from its centre. Hurricane Andrew
holds the record for the most costly hurricane in American history: damage ran
to $ 25billion. It cut a ruinous course across southern Florida on August 15,
1992, smashing apart houses and offices in the city of Homestead, a suburb just
south of Miami (top left), and destroying an Air Force base located there.

The Great Storm

On Oct 16-17, 1987, winds of hurricane force devastated areas of southern
Britain. Winds gusted at speeds of up to 140km/h (86mph), killing 19 people and
causing nearly pounds 1billion worth of damage (including this wrecked car,
below left). Tearing through the counties of Sussex and Kent, the violent winds
brought down more than 15 million trees in South-East England, including six of
the seven oaks which gave Sevenoaks, in Kent, its name.  Roofs were removed,
fences attened, and chimneys sent crashing. The aircraft hangar at Southend
collapsed, reducing the planes it housed to scrap. High on the cliffs of East
Sussex, over 200 mobile homes were wrecked at a caravan site in Peacehaven.

Holy smoke

The storm of 1703 was the worst recorded in British history. At least 123 people
were killed on land, and the total losses at sea were estimated at 8,000,
including a Channel squadron of the Royal Navy. In a tragic freak accident, the
Bishop of Bath and Wells was crushed to death when a chimney stack came crashing
through the ceiling of his bedroom.

JARGON

DVORA'K TECHNIQUE

Gathering data on hurricane intensity based on satellite images

EYE

The relatively calm centre of a tropical cyclone

FUJIWHARA EFFECT

Two storms rotating around each other

HURRICANE SEASON

Hurricanes occur most frequently in the summer and autumn when the sea is at its
warmest. In the north-eastern Pacific/western Atlantic region, the season runs
from 15 May to 30 November

LANDFALL

When a hurricane hits land

STORM SURGE

Dome of water created by the hurricane's low pressure centre and spiralling
winds, leading to flooding on land

FACTFILE

Why do hurricanes occur most often in the summer and autumn?

This is due to favourable climactic conditions - warm oceans, pronounced
atmospheric circulation and conducive tropical atmospheric conditions.  In which
direction do hurricanes rotate?

Anti-clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere, and clockwise in the Southern
Hemisphere.

FACTFILE

Are hurricanes getting more intense and frequent?

No, there has been a marked decrease in the intensity of Atlantic tropical
hurricanes.

What is the most rainfall produced in a hurricane?

The most rainfall produced over 10 days in a hurricane is 3.7METRES.

FACTFILE

Which year had the most hurricanes?

The most typhoons in one year was 26 in 1964, and the most hurricanes, 19 in
1995.  Why are hurricanes given names?

So that forecasters and the public can easily refer to them.

MAIN PICTURE: This boat was plucked from its mooring and dragged into the middle
of a field by hurricane force winds

INSET: This plane was wrecked when Hurricane Gilbert hit Jamaica

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                            Copyright 1998 MGN Ltd.


                          FOCUS - 588 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 Sunday Mirror

                            November 8, 1998, Sunday

THE GUINNESS BOOK OF AMAZING NATURE: HURRICANES

SECTION: FEATURES

LENGTH: 1753 words


Hurricanes are whirling tropical storms that can create giant waves up to 8
metres high

HURRICANES, typhoons and cyclones are all aspects of the same phenomenon. They
are different regional names given to strong tropical storms. These storms form
over the western Atlantic Ocean, the north-eastern Pacic Ocean and the
Caribbean. Hurricanes derive their name from the West Indian god called
'Hurakan' to whom local tribes would pray for mercy from deadly storms.
Hurricanes travel over sea and once they reach land they usually degenerate into
depressions.

Brewing a storm

Hurricanes develop when rising air currents form over warm oceanic waters
creating areas of intense low pressure. These form a well at the centre of the
warm, rising air.  As the air spirals upwards it cools, causing the water vapour
it carries to condense rapidly, forming banks of dense cloud and torrential
downpours of rain. The condensed water vapour releases massive quantities of
latent heat which further fuels the development of the hurricane. In releasing
this latent heat, hurricanes prevent the tropics from overheating.

Spinning an odd line Hurricanes usually originate between latitudes of 7 and 15
degrees either north or south of the equator. In the Northern Hemisphere they
generally start moving towards the west before curving north-west and later
north-east. In the Southern Hemisphere, the tracks are generally westward, then
south-west and eventually south-east. Initial speeds of hurricanes are about
16km/h but this can double or more, after recurving. There are considerable
variations from the basic pattern of behaviour.

The calm before the storm At the centre - or the 'eye' - of the storm there is
relative calm, with cloudless skies and wind speeds of about 24km/h. The
strongest winds rotate around the eye itself, where they can reach speeds of up
to 350km/h. The passing of the eye of the storm suggests that the storm is over,
but the brutal winds that follow from the opposite direction can be just as erce
as those in the rst wave. The eye itself measures about 25-40km across, becoming
smaller and more circular as the inowing winds spiral faster, causing some of
the most destructive winds of the hurricane to rage within a 100km radius of it.
Cloud banks swirling around the eye can reach heights of 13 to 16km above the
surface of the ocean.

Storm surges

The most destructive aspect of a hurricane is the storm surges that go with it.
Triggered by the combination of low air pressure and spiralling winds, vast
amounts of water are sucked up from the sea. This water eventually takes the
form of huge waves that can reach up to eight metres in height. When a hurricane
blows in from the ocean and hits land, the storm surge manifests itself as a
great wall of water. This can cause severe ooding. The storm surge is
responsible for 90 per cent of deaths, usually through drowning.

JARGON

CENTRAL DENSE OVERCAST A shield of cloud that forms in the eyewall of a
hurricane

CORIOLIS EFFECT

Name given to the influence of the Earth's rotation on the direction in which
hurricane winds spiral - to the right in the Northern Hemisphere, and left in
the Southern Hemisphere.

FACTFILE

What is the difference between hurricanes and twisters?

Twisters are much smaller, land-based vortices, whilst hurricanes are sea
-based. Twisters last for hours, hurricanes last for days...and leave behind
chaos like these wrecked boats in Miami after Hurricane Andrew (below).

Can hurricanes be prevented?

Experiments to date, such as seeding hurricanes, have been unsuccessful,
although it is possible to monitor and therefore prepare for them.

Force 5 hurricanes are normally expected once a century...but two hit the USA
within four years of each other, and caused damage estimated at $ 35billion

Measuring wind speed

The force of a hurricane can be calculated on two scales. The Beaufort Scale
measures wind speeds up to 118km/h which rate at the top of the scale as force
12. The Safr-Simpson scale is commonly used to track more powerful hurricanes.
The intensity of a hurricane is measured in ve levels. Level 1 measures 'weak'
winds of 120km/h whereas level 5 winds can reach 'devastating' speeds of over
250km/h.

Whirling dervish

The hurricane that hit Galveston, Texas, on Sept 8, 1900, was the most deadly
natural disaster ever to befall the USA. Reaching wind speeds of around 170km/h,
an estimated 10,000 to 12,000 people were killed, and around $ 20million worth
of damage caused. Following the disaster, measures were taken to protect the
city, specically by building a seawall. When its effectiveness was tested by
another hurricane in 1915, the death toll amounted to a comparatively modest
275, although the cost in damages rose to $ 50million.

Low down in Florida

On the night of Sept 2, 1935, large parts of North America, stretching from
Florida to North Carolina, were hit by the most vicious hurricane ever. The
'Labour Day' hurricane devastated large areas of the country, with islands in
the Florida Keys disappearing and hundreds of people going missing from many
coastal regions. Air pressure on the mainland reached a record low with
barometer readings dropping to 892mb. This is the lowest ever central pressure
recorded of any Atlantic hurricane. Winds travelling at devastating top speeds
wrought havoc, snapping tough metal and wooden structures, from trees to steel
railings. Local people who were able to respond to the hurricane warnings found
travel out of cities impossible: fallen trees littered the railway tracks and
many carriages had been derailed.

Belize blown away

Belize was almost wiped out by Hurricane Hattie and its ensuing storm surge on
Oct 31, 1961. Hattie's winds were blowing at a sustained speed of approximately
320 km/h, with waves of three metres, when it reached the city. Two thousand
people died and three-quarters of the city's buildings were badly damaged or
completely destroyed. As a result, the capital was moved 80km inland to a safer
site.

Betsy changes her mind

Hurricane Betsy began its erratic path of destruction on Aug 27, 1965.  On
course for the south-eastern Bahamas, it hovered just north of the capital
Nassau for 12 hours before heading towards Florida. Locals there were warned of
an imminent assault by the hurricane, but Betsy took an unexpected turn towards
the Gulf of Mexico, ending its violent outburst with tidal waves and ferocious
200km/h winds in New Orleans. The town was severely damaged, and those who had
refused to evacuate were killed by the oodwaters that swept through the city,
devastating the historic French Quarter and leaving over 50,000 people homeless.

Five out of five

Statistically, Force 5 hurricanes are only expected to occur once every 100
years, and yet two have struck within the last decade: hurricanes Gilbert and
Andrew. The gigantic Hurricane Gilbert, which began its assault on the
Caribbean, Mexico and Texas between Sept 12 and 19, 1988, with winds gusting up
to 330km/h, killed over 350 people, left 750,000 homeless and caused at least $
10billion worth of damage. Gilbert blew through Jamaica with sustained wind
speeds of 280km/h and a storm surge whose waves were six metres high, depositing
up to 0.5 metres of rain in only eight hours.  Such was the intensity of Gilbert
that its zone of rain stretched for 1,000km from its centre. Hurricane Andrew
holds the record for the most costly hurricane in American history: damage ran
to $ 25billion. It cut a ruinous course across southern Florida on August 15,
1992, smashing apart houses and offices in the city of Homestead, a suburb just
south of Miami (top left), and destroying an Air Force base located there.

The Great Storm

On Oct 16-17, 1987, winds of hurricane force devastated areas of southern
Britain. Winds gusted at speeds of up to 140km/h (86mph), killing 19 people and
causing nearly pounds 1billion worth of damage (including this wrecked car,
below left). Tearing through the counties of Sussex and Kent, the violent winds
brought down more than 15 million trees in South-East England, including six of
the seven oaks which gave Sevenoaks, in Kent, its name.  Roofs were removed,
fences attened, and chimneys sent crashing. The aircraft hangar at Southend
collapsed, reducing the planes it housed to scrap. High on the cliffs of East
Sussex, over 200 mobile homes were wrecked at a caravan site in Peacehaven.

Holy smoke

The storm of 1703 was the worst recorded in British history. At least 123 people
were killed on land, and the total losses at sea were estimated at 8,000,
including a Channel squadron of the Royal Navy. In a tragic freak accident, the
Bishop of Bath and Wells was crushed to death when a chimney stack came crashing
through the ceiling of his bedroom.

JARGON

DVORA'K TECHNIQUE

Gathering data on hurricane intensity based on satellite images

EYE

The relatively calm centre of a tropical cyclone

FUJIWHARA EFFECT

Two storms rotating around each other

HURRICANE SEASON

Hurricanes occur most frequently in the summer and autumn when the sea is at its
warmest. In the north-eastern Pacific/western Atlantic region, the season runs
from 15 May to 30 November

LANDFALL

When a hurricane hits land

STORM SURGE

Dome of water created by the hurricane's low pressure centre and spiralling
winds, leading to flooding on land

FACTFILE

Why do hurricanes occur most often in the summer and autumn?

This is due to favourable climactic conditions - warm oceans, pronounced
atmospheric circulation and conducive tropical atmospheric conditions.  In which
direction do hurricanes rotate?

Anti-clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere, and clockwise in the Southern
Hemisphere.

FACTFILE

Are hurricanes getting more intense and frequent?

No, there has been a marked decrease in the intensity of Atlantic tropical
hurricanes.

What is the most rainfall produced in a hurricane?

The most rainfall produced over 10 days in a hurricane is 3.7METRES.

FACTFILE

Which year had the most hurricanes?

The most typhoons in one year was 26 in 1964, and the most hurricanes, 19 in
1995.  Why are hurricanes given names?

So that forecasters and the public can easily refer to them.

MAIN PICTURE: This boat was plucked from its mooring and dragged into the middle
of a field by hurricane force winds

INSET: This plane was wrecked when Hurricane Gilbert hit Jamaica

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                            Copyright 1998 MGN Ltd.


                          FOCUS - 589 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

               May 30, 2001, Wednesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

Heed hurricane warning

SECTION: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 502 words



From a great distance, a hurricane is a thing of awesome beauty. Its radar image
- a swirling, multicolored yin and yang of nature's power - can mesmerize. Up
close, however, a hurricane is not so pleasant. The wind energy generated by an
average hurricane is equivalent to half the worldwide electrical generating
capacity.

Many Floridians have never had a first-person experience with a serious
hurricane. That is because Florida has been largely spared over the past three
decades. With the exception of Hurricane Andrew in 1992, no major hurricane
(Category 3 or higher) has made landfall on the peninsula since 1966. Attribute
that to changing weather patterns and luck. In the prior 35 years, 11 major
hurricanes struck Florida.

Hurricane expert William Gray doesn't expect us to be so lucky for long. "We
will see damage in Florida like we have never known," said Gray, a Colorado
State University professor and accurate hurricane prognosticator. In April, he
said he expects six hurricanes this season.

Here is another important point. While predictions of hurricane movements have
improved with the use of technology, they still aren't foolproof. "I'm afraid
people think we do a better job than we actually do," said Max Mayfield, head of
the National Hurricane Center.

Floridians might want to remember those warnings as another six-month hurricane
season begins on Friday. It's not hysteria; in fact, Gray's prediction is just
common sense. Florida has seen a population explosion over the past three
decades: 16-million people now live here, and millions more visit each year.
Plus, much of the state's newest (and most expensive) development is perched
precariously on barrier islands.

So it's a good bet that the next major storm whose eye comes ashore in Florida
will bring destruction of historic proportions, at least in terms of cost. We
can do something to protect lives, of course, but even that is problematic in
much of Florida, especially Pinellas County with its miles of barrier islands
connected only by bridges.

David Bilodeau, the county's emergency management director, figures it takes 12
to 15 hours to evacuate Pinellas residents in the face of a Category 3
hurricane, and that is if everyone cooperates and nothing goes wrong. A
hurricane warning comes 24 hours before the storm is expected to make landfall,
so there is little room for error. That's why Bilodeau is going to a three-step
evacuation plan.

Before an expected hurricane warning, the first group asked to leave will be
those who already have evacuation plans outside the county. Next will be
residents who plan to stay in public shelters. Finally, the die-hards. If it
works, the roads and bridges should be less clogged than when everyone tries to
flee at once.

Nothing goes as planned, of course, but give Bilodeau credit for trying. Maybe
more Floridians will heed the words of Gray and Mayfield and realize luck may
not be with them the next time. Let's hope that message is understood.


LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                    Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 590 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             July 11, 2005, Monday

Florida hit by another battering as hurricane roars ashore Hurricane brings new
chaos to battered Florida

BYLINE: By Harry Mount in Savannah

SECTION: News; International Pg. 013

LENGTH: 435 words

HURRICANE Dennis struck the US Gulf Coast yesterday spreading chaos and
destruction across a region still scarred by last year's record-breaking
tropical storms.

Dennis, the first major hurricane of the season, hit northern Florida, Alabama
and Mississippi after wreaking havoc in the Caribbean and leaving 32 dead in
Haiti and Cuba.

About 7,000 people filled storm shelters in the three states and many towns
emptied as almost 1.4 million people were placed under evacuation orders.
Hundreds of thousands of homes along the Florida coast were without power.

Tornadoes, spinning off from the hurricane, roared through Tampa Bay.

In Key West, branches and street signs were blown along deserted roads and the
main thoroughfare, Duval Street, was under 18in of water.

The hurricane lost a little steam in the Gulf of Mexico just before crashing
ashore but remained a powerful category three hurricane on a scale that goes up
to five, packing winds of up to 120mph as it closed in on parts of Florida which
are still recovering from Hurricane Ivan 10 months ago.

"I think there is a legitimate feeling, 'Why me? What did I do wrong?' "
complained the state's governor, Jeb Bush, before the hurricane made landfall.

Almost 10,000 people whose homes were damaged or destroyed by last September's
hurricane are still living in mobile homes in the area under most threat from
Dennis.

One of them, Mitch Lamb, had just returned from a mobile home to his house in
Gulf Breeze, Florida, having spent $70,000 ( pounds 40,000) on repairs. He was
evacuated on Saturday.

Mr Lamb said: "I hope this house is gone when I get back because I do not want
to go through it again. We'll just sell the waterfront property and take the
loss."

The storm struck Cuba on Saturday and, although weaker at the time, it caused
the deaths of 10 people on the island.

Electricity in Havana was cut before the storm arrived to prevent injury from
falling power lines and 1.5 million Cubans were evacuated.

"It's arrived with all its diabolical force," Fidel Castro, the country's
veteran leader, told state television.

The hurricane killed 22 in Haiti as it tore down power lines and trees,
triggered landslides, flooded homes and blocked roads.

Dennis is an exceptionally strong hurricane for so early in the hurricane
season, which lasts from June 1 to Nov 30.

It is the earliest Category 4 hurricane, defined as one with winds between 131
and 155 mph, in the Caribbean since Hurricane Audrey, which caused chaos in June
1957, according to the National Hurricane Centre in Miami.
editorial§telegraph-usa.com

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                     Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited


                          FOCUS - 591 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     May 30, 2002, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Respite from hurricane may soon blow over

BYLINE: Deborah Sharp

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 1221 words

DATELINE: MIAMI

MIAMI -- Atlantic hurricane season starts Saturday, and the U.S. mainland is
overdue for a hit.

The past several years have been more active than average in terms of the number
of hurricanes forming at sea. Yet more than 21/2 years has passed without one
hitting the U.S. coastline.

Forecasters say the uncommon streak of good fortune, due in part to a stubborn
weather trough steering storms away from the East Coast, can't hold forever.


"We've basically been lucky. And we shouldn't expect to go on being lucky," says
Hugh Willoughby, hurricane research division director for the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration.

The last hurricane to hit the U.S. mainland was Hurricane Irene, which struck
Florida in October 1999. The longest period on record without a U.S. landfall is
from 1980 to 1983 -- three years, seven days.

NOAA experts say the Atlantic hurricane season will have a normal to slightly
above-normal level of storm activity: nine to 13 tropical storms, six to eight
of which becoming hurricanes. They predict two or three major storms. The season
lasts through Nov. 30.

On Friday, hurricane forecaster William Gray of Colorado State University is
expected to revise downward his April 5 forecast, which called for 12 named
storms, including seven hurricanes. Gray says cooler-than-expected Atlantic
Ocean temperatures may be less favorable for storms.

Hurricane forecasters for the Central Pacific region, which includes Hawaii,
also expect above-average activity: six or seven storms forming, instead of the
average four or five.

Meteorologists, who speak of hurricane trends over decades, say they believe
we're in a heightened storm period. Regular changes in ocean temperatures and
climate patterns help shape these active and slower cycles. Since 1995, the
number of storms in every season but one has exceeded the average.

Typically, 10 tropical storms form during the Atlantic hurricane season. Six of
those intensify into hurricanes, storms with winds of at least 74 mph. On
average, two become major hurricanes with winds greater than 111 mph.

The powerful storms inspire both fear and fascination. The Arawak tribes of the
Caribbean called them hurakan, for evil spirit. William McKinley, while
president from 1897 to 1901, said a hurricane was more fearsome than the Spanish
Navy.

Forecasters worry about the potential for more damaging storms because the
coastal population has mushroomed in the past two decades from 40 million to 50
million people. Many coastal residents are hurricane novices.

Yet, one of the biggest hurricane myths is that only coastal residents should be
concerned. Even though storm surge is historically the biggest killer during
hurricanes, far more people have died inland in the past three decades as a
result of flooding triggered by heavy rains associated with hurricanes.

National Hurricane Center researchers studied 600 U.S. hurricane deaths from
1970 through 1999 and found:

 * Flooding from rain claimed 351 lives.

 * High winds killed 71.

 * Six drowned in storm surge.

Another myth is that a tropical storm is a hurricane's puny cousin and easy to
ignore. Last June's Tropical Storm Allison caused 41 deaths in six states.
Damage topped $ 5 billion. The hardest wallop was in Houston, where 45,000 homes
and businesses were devastated. Then Allison, which never became a hurricane,
drenched areas from New Orleans to Boston.

Given such destruction, it's no surprise humans have long yearned to curb
hurricanes. Ancient tribes made offerings, and atomic scientists dreamed of
busting them up with nuclear bombs.

Hurricanes release energy equivalent to a 10-megaton nuclear bomb exploding
every 20 minutes, experts say. Dropping a bomb into the maelstrom would be like
tossing marshmallows to stop a freight train -- not to mention the radioactive
fallout. The bomb notion was eventually discarded, as was the idea of towing in
icebergs to cool the warm oceans where hurricanes gain strength.

Homeowners also have some misguided hurricane notions. They crisscross windows
with masking tape, a process that doesn't prevent shattering glass but does
produce sun-baked Xs that are impossible to remove. They stock up with steaks
and other supplies, not realizing power failures mean spoiled refrigerated food.


Throwing hurricane parties as a storm approaches grew less common after the
devastation caused a decade ago by Hurricane Andrew, which hit southern Florida
and Louisiana, flattened 125,000 homes and claimed 26 lives. But such parties
are becoming fashionable again.

The National Hurricane Center's director, Max Mayfield, points to "hurricane
amnesia" if a few years pass without a destructive storm. "It just takes one
hurricane over your community to make it a very bad year," he says.



Be prepared

The benefits of evacuation plans, hurricane shutters and emergency supplies are
obvious. But lesser-known steps also boost safety and comfort during a
hurricane:

* Agree beforehand on a local meeting point if family members get separated.
Appoint a contact outside the storm zone so everyone knows who to check with for
messages.

* Take "before" pictures of home and belongings for insurance.

* Outfit hurricane kit with a whistle to alert rescuers.

* Rely on battery-powered lanterns and flashlights if power is out. Candles can
cause fires.

* Fill your car with gas before the storm hits. Pumps won't work without
electricity.

* Store a minimum of 3 gallons of drinking water per person. Fill bathtub with
water for toilet-flushing and other uses.

* Everyday food and drinks become yearned-for luxuries after power lines go
down: Ice. Brewed coffee. Tuna on toast with mayo. Seasonings and condiment
packets can break the monotony of dry and canned foods. Don't forget the manual
can opener. And instant coffee with water boiled on an outdoor grill has
comforted many storm survivors.

TEXT WITHIN GRAPHIC BEGINS HERE

Atlantic season outlook for 2002

The Atlantic hurricane season is forecast to produce nine to 13 named storms.
Six to eight are expected to reach status (winds of 74 mph or more), according
to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The long-term annual
average from 1950 to 2000 for the Atlantic Basin is 10 named storms and six
hurricanes.

Atlantic hurricane names

Hurricanes carried only women's names until 1979, when male and female names
began alternating. Names for the 2002 Atlantic hurricane season that starts
Saturday:

Arthur

Bertha

Cristobal

Dolly

Edouard

Fay

Gustav

Hanna

Isidore

Josephine

Kyle

Lili

Marco

Nana

Omar

Paloma

Rene

Sally

Teddy

Vicky

Wilfred

Hurricane-related terms

* Tropical disturbance: Unorganized mass of thunderstorms; very little, if any,
organized wind circulation.

* Tropical depression: Sustained winds of 23-38 mph circulate around a center
that later could turn into the eye of a hurricane.

* Tropical storm: Sustained winds are 39-73 mph. A storm is named once it
reaches tropical storm strength.

* Hurricane: Sustained winds of 74 mph or more.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Rob O'Neal, The Key West Citizen, via AP; GRAPHIC, B/W,
Julie Snider, USA TODAY, Sources: National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration; world Meterological Organization; research by Chris Capella and
Chad Palmer, USA TODAY (LINE GRAPH); PHOTO, B/W, Scott Eslinger, Beaumont
(Texas) Enterprise, via AP; Worst storm: Larry and Sandra Donald of Beaumont,
Texas, wade through their flooded driveway in the aftermath of Tropical Storm
Allison in June. Allison was the costliest tropical storm ever to strike the
USA. It caused 41 deaths but never reached hurricane status.<>Breaking the
waves: A Key West, Fla., resident tests the water coming ashore Nov. 4 as winds
from Hurricane Michelle brush the area. The late-season storm packed 135 mph
winds and forced the evacuation of the Florida Keys, but it did not make a
direct hit on the U.S. mainland.

                      Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 592 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     October 1, 2004, Friday, FINAL EDITION

Top expert: No more major hurricanes

BYLINE: Patrick O'Driscoll

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 482 words

The USA's leading hurricane expert is forecasting some good news: There won't be
any more major hurricanes this season.

William Gray, head of the Tropical Meteorology Project at Colorado State
University, expects a "somewhat average" finish to this year's unusually active
hurricane season, which has smashed Florida with four deadly storms since
mid-August. Hurricane season runs from June through November.


"We're not forecasting any major storms the rest of the year," says Gray, who
predicted in March that at least one major hurricane would hit the USA.

Gray's team, which today will be announcing its storm-season outlook, predicts
three more "named" tropical storms, two of them hurricanes with winds of 74 mph
or more. Some or all of those storms could remain at sea and never make
landfall.

Other experts aren't as optimistic, however. They caution that since 1995,
seasons as busy as this one sometimes got more storms than usual in their final
months.

"The season's not over yet," says Chris Landsea, a research meteorologist in
Miami for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. "I would be very
surprised if we didn't have any more hurricanes."

The mixed outlook comes as Florida struggles to recover from four hurricanes in
six weeks. The onshore assault since mid-August by Charley, Frances, Ivan and
Jeanne killed at least 120 people in the USA and inflicted an estimated $25
billion in damage.

Most forecasters had expected an above-average season, with at least a dozen
storms, six to eight of them hurricanes. But none guessed that so many would
blast ashore. Half of the 12 Atlantic storms so far -- five hurricanes and one
tropical storm -- have hit the U.S. coast.

The most hurricanes ever to hit the USA in one season was seven in 1886. The
worst in recent times was six strikes in 1985. The average over more than a
century of record-keeping is less than two hurricane hits a year.

"Florida was just unlucky," Gray says. "It was probably a 1-in-100 year or
1-in-200 year season" for storms striking land.

Twenty percent of tropical storms occur in October. September is usually the
busiest month, with 50% of the year's storms. Two of the worst hurricanes of the
past decade struck in October. Hurricane Mitch in 1998 killed more than 10,000
people in Central America. Hurricane Opal in 1995, which hit Florida near the
spot where Hurricane Ivan struck this year, killed 27 and caused $3 billion in
damage.

The busiest storm year on record was 1933, when 21 tropical storms rose in the
Atlantic and Caribbean. The USA was struck that year by three of the 50 most
powerful hurricanes recorded.

Today marks the 38th straight day that at least one "named" tropical storm is
swirling somewhere off the U.S. coast. Tropical Storm Lisa is churning well out
in the Atlantic and is unlikely to approach land.

LOAD-DATE: October 01, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, b/w, Reported by Melanie Eversley, USA TODAY, Sources:AIR
Worldwide; National Hurricane Center; wire reports(Chart)

                      Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 593 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 29, 2017 Wednesday

URI hurricane expert receives award from National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration

LENGTH: 790  words

DATELINE: New York



 New York:  University of Rhode Island has issued the following news release:



  The temperature of the ocean is the most important factor in forecasting
hurricane intensity.



 Scientists were largely unaware of this fact--until University of Rhode Island
oceanographer Isaac Ginis discovered the crucial role the ocean plays in the
path and power of hurricanes.





 Ginis has received many honors for his decades of research, with the latest
award from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA.



 At the Tropical Cyclone Operations and Research Forum March 16, he received a
certificate of appreciation from the federal organization for his contributions
to hurricane forecasting.



 Ginis, a native of Russia, doesn't sail or fly into hurricanes to study them.
His groundbreaking research has been accomplished sitting at a computer.



 With a bachelor's degree in math and a doctorate in geophysics--both from
Russian institutions--Ginis creates mathematical computer models to track storms
and predict their strength.



 His expertise is sought out by public and state officials--including those in
Rhode Island--trying to discern when, and if, a hurricane will make landfall.
Ginis' insight is critical; his models give officials time to prepare for a
storm and save lives.



 URI's Department of Marketing and Communications talked to Ginis recently about
his research, and whether climate change will bring more storms to the
Northeast.



 How did you get interested in studying hurricanes?



  I became interested in hurricanes when I took physics in high school and was
lucky to get the opportunity to study them as part of my doctorate thesis
research. I wanted to better understand the physical processes that control a
hurricane's behavior so we can better predict what the storm is going to do
tomorrow or in the next few days.



 You are the first scientist to show the ocean's role in hurricane intensity.
Can you explain your discovery?



 From a physics standpoint, a hurricane is a heat engine. It's a massive natural
machine for converting heat energy into mechanical energy--in this case wind.
That heat energy is derived from the ocean. Recognizing this relationship
between the ocean and the atmosphere allowed us to build computer models that
can more accurately predict the strength of hurricanes. But hurricanes are
complex, and there are many ingredients in the recipe for any given storm.



 If you don't fly into a hurricane, how do you get your data?



  We have many observational platforms these days to gather data in the
atmosphere and ocean that help predict hurricanes. Most important, of course,
are the measurements made by reconnaissance aircraft. In their absence,
satellites are the primary platform for hurricane observations, but critical
measurements are also taken at sea by ships and buoys and on land by radars and
other coastal monitoring systems.



 As temperatures increase due to climate change, do you expect more frequent and
intense hurricanes in the Northeast?



  Recent scientific evidence and modeling studies suggest that hurricane
intensity may be increasing and will continue to increase due to warmer
sea-surface temperature, but the connection to Atlantic hurricane frequency is
less conclusive. In addition to intensity, models project significant increase
in rainfall that will lead to inland flooding during hurricanes.



 What about other regions of the world? How do you help predict hurricanes
elsewhere?



  The computer models our URI hurricane research group helps to develop and
improve are used by NOAA's National Hurricane Center and the Navy's Joint
Typhoon Warning Center worldwide.



 For example, our models were involved in forecasting Typhoon Haiyan in the
Northwest Pacific, the strongest tropical cyclone recorded at landfall, which
devastated the Philippines in 2013.



 Have you ever been in a hurricane?



 Although I never experienced a hurricane personally, I was involved in
surveying the damage after Hurricane Katrina in 2005. The devastation inflicted
by that storm on the Gulf Coast is still vivid in my memory.



 In Biloxi, Miss., I saw houses destroyed by the storm surge with only a few
items left on the ground and large casino barges severely damaged and pushed on
shore. Those images made me appreciate even more the enormous destructive power
of a hurricane.



 What advice do you have for students who want to study hurricanes? Is it more
important to study math or physical oceanography--or both?



  Weather and hurricane forecasting is a combination of physics, mathematics and
computer science. I suggest studying all of these subjects in college.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 594 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                  thesun.co.uk

                    September 9, 2017 Saturday 10:00 AM GMT

What's in a name? Why are hurricanes named after people? What names will never
be used and why;
Many people don't know that some names are now permanently blacklisted from ever
being used in the future

BYLINE: By George Harrison & Emma Clarke

SECTION: NEWS; Version:2

LENGTH: 281 words


HURRICANE Irma tore through the Caribbean back in August and September 2017..

Dubbed a "nuclear hurricane" because it was so powerful, Category 5 Irma came
after Hurricane Harvey, and was followed by Hurricane Jose.

Why are hurricanes named after people?

The tradition of naming hurricanes originated in 1953 at the National Hurricane
Center in Miami, Florida.

Naming hurricanes is a method employed to avoid confusion and to help the public
remember weather warnings.

It has since been the work of the World Meteorological Organization based in
Geneva to name the storms.

There are alphabetical lists of names which are used, but there have been
instances where names have been omitted from the list.

Why are names are blacklisted?

The World Meteorological Organisation keeps six separate lists of 21 names,
enough for a year's worth of tropical storms.

This means that, usually, storm names are re-used every six years, but there are
some names which will never crop up again.

These are the names which have been used in the past to refer to the deadliest
hurricanes, which have ended up causing mass devastation.

When a storm is particularly deadly, like Hurricane Katrina was in 2005, that
name is "retired" out of respect for its victims.

The WMO fears that it would be insensitive to bring back names associated with
so much death and destruction, so they strike it off their lists for good and
replace it with a new name.

What names will never be used again?

Amongst the names that have been retired are:

liConnie, 1955

liDiane, 1955

liKatrina, 2005

liWilma, 2005

liRita, 2005

liBetsy, 1965

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBTSUN


                    Copyright 2017 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 595 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        Florida Keys Keynoter (Marathon)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 17, 2014 Wednesday

More than halfway into hurricane season, so far so good

BYLINE: Kevin Wadlow, Florida Keys Keynoter, (Marathon, Fla.)

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 456 words


Sept. 17--The historic peak of storm season came and went last week, and all was
quiet on the hurricane front in the Florida Keys.

"It has been quiet and that's really good news," Dennis Feltgen, public affairs
officer for the National Hurricane Center, said Tuesday. "Don't raid your
hurricane supplies yet. We've got three more months to go."

Hurricane season runs from June 1 through Nov. 30. Tuesday, Hurricane Edouard
blew up into the Atlantic Ocean's first major hurricane of the season.

"Basically, Edouard is a fish storm, meaning it's not really going to impact
anybody except fish," Feltgen said.

The Category 3 hurricane is expected to remain far out to sea, although its
storm-tossed waves may create large swells reaching the U.S. shoreline from
Florida to the Northeast.

"It's been a while since we had a major hurricane in the Atlantic Basin, and
that's good," Feltgen said. "You have to go all the way back to Hurricane Sandy
in 2012."

Over along Baja California's Pacific coast, Hurricane Odile steamrolled into
Mexico's Cabo San Lucas as a Category 3 storm Monday, leveling buildings in the
resort area. No deaths were reported.

While Odile since has degraded into a tropical storm, it could still cause
extensive flooding throughout the Southwest. Parts of Arizona, Nevada and
California have already experienced severe flooding from the remnants of Pacific
storm Norbert this month.

Florida and the Keys must maintain a lookout for hurricanes on this side of the
country.

"Hurricane Wilma is the classic example," Feltgen said of the late-October 2005
storm that flooded large areas of the Keys. "October tends to be an active month
for Florida and the Keys."

Hurricane Georges hit the Keys on Sept. 25, 1998.

"If you look at the [hurricane frequency] chart, September is the busiest month
but there's a bump in October," Feltgen said.

Weather conditions begin to change as fall approaches, which tends to discourage
formation of storms off the Africa coast and in the mid-Atlantic. However, the
fronts in the warm Caribbean can still develop into a storm or even a hurricane.

"What does develop down there tends to move north," Feltgen said. "What's in the
way? The Keys and the rest of Florida. So don't let your guard down."

So far in the Atlantic Basin in 2014, five tropical storms have formed with four
of them becoming hurricanes: Arthur, Bertha, Cristobal and Edouard.

Hurricane Arthur made landfall in South Carolina, the first U.S. landfall of a
Category 2 hurricane storm in six years (Sandy was considered "post-tropical"
when it hit the Northeast in 2012).

___ (c)2014 the Florida Keys Keynoter (Marathon, Fla.) Visit the Florida Keys
Keynoter (Marathon, Fla.) at www.keysnet.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20140917-FK-More-than-halfway-into-hurricane-season-so-far-so-good-0917-20140917

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FK


                      Copyright 2014 Florida Keys Keynoter


                          FOCUS - 596 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            April 5, 2006 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricane Forecast: Active, But Calmer Than Last Year

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: A Section; A14

LENGTH: 298 words

DATELINE: MIAMI April 4


The 2006 hurricane season will not be as ferocious as last year's, when
Hurricane Katrina devastated New Orleans, but will still be unusually busy, a
noted forecasting team predicted Tuesday.

The Colorado State University team led by William Gray, a pioneer in forecasting
storm probabilities, said it expects 17 named storms to form in the Atlantic
basin during the six-month season starting in June.

Nine of the storms will probably strengthen into hurricanes, with winds of at
least 74 mph, the team said, reaffirming their early prediction in December.

The forecasters said five of the hurricanes are likely to be major storms,
reaching at least Category 3 on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale of hurricane
intensity and boasting winds of at least 111 mph.

But they also said there is less chance of major storms making landfall in the
United States compared with the record-breaking 2005 season.

The long-term statistical average is about 10 named storms per season, of which
six become hurricanes.

"Even though we expect to see the current active period of Atlantic major
hurricane activity to continue for another 15 to 20 years, it is statistically
unlikely that the coming 2006-2007 hurricane season, or the seasons that follow,
will have the number of major hurricane U.S. landfall events as we have seen in
2004-2005," Gray said in a statement.

Last season  --  which, at $80 billion, was the costliest on record in terms of
damage  --  saw 27 named storms, of which 15 developed into hurricanes.

In addition to Katrina, Hurricane Rita hammered Texas and Hurricane Wilma
briefly became the most intense Atlantic hurricane ever observed before hitting
the Mexican resort of Cancun and then curving back over South Florida, where it
caused $10 billion in damage.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 597 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 4, 2006 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

The Reliable Source

BYLINE: Amy Argetsinger and Roxanne Roberts

SECTION: Style; D03 , THE RELIABLE SOURCE

LENGTH: 498 words


Hurricane season 2006 kicked off this week with the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration's list of ordinary, easy-to-forget names. Here at the
Reliable Source Weather Service, we found a way to make storm-stalking sexier.
Which ones will go down in the history books? Which will huff and puff and then
fade away? Which should be retired? (Actual NOAA storm name for '06 are in
parentheses.)

Hurricane Angelina (Alberto)

Hurricane Brownie (Beryl)

Hurricane Condi (Chris)

Hurricane Dick (Debby)

Hurricane Exxon (Ernesto)

Hurricane Fiddy (Florence)

Hurricane Gore (Gordon)

Hurricane Hillary (Helene)

Hurricane Idol (Isaac)

Hurricane Jenna (Joyce)

Hurricane Katie (Kirk)

Hurricane Ludacris (Leslie)

Hurricane McCain (Michael)

Hurricane Nicole (Nadine)

Hurricane Oprah (Oscar)

Hurricane Paris (Patty)

Hurricane Rummy (Rafael)

Hurricane Shiloh (Sandy)

Hurricane Taylor (Tony)

Hurricane Valerie (Valerie)

Hurricane Washingtonienne (William)

Tipsters respond to your desperate plea for the identity of the fellow who took
Barbara Bush to dinner at Indigo Landing last week. You call the man they point
to, and he refuses to comment (total giveaway, right?); meanwhile, his name
sounds right to one restaurant eyewitness. But when you show the witness a
yearbook photo of the suspect, he doesn't think it's the brunette twin's date!
Do you:

a. Write off the tipsters (darn those hoaxers, trying to get a pal's name in the
paper)?

b. Put your witness under hypnosis (are you reeeally sure it's not him in the
photo)?

c. Renew the plea for readers to send tips to reliablesource@washpost.com?

One in an occasional series of dispatches from parties you should have crashed.

Event: Thursday's "Beatles Ball," the Washington Ballet's first fundraiser since
its crippling strike this past winter.

Theme: Fab Four, pre- and post-ashram, pegged to the ballet's "Bach/Beatles
Project."

Decor: Gala chairwoman Cindy Jones turned the ornate Mellon Auditorium into a
neon hallucination: Tie-dye tablecloths and chairs, giant screens flashing
pictures of John, Paul, George and Ringo, replica of the "Sgt. Pepper" album
cover on the stage.

Dress Code: Black tie, with lots of Pucci-esque gowns, a few retro lamé suits
and miniskirts, and one pair of gold hot pants quietly disparaged for
insufficient buttitude.

Mood-Altering Substances: Open bar.

Illegal Mood-Altering Substances: None. You think it's 1967?

Speeches: One, mangling Beatles song titles to thank donors for giving a record
$500,000.

Entertainment: Mini ballet performances to "Wild Honey Pie" and "In My Life."
Beatles Mania cover band during dinner (loud), followed by disco-pop dance band
(deafening). Conversation impossible; dance floor constantly packed. Artistic
Director Septime Webre drenched in sweat by night's end.

Goodie Bag: Edible chocolate Beatles CD, real Beatles CD, $25 gift cards from
Saks Fifth Avenue (someone got one worth $1,000) and a copy of Washington Life
magazine.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 598 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                     The Times Higher Education Supplement

                                October 21, 2005

The Terror Of The Tempest-toss'd

BYLINE: Andrew Robinson

SECTION: BOOKS; No.1714; Pg.24

LENGTH: 1732 words


Biblical prophets foretold whirlwinds, but reliable hurricane forecasts elude
even modern scientists, notes Andrew Robinson

Divine Wind: The History and Science of Hurricanes By Kerry Emanuel Oxford
University Press 285pp, Pounds 26.99 ISBN 0 19 514941 6

The concluding words of US scientist Kerry Emanuel's just-published book about
hurricanes - which went to press at the end of 2004 - have turned out to be
prophetic in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. "While global warming may
eventually have a noticeable effect on hurricane activity, there is no evidence
of a warming-induced trend in hurricanes so far, and while we focus on the
distant future we ignore the peril on our doorstep." That is, the peril inherent
in massive coastal development. Emanuel notes: "A succession of directors of the
National Hurricane Center have for decades travelled the East and Gulf coasts of
the United States and testified to Congress, warning that the upswing in coastal
population, coupled with inadequate construction, was setting us up for
disaster. They have been largely ignored. Federal and state policies on such
matters as flood insurance and disaster relief continue to encourage development
in flood- and hurricane-prone regions, forcing all taxpayers to subsidise the
risks undertaken by a few. In this respect, we could not differ more from the
(ancient) Mayans, who learned to build their cities well inland."

The current director of the National Hurricane Center, Max Mayfield, echoes
Emanuel's comment on the back jacket: "Today's coastal development, along with
hurricane amnesia, places modern man on a collision course with catastrophe if
the lessons of history are ignored."

Emanuel even offers a specific "nightmare scenario" about New Orleans in the
chapter on "Forecasting hurricanes". "A small, rapidly moving hurricane
intensifies as it moves northward in the Gulf of Mexico. Its present course will
take it ashore along the Alabama-Mississippi coastline, but a last-minute veer
to the left could bring it directly into downtown New Orleans. Much of that city
is below sea level and relies on pumps to keep the water out. A strong storm
surge coupled with heavy rain could overwhelm the pumps and submerge most
residences and one-story buildings. Evacuate, or trust the forecast?"

The particular difficulty with forecasting hurricanes, as compared with other
great forces of nature, is that they are neither effectively unpredictable like
earthquakes and lightning, nor slow-moving enough to permit a planned response
like river floods and droughts, but lie somewhere between these extremes. Their
paths can nowadays be tracked in detail and their wind speeds and humidity
monitored by satellites and aircraft, but hurricanes can still behave like
mavericks. At short notice they can change direction and devastate a major city
rather than hitting a nearby, relatively uninhabited coastline, or they can
suddenly intensify as a result of unanticipated interactions with air pressure,
heat and moisture in the atmosphere, in the ocean and on land.

Emanuel, a professor of earth, atmospheric and planetary science at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and one of the world's leading hurricane
researchers, does not try to conceal how little is known about hurricanes; in
fact, he lays out the scientific uncertainties for a general readership.

About how hurricanes form, for example, he states: "Although some aspects of the
transformation of atmospheric disturbances into tropical cyclones are relatively
well understood, the general problem of tropical cyclogenesis remains I one of
the great mysteries of the tropical atmosphere." Why do a few of the regular
series of atmospheric waves transmitted from the Sahara Desert to the Atlantic
Ocean become hurricanes while the vast majority do not? And about the
much-debated effect of global warming on hurricanes, Emanuel is distinctly
cautious: "Although there is considerable evidence that hurricanes would be more
intense in a warmer climate, the question of how frequently they might occur
remains largely unanswered. Complex computer models of the global climate system
now resolve the atmosphere well enough to produce storms that behave like
tropical cyclones, but their resolution is still too coarse to capture the
structure of the eye and eyewall, and consequently the modelled storms are too
weak." When different computer models are used to predict the effect of doubled
carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere, some of them predict an increase
in storm frequency, while others predict a decrease.

"Science has not progressed far enough to allow us to say anything meaningful
about how hurricane frequency might change in response to global warming." In an
article published in Nature a few weeks before Katrina hit the US, Emanuel
repeated this view.

The emphasis of this book - like Howard Bluestein's comparable book, Tornado
Alley: Monster Storms of the Great Plains (also published by Oxford University
Press) - is, as it should be, on science. But the scientific explanations make
fewer concessions to the non-scientific reader than might have been expected.
However, the excellent photographs and satellite images of hurricanes and their
dramatic impact, and the vivid and copious diagrams, will help such readers over
the difficult patches (despite some errors in the labels and captions, which
should have been edited to fit the diagrams and the main text precisely). Anyone
wanting to know the current state of our scientific understanding of hurricanes
should get hold of this attractively produced book, provided they are willing to
make some intellectual effort - anecdotal it is not, with little about the
personalities behind hurricane research. Overall, Divine Wind is the best
introduction to hurricanes that I have come across, definitely more readable
than Roger Pielke's Hurricanes: Their Nature and Impact on Society (1998).

Interleaved between the scientific chapters are chapters on historic hurricanes,
ranging from the typhoons that scotched Kublai Khan's attempt to invade Japan in
1274 and again in 1281 - leading to the Japanese name for typhoons, kamikaze,
the "divine wind" - to the massively expensive Hurricane Andrew disaster in
Florida in August 1992, which was said to have been a factor in the election
defeat of President George H. W. Bush, as a result of the federal Government's
slow and disorganised response to the catastrophe. There are also many paintings
of big storms by well-known artists such as J. M. W. Turner and Winslow Homer
and by lesser-known modern artists, and numerous quotations from literature,
classic and not so classic.

While the accounts of past hurricanes are generally of great interest, if
somewhat repetitious en masse, the paintings and literary quotations should have
been pruned. Two or three paintings of storm-tossed sailing ships would have
been enough, and while Shakespeare's The Tempest, Conrad's Typhoon, Shelley's
poetry and the writings of some others such as Emily Dickinson and Lafcadio
Hearn are worth citing at length, much of the quoted poetry should have been
buried at sea. On the whole, hurricanes have not stimulated artists and writers
to create their best work. Who bothers now with John Ford's 1937 film The
Hurricane, which takes up a whole page in the book with a cheesy movie poster,
as compared with his classic Westerns?

It is not easy to convey the power of hurricanes in words (or even moving
images). Perhaps concrete details work better than heavy-duty verbs and
adjectives. This is from the autobiography of the US Admiral William F. "Bull"
Halsey, whose Third Fleet was badly mauled by typhoons in the western Pacific
Ocean in 1944-45. "The rain and the scud are blinding; they drive you flat-out,
until you can't tell the ocean from the air. At broad noon I couldn't see the
bow of my ship, 350 feet from the bridge. The New Jersey once was hit by a
5-inch shell without my feeling the impact; the Missouri, her sister, had a
kamikaze crash on her main deck and repaired the only damage with a paintbrush;
yet this typhoon tossed our enormous ship as if she were a canoe. Our chairs,
tables and all loose gear had to be double-lashed; we ourselves were buffeted
from one bulkhead to another; we could not hear our own voices above the
uproar." As Emanuel himself remarks: "The average hurricane at sea precipitates
about one trillion gallons of rainwater per day, about triple the rate of
freshwater consumption in the United States in 1995." That really is an awesome
statistic.

No wonder the Bible was preoccupied with such almighty forces, though the word
hurricane itself is not mentioned there; it comes from the New World, possibly
from Hurakan, a storm god of the Maya, who were regularly afflicted by
hurricanes. Emanuel notes various occasions when hurricanes may have changed the
course of great events. Apart from Kublai Khan's two failed invasions of Japan
in the 13th century, there is the hurricane that may have prevented the French
from wresting control of Florida from the Spanish in the 16th century, the
terrible hurricanes of 1780 that destroyed the economy of the Caribbean, and the
appalling cyclone in East Pakistan in 1970 (with at least 300,000 deaths, like
the 2004 Asian tsunami), callously ignored by the government in West Pakistan,
which probably gave a final shove to the independence struggle that gave birth
to Bangladesh the following year.

Will the drowning of New Orleans by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 have any lasting
effect on the history of the US? Compared with the terrorist attacks of
September 11, 2001, the impact will surely be less - except on the insurance
industry and Emanuel's own field of hurricane research, which will undoubtedly
receive a financial boost. But if the Republicans were to be defeated at the
next national election, the Bush (Junior) Administration's inept and
scientifically illiterate handling of the Katrina catastrophe would be likely to
have played a significant role.

"For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind," as Divine Wind
quotes from the book of the Old Testament prophet Hosea.

Andrew Robinson, literary editor of The Times Higher, is the author of
Earthshock: Hurricanes, Volcanoes, Earthquakes, Tornadoes and Other Forces of
Nature.


LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2005

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Magazine

                      Copyright 2005 TSL Education Limited


                          FOCUS - 599 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                        The Times Educational Supplement

                               September 16, 2005

Vicious Circles

BYLINE: Yolanda Brooks

SECTION: THE INSIDE STORY; HURRICANES; No.4652; Pg.8

LENGTH: 1874 words


As America is left reeling in the wake of Hurricane Katrina, Yolanda Brooks
details the anatomy of one of nature's most frightening forces

Hurricanes are the most ferocious storms on earth. They have the power to
destroy nations and create refugees in the world's richest country. These
spinning storms stretch for hundreds of miles, spewing rain, whipping up
tornados and blowing gusts of up to 180 miles per hour that can re-contour
hills, alter the course of rivers and obliterate towns and cities.

Three weeks ago, Katrina was just a name on a list to be assigned to a future
hurricane. Today, it is the name associated with one of the most devastating
natural disasters in the history of the United States. In her wake, she left up
to one million people homeless, submerged 80 per cent of New Orleans in fetid
water, took countless lives and created a disaster zone roughly the size of the
UK.

Katrina hit at the height of Atlantic Hurricane Season, which runs from the
beginning of June until the end of November. Meteorologists had warned that the
2005 hurricane season would be particularly intense and that the Atlantic basin
region, which encompasses not only the Gulf of Mexico, but the eastern seaboard
of the US and islands in the Caribbean, would be in for a rough ride. Even
before Katrina howled across the states of Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama,
the predictions were coming true.

Hurricane Dennis hit Jamaica, Cuba and Florida in early July and was the
strongest storm to form, before August, since records began. Less than two weeks
later, Hurricane Emily swept across the Winward Islands, Grenada and Mexico,
snatching that record away.

Sea monster

Like all hurricanes that form in the Atlantic Basin, Katrina began life as an
unremarkable cluster of thunderstorms off the coast of West Africa. As they
rolled westwards across the Atlantic these thunderstorms found perfect hurricane
forming conditions around 280km (175 miles) east of Nassau in the Bahamas.

All hurricanes (called typhoons in south-east Asia and tropical cyclones if they
occur in the Indian Ocean and south of the equator) need the same specific
conditions for creation - sea temperatures of 26.5C (80F) or more and depths of
least 50 metres (150 feet). Combine with warm, moist air, light, consistent
upper-level winds and a location within 5 LESS THAN to 30 LESS THAN north or
south of the equator.

Warm air from the thunderstorms and moisture from the ocean surface mix and
rise. The rising air creates low pressure at sea level and more moist air is
sucked upwards, generating higher wind speeds. As the warm vapour rises it
condenses to form water droplets. The droplets accumulate and form cumulus and
cumulonimbus clouds, which rise high into the atmosphere. Trade winds initiate
the spin.

Due to the Coriolis Effect, hurricanes north of the equator spin
counter-clockwise and south of the equator they spin clockwise.

These thunderstorms continue to grow, fuelled by large-scale evaporation and the
area of low pressure expands.

On August 23, what started out as a collection of thunderstorms began to spiral
and develop into Tropical Depression Number 12. On August 24, the depression
evolved into Tropical Storm Katrina. Tropical storms can reach speeds of up to
74mph, but when the speed tipped over that point, this whirling mass of cloud
became Hurricane Katrina.

As a storm reaches hurricane strength, the eye, its defining feature, develops.
Typically measuring 30-50km (20 to 40 miles) across, it's an area of extremely
low atmospheric pressure, with few clouds, little or no rain and relatively
light winds.

Outside this calm interior lies the eyewall and the furious winds associated
with all hurricanes. Tightly-packed thunderstorms make up the constantly
changing eyewall and beyond that lie the spiral rain bands, which can be
80-480km (50 to 300 miles) long. The average hurricane is around 480km (300
miles) long.

She's unpredictable By the time Katrina became a hurricane on August 25, she was
classed as category one. Eleven people died as she swept across the southern tip
of Florida, but Katrina was still in her infancy.

Hurricanes don't travel in straight lines. They can be pushed off course by
other strong winds and spin back on themselves. They zigzag and they dawdle,
intensify and lose strength. After leaving Florida, Katrina headed south-west
and refuelled over the Gulf of Mexico, which had been warmed by a long hot
summer. Here she grew to become a catastrophic category five storm, with
sustained wind speeds of 175mph and gusts reaching 215mph.

Curving north, she headed towards one of the most vulnerable cities on the Gulf
Coast - New Orleans.

For people in the path of Hurricane Katrina, landfall was the start of the
drama. But for the hurricane itself, it was the beginning of the end. After
travelling hundreds of miles, she finally has no more warm ocean to sustain her.
However, a dying hurricane is still a formidable thing.

One of the biggest dangers it brings with it is a sea surge. As a hurricane hits
a coastline, sea levels rise rapidly as the high winds push the sea forward.
During Hurricane Katrina, storm surge spread as far away as Florida. In Biloxi,
Mississippi, a surge of up to 7.6m (30ft) - the highest ever recorded in the US
- was measured. In some places along the Mississippi coast the waves of water
travelled 1.6km (1 mile) inland.

Often lurking in the hurricane are tornados, which form while it is blowing over
land. They measure up to 250m across and they usually have a lifespan of
minutes, while a hurricane can live for up to two weeks. Average tornado speeds
reach 200mph and where the funnel touches the ground, they create narrow trails
of destruction. As Katrina swept northwards, tornados were reported as far away
as Georgia.

Finally, there are the torrential rains -15-30cm (6 to 12 inches) of rain is
typical. Hurricanes actually move quite slowly (10-30mph) and the slower they
move the more rain that falls. As the aftermath of Katrina showed, it is not the
collapsing buildings or flying debris that leaves the most casualties during a
hurricane, but the subsequent flooding caused by a combination of surge and
heavy rain. In Mississippi and Alabama, the waters receded relatively quickly.
However, in New Orleans, a city that sits seven to eight feet below sea level,
Katrina was the storm that the city had long dreaded.

Planning ahead

In 1965, New Orleans took a direct hit from a category two hurricane called
Betsy. Seventy-two people died as the 10ft storm surge overwhelmed the levees
that protected the city from Lake Pontchartrain in the north and the Mississippi
in the south. Four years later Hurricane Camille, one of only two category five
hurricanes to hit the US, killed some 260 people when it hit Mississippi,
Alabama and Louisiana. Yet 33 years later, with improved warning systems and
better communication, a category four storm kills as many as 10,000 people in
the same three states.

A growing coastal population ensured there were more people living in the path
of the storm. Only 200,000 people evacuated for Camille, compared to the half a
million who streamed out of New Orleans ahead of the storms.

The destruction of the barrier islands and wetlands that used to provide some
natural protection for Louisiana was cited as another reason for the high death
toll. Then there were the levees built to cope only with a category three storm.
However, the biggest killer was lack of planning and the failure to get more
people out of harm's way. While hurricanes are unstoppable, the damage they
cause can be reduced with resources, effective emergency planning and accurate
forecasting.

Eyes on the sky

The first line of defence for the Atlantic region is the National Hurricane
Centre (NHC) in Miami, Florida. Long before a tropical storm develops into a
hurricane, scientists will be watching their screens, analysing their satellite
images and data feeds from instruments on ocean buoys and direct observation
from ships. They will be tracking the direction of the storm and looking for
signs of it strengthening. They will also be using information collected by
Hurricane Hunters sent out to fly into and above the storms to provide detailed
real-time information (see panel).

The data from all these sources is fed into various storm modelling programs and
the combination of direct observation, computer analysis and human expertise
provide the forecasts.

Despite the increasing complexity of technology, short-term forecasting is still
an inexact science. Scientists are still refining techniques that will improve
short-term forecasts able to pinpoint the precise time and location of landfall
days, rather than hours in advance.

Research is also focused on long-term forecasting, and one of the leading
organisations in the field is based not in Florida, but in the UK. Tropical
Storm Risk (TSR) has combined the expertise of meteorologists, climate
physicists and statisticians from University College London and the Met Office
to create computer models that can predict the intensity of a hurricane season
months in advance.

They were able to predict back in December that the 2005 Atlantic hurricane
season would be a particularly busy one. In their last bulletin in August they
predicted "record-breaking activity levels ... at 150 per cent above average".

Professor Mark Saunders, lead scientist at TSR explains how it works: "We have
two main predictors. The first being how warm or cold the sea waters are in
August/September - the main hurricane season - and how warm it is in the regions
where hurricanes usually form, between the west coast of Africa and the
Caribbean.

"The second predictor, which we feel is more important, is the speed of the
trade winds, which blow from east to west across the tropical north Atlantic,
from Africa to the Caribbean. Sea temperatures are at their warmest on record,
and the forecast is for trade winds to be strongly enhancing, so we anticipate
that the 2005 Atlantic season will be exceptionally above average."

As they count the dead and bulldoze the wreckage in Mobile, Gulfport, Biloxi and
New Orleans, it is sobering to think that the 2005 season still has six weeks to
run.

Within 12 hours of hitting Louisiana, Katrina was downgraded to a tropical
storm. As she raced northwards, she lost her potency and within a few days she
could no longer be detected on satellite and radar screens. In her place were
images of the dispossessed, shattered landscapes and economies.

She may be gone, but she will never be forgotten.

Useful websites

* National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration: http:/ /hurricanes.noaa.gov

* National hurricane Centre: www.nhc.noaa.gov

* CNN: www.cnn.com/specials/2005/hurricanes

* Wikipedia: http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricanes

* Animated hurricane cycle: http:/ /news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/4588149.stm

* Tropical Storm Risk: http:/ /tropicalstormrisk.com

* Caribbean Hurricane Network: http:/ /stormcarib.com/

* Hurricane information for children: www.ns.ec.gc.ca/weather/
hurricane/kids.html


LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2005

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Magazine

                      Copyright 2005 TSL Education Limited


                          FOCUS - 600 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                           October 13, 2007 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Perfect storm can ruin the perfect holiday

BYLINE: Debbie Olsen, For the Calgary Herald

SECTION: TRAVEL; Pg. F10

LENGTH: 738  words


Do you remember Wilma? Mitch? Dean? When the storm approaching your holiday spot
has a name, it's never a good sign.

Despite forecasts of a busier than average hurricane season, the idea of a cheap
family vacation on a tropical beach was just too appealing for us -- especially
when we found a last-minute airfare deal to Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, for $199
plus tax per person.

With off-season rates for hotels and tours, we saved a bundle on the total cost
of our vacation. Add to this the fact we didn't have to fight off other tourists
for a coveted beach-front lounge chair and our late summer vacation seemed
almost perfect.

At least, until we heard the hurricane reports. Nothing short of a perfect storm
could ruin our perfect holiday.

Fortunately for us, the hurricane in question was headed towards the other side
of the country.

While hundreds of vacationers were frantically trying to exit Cancun before
hurricane Dean hit the Yucatan Peninsula in late August, our family was relaxing
on a beach. By the time Dean travelled inland to reach Puerto Vallarta, the
Category 5 hurricane had been downgraded to little more than a remnant low.

In its weakened state, it could no longer be described as a perfect storm and
yet Dean's heavy rains wreaked havoc on the city of Puerto Vallarta. Businesses
shut down and traffic flow was hindered for the better part of a day in the
downtown areas of the city.

Although it made our vacation less than ideal, we only spent one day hiding out
from the rain and enjoyed six days of sun, sand and surf. Sometimes a
last-minute deal during hurricane season can work out well.

Hurricane-proof your vacation

You take a chance when you are travelling to tropical locales during hurricane
season, but there are a few things you can do to reduce your risk and protect
your vacation investment.

Here are a few tips if you plan to take advantage of low rates on flights and
hotels to a tropical destination this fall.

Know the season

The Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30 and the eastern
Pacific hurricane season runs from May 15 to Nov. 30, but the peak season is
from mid-August to late October. The Atlantic basin includes the

Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico. The eastern Pacific basin
extends to 140 degrees W.

Playing the odds; different places, different risks

Some destinations have a higher incidence of hurricanes and named storms than
others.

Puerto Vallarta has a lower risk of named storms than Cancun, for example.
Bermuda and Miami have approximately a one-in-four annual risk of being affected
by a hurricane. The odds for Nassau, Bahamas, are about one-in-five.

The islands of the western Caribbean are less likely to be affected by
hurricanes than those of the eastern Caribbean. The southernmost Caribbean
islands (Aruba, Barbados, Bonaire, Grenada, Trinidad, Tobago) are rarely hit by
hurricanes.

A recent Dow Jones Island Index assessing hurricane risk rated Curacao as the
Caribbean island least likely to be hit by a hurricane, followed by Bonaire,
Grand Cayman, Barbados and Aruba.

For a look at the return frequency of hurricanes in the United States, visit
nhc.noaa.gov/HAW2/english/basics/return.shtml.

Trip insurance

In most cases, when a severe hurricane is expected, airlines begin booking
passengers on whatever flight they have to get them out.

The problem comes when the prediction is not precise.

Airlines will generally not change your flights without significant fees unless
they are fairly certain there is an imminent risk.

Some passengers who tried to leave Cancun ahead of hurricane Wilma in 2005 were
charged hundreds of dollars in additional fees.

Trip cancellation and interruption insurance costs about five per cent of the
cost of your entire trip, but it can refund your money if your trip is delayed
due to severe weather or for other reasons.

It also provides protection from other unforeseen problems.

Some tour companies and resorts offer their own hurricane insurance programs.

It's a good idea to inquire about hurricane insurance policies before you book
your vacation.

What's in a name?

Have you ever wondered why some storms have names and how those names are
chosen? For information on the history of naming storms or to view a list of
storm names for the next six years worldwide, visit the National Hurricane
Center website: nhc.noaa.gov/aboutnames.shtml.

Debbie Olsen is an Alberta-based freelance travel writer and mother of four.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Greg Olsen, For the Calgary Herald; Red sky at night may be a
sailor's delight, but the cloud cover didn't forewarn hurricane Dean's arrival.
;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2007 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 601 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                           December 8, 2007 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Noted U.S. forecasters see 7 hurricanes next year; 2008 Season 'Somewhat above
average'

BYLINE: Jim Loney, Reuters

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 511  words

DATELINE: MIAMI


The noted Colorado State University hurricane research team predicted Friday
that 13 tropical storms will develop in the 2008 Atlantic hurricane season, of
which seven would strengthen into hurricanes.

The team formed by forecasting pioneer William Gray, whose long-range forecasts
have been wrong for the past three years, said that would make 2008 a "somewhat
above-average" hurricane season. The long-term average is for 10 tropical storms
and six hurricanes during the six-month season starting June 1.

Gray's team, led by his protege Philip Klotzbach, said three of the hurricanes
next year would be the most dangerous Category 3 or above storms, with winds of
at least 111 miles per hour.

The Colorado State University hurricane experts, whose forecasts are closely
followed by energy and commodity markets as well as disaster relief
professionals, had predicted there would be 17 tropical storms in the 2007
season that ended on Nov. 30.

In the end, the season saw 14 Atlantic tropical storms, of which six
strengthened into hurricanes. Two of the hurricanes, Dean and Felix, reached the
maximum Category 5 strength on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale of hurricane
intensity. Dean killed at least 27 people as it raced through the Caribbean and
hit Mexico's Yucatan peninsula, while Felix killed more than 100 in Nicaragua.

It was the second year in a row the United States was largely spared after the
devastating years of 2004, when four hurricanes hit Florida, and 2005, when
Katrina swamped New Orleans, killing 1,500 people and causing $80 billion in
damage.

"Despite fairly inactive 2006 and 2007 hurricane seasons, we believe that the
Atlantic basin is still in an active hurricane cycle," Gray said in a statement.

"This active cycle is expected to continue at least for another decade or two,"
he said. "After that, we're likely to enter a quieter Atlantic major hurricane
period like we experienced during the quarter-century periods of 1970-1994 and
1901-1925."

Gray is at odds with some hurricane researchers who believe that global warming
could be contributing to intensified hurricane activity. The CSU team said it
expected "fairly warm" tropical Atlantic sea surface temperatures in 2008.
Hurricanes draw their strength from warm water.

They also expected weak or neutral La Nina conditions -- unusually cold ocean
temperatures in the eastern equatorial Pacific which are part of the recipe for
active hurricane seasons in the Atlantic.

La Nina's opposite, the warm-water El Nino phenomenon, tends to dampen Atlantic
hurricanes by increasing wind shear, a difference in wind speeds at different
altitudes that can tear apart nascent hurricanes.

The CSU team predicted a 60 percent chance that at least one hurricane of
Category 3 or higher would hit the United States in 2008, above the long-term
average of 58 percent.

The U.S. East Coast has a 37 percent probability of seeing a major hurricane and
the Gulf Coast a 36 percent probability, it said. The Caribbean basin also has
an above-average chance of seeing a major hurricane next year, CSU added.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Herald Archive, Reuters; An image from the International Space Station
shows the breadth of hurricane Dean covering Earth below. Forecasters predict
seven more hurricanes in 2008. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2007 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 602 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                             May 25, 2013 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Big storm season predicted this year; U.S. northeast and Canada both put on
notice

BYLINE: William Marsden, Postmedia News

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 455 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Seven months after hurricane Sandy ravaged the Atlantic coastline from Maryland
to Connecticut, U.S. and Canadian climate scientists are predicting another
banner season for the giant storms.

That could be bad news for the residents and business owners of the northeastern
seaboard, many of whom are still rebuilding their shattered lives after Sandy
killed 42 people and, according to insurers, cost about $65 billion US in
damage.

The Canadian Hurricane Centre is also warning the Atlantic provinces of major
hurricane activity this season, primarily because of warmer ocean waters. This
year's hurricane season, which begins June 1 and which is expected to last at
least six months, will again be above normal, according to the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration's hurricane centre.

NOAA predicts hurricanes in the Atlantic region will range from "active" to
"extremely active." Scientists said there is a 70 per cent likelihood of 13 to
20 named storms, of which seven to 11 could become hurricanes, with winds of 119
kilometres an hour or higher, and three to six major hurricanes (178 km/h or
higher).

These numbers are well above the 1981-2010 seasonal averages of 12 named storms,
six hurricanes and three major hurricanes for the Atlantic.

During the 2012 storm season, the number of named storms in the Atlantic region
was higher than average but the intensity was lower. There were 19 named storms
of which 10 became hurricanes. Only one - hurricane Michael in September - was
classified as major. Sandy was just shy of the "major" category with winds up to
177 km/h.

NOAA says it does not make predictions of whether any of these hurricanes will
reach landfall because the path of hurricanes depends on daily weather patterns.

Scientists said the same atmospheric conditions are at play that have produced
increased Atlantic hurricane activity since 1995. These include a strong West
African monsoon, warmer tropical Atlantic and Caribbean waters, lower air
pressure and reduced wind shear.

As usual, the storms will incubate just above the equator off the west coast of
Africa and travel westward toward the Caribbean before turning north. NOAA
acting administrator Kathryn Sullivan warned that tropical storm and hurricane
impacts are not limited to the coastline.

"Strong winds, torrential rain, flooding and tornadoes often threaten inland
areas far from where the storm first makes landfall," she said. Joe Nimmich,
associate administrator at the Federal Emergency Management Agency, warned
Americans to prepare themselves for a difficult season.

"Preparedness today can make a big difference down the line, so update your
family emergency plan and make sure your emergency kit is stocked," he said in a
statement

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 Edmonton Journal, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 603 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                The Denver Post

                          September 16, 2017 Saturday
                              SAT REGIONAL Edition

Back-to-back storms reignite climate debate

BYLINE: Dino Grandoni

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 780 words


The back to back landfalls of two harrowing storms in Texas and in Florida have
reignited both the scientific debate over the link between hurricanes and global
warming and the political debate over what, if anything, to do to address
climate change.

So far, the only Republicans willing to engage in either have been moderates or
those representing low lying coastal districts vulnerable to sea level rise and
storm surges. Members of President Trump's Cabinet, such as Environmental
Protection Agency chief Scott Pruitt, have said that "it's insensitive" to
discuss the "cause and effect of these storms" in the midst of the dual
disasters of Hurricanes Harvey and Irma.

President Trump, too, was dismissive this week of any link between climate
change and hurricanes. When asked on Air Force One whether the two recent storms
have changed his view on climate change, Trump told reporters: "We've had bigger
storms than this."

Hurricane patterns in the Atlantic basin, which includes the Caribbean and Gulf
of Mexico, have long been a puzzle to scientists. Even so, hurricane researchers
were perplexed by Trump's comment.

"That's just not correct," said Kerry Emanuel, a hurricane expert at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Parsing Trump's comment begins with trying to understand what Trump means by
"bigger."

Because he brought up the 1930s, Trump perhaps had in mind the infamous 1935
Labor Day hurricane that, like Irma, devastated the Florida Keys. That storm was
recorded as having the lowest air pressure of any hurricane on record in the
United States.

But there are other statistics by which hurricanes can set records. Indeed,
Hurricane Harvey went down in storm annals for having more rainfall than any
other hurricane in the continental U.S.

And Hurricane Irma maintained Category 5 wind speeds for longer than any other
hurricane for which scientists have satellite data. Jim Kossin, a hurricane
scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the
University of Wisconsin at Madison, called the duration of Irma's high wind
speeds "truly remarkable and unprecedented in the historical data."

Other recent destructive storms were record breakers. Hurricane Katrina in 2005
produced the largest storm surge ever observed in the United States after making
landfall near New Orleans. Hurricane Sandy in 2012 had the largest diameter of
any Atlantic hurricane before slamming into the Northeast.

Trump's declaration about the size of past storms relative to Irma, at least,
contradicted what he tweeted while that hurricane bore down on Florida when he
called Irma a storm "of epic proportions, perhaps bigger than we have ever
seen."

But the occurrence alone of superlative storms either in 1935 or 2017 does not
answer the question of what effect rising atmospheric and ocean temperatures
have on hurricanes.

Over the past century, the Atlantic has oscillated between busy and quiet
stretches. After a series of destructive storms in the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s,
Atlantic hurricane activity simmered down during the 1970s and 1980s before
picking up again after 1995.

"The President may have been referring to the fact that the 1930s 1950s were an
unusually active phase for hurricane activity in the Atlantic, perhaps
comparable to the one we are in now," Gabriel Vecchi, a hurricane researcher at
Princeton, wrote in an email. "That is true, though we can't say with
confidence, based on my read of the evidence, that the present phase is more or
less active than the one in the 1930 1950s."

It's that lull in the 1970s and 1980s that has puzzled scientists, who say that
could have been caused by natural shifts in large scale ocean currents or the
cooling effect of pollution in the air before the United States passed stringent
environmental laws in the 1970s. "The real anomaly is that the '70s and '80s
were unusually quiet," Emanuel said. "It's not that the '30s and '40s were
unusually active."

When it comes to the connection between storms and the warming effect of
greenhouse gases in the air, scientists say the right question is not whether
climate change causes a specific storm. The better question is whether climate
related factors make hurricanes worse.

Climate scientists generally agree a warmer climate makes storms wetter, pouring
more rain, and that sea level rises make hurricane related storm surges worse.
"I don't see hurricanes as necessarily the best piece of evidence to see that
global warming is real," Vecchi said in an email. "The fact that the planet has
been warming: surface, ocean, land, deep ocean; that ice and snow have been
melting; and that sea level has been rising are much more compelling and
unambiguous."

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Damaged homes and RVs at Sunshine Key RV Resort & Marina in Sunshine
Key, Fla., lie in the wake of Hurricane Irma on Wednesday. Joe Raedle, Getty
Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 604 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                             May 23, 2007 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Experts predict active hurricane season

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D6

LENGTH: 396  words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON -- The 2007 Atlantic hurricane season will be more active than normal
due to warmer ocean waters, with as many as 10 hurricanes, and three to five of
them could be major, the U.S. government's top climate agency predicted Tuesday.

"We are right now in ... a period of more active hurricane seasons," said Conrad
Lautenbacher, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. "It
just takes one hurricane to make it a bad year for everyone here."

NOAA foresees 13 to 17 tropical storms this season, with seven to 10 developing
into hurricanes. Three to five could be major ones of Category 3 or higher with
winds over 110 m.p.h., the agency said in its annual forecast.

An average Atlantic hurricane season brings 11 tropical storms, of which six
reach hurricane wind speed of 74 m.p.h., including two major hurricanes, NOAA
said. The hurricane season, which officially starts on June 1, typically peaks
between Aug. 1 and late October.

Earlier forecasts for the season also have predicted the return of an active
pattern this year. A year ago, just 10 storms formed and no major hurricanes
reached the United States.

The 2007 season got off to an early start this month when subtropical storm
Andrea formed off the U.S. Atlantic coast, making it the first named storm of
the year.

In the devastating 2005 Atlantic hurricane season a record four major hurricanes
hit the United States, including Katrina, which devastated New Orleans, killed
1,300 people and caused $80 billion in damage. The 2005 season generated 28
tropical storms, of which 15 became hurricanes.

The storms also slammed U.S. offshore oil and natural gas platforms and shut
coastal refineries, sending fuel prices to then-record highs.

Weather forecaster AccuWeather.com has predicted 13 or 14 tropical storms or
hurricanes would form in the Atlantic this year and six or seven could hit the
United States, with the Gulf Coast and Gulf of Mexico oil installations at high
risk.

The Colorado State University team predicted 17 storms, of which nine would
become hurricanes. WSI Corporation and London-based Tropical Storm Risk also
have predicted an active season.

Gerry Bell, a top NOAA forecaster, said while it was not possible to predict how
many hurricanes might make landfall in the U.S. this year, similar seasons have
seen between two and four storms hit the U.S. Atlantic and Gulf coasts.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2007 The Leader-Post, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 605 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                             June 3, 2010 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Stay out of harm's way when RVing in hurricane zones

BYLINE: Judy Jackson, Edmonton Journal

SECTION: RV SHOWCASE; Pg. T3

LENGTH: 687  words


June 1st is the beginning of the six-month hurricane season. Predictions are
that 2010 may be a very active season due to a waning El Nino and warmer waters
in both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.

If your RVing plans include travel to anywhere in the U.S. southeast, Atlantic
coastal states and provinces, or Gulf of Mexico states, you need to know a
little bit about hurricanes.

First, hurricanes are big, really really big. The average hurricane is 200-400
miles across. Big ones will be 550-plus miles.

Second, they don't occur suddenly, like in the movies. It takes days and weeks
for hurricanes to build from tropical depression, to tropical storm, and finally
to hurricane. There is plenty of warning before a hurricane hits.

Third, hurricanes don't travel very fast. They average 10-20 miles an hour,
though on rare occasions they can move along as fast as 70 mph or creep along at
two or three.

Fourth, hurricanes don't travel in straight lines. They take curving paths,
often looping and backtracking and zig-zagging.

Fifth, hurricanes can have tremendous amounts of rain or very little.

Sixth, hurricanes have an eye, the centre of the storm. The eye can be from five
to 120 miles across with most being 20-40. In the eye it can be eerily calm with
clear skies, fooling people into thinking the storm is over, causing them to
come outside to see the damage. However, once the eye passes over, there is the
other half of the storm still left to endure, with sudden ferocious winds coming
from the opposite direction.

Seventh, the worst winds tend to be in the northeast quadrant of the storm.

Eight, the sustained winds of a hurricane (74 to over 190 mph) are bad and cause
a lot of damage. However, hurricanes tend to spawn many tornadoes which cause
much of the damage.

Ninth, flying debris can be a bigger hazard than the wind itself.

Tenth, hurricanes are tropical but are not restricted to tropical areas, the
coast, or the summer. Some of the worst and most damaging hurricanes have hit in
the Carolinas and northward in September. August and September are the months
with the most hurricanes.

What should you do if a hurricane is headed your way? Don't risk it. Evacuate
-and do so early. Because hurricanes are so large and their path of travel is so
variable, it will take time, maybe days, to drive your way out of danger.

If you wait too long before evacuating it's likely you will get caught in a
major traffic snarl along with all the other late evacuees, and you may not
reach safety before the rain and winds of the hurricane or its outer bands reach
you.

You may run out of fuel. There will likely be fuel shortages (because everybody
is buying and stockpiling fuel) and you may not be able to buy fuel to complete
your evacuation. If you must stay put, get prepared.

- Get as much water as you can -fill bottles, tubs, tanks, buckets, anything you
can find with water.

- Have plenty of nonperishable food and food that doesn't have to be cooked,
heated, prepared or refrigerated.

- Have a good supply of drinks and juices.

- Be sure you have a mechanical can opener.

- Have a way to cook food other than with electricity, such as a grill that uses
wood, charcoal, or gas.

- Get plenty of batteries.

- Be sure you have plenty of personal items, diapers for babies.

- Have a good supply of first aid items.

- Be sure to have plenty of necessary prescription medications -- get refills.

- If at all possible, cover your windows.

- Position your RV so that it noses into the wind if you can. Be aware that the
wind direction will change as the storm moves through.

- Close vents, latch doors.

- Park close to a building on the side opposite of the expected predominent wind
direction.

- Move your RV away from trees -far enough that it can't be reached if trees are
blown over.

- Have a portable radio/TV so that you can keep up with the latest on the
hurricane track and local news and conditions.

Above all, think, use your common sense, don't take risks, be wary, be safe.

Here are some websites to check for more information about hurricanes:

http://library.thinkquest.org/5818/hurricanes.html

http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/30072578

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Journal Stock;
Colour Photo: Journal Stock;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2010 Edmonton Journal, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 606 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         Independent on Sunday (London)

                            August 15, 2004, Sunday

SPECIAL REPORT: HURRICANE CHARLEY - MIGHTY POWER FROM A BALMY SEA;
 THE SCIENCE

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR SCIENCE EDITOR Satellite image of the storm

SECTION: First Edition; NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 404 words


Hurricane Charley began life, as all hurricanes do, as a vast body of warm,
moist air gathering over a tropical ocean and reaching the critical
hurricane-forming temperature of 26C (78.8F).

This phenomenon formed the engine that drove Hurricane Charley's immense
destructive potential.

In Asia, hurricanes are known as typhoons, but each is a tropical cyclone, a
weather pattern arising from a flow of wind around a central "eye", reaching a
speed of at least 74 miles an hour.

A hurricane - the name is from "Hurican", the Carib god of evil - derives its
existence and energy from the heat and moisture of tropical oceans. Hurricanes
also need the prevailing winds near the ocean surface to be able to form their
inward spirals of air - which lead to the spiral bands of thunderstorms. The
ocean's heat causes evaporation, which forms clouds, and the warm air, heating
up still further, sends these moisture-laden clouds higher into the atmosphere.

A hurricane can pick up 2bn tonnes of moisture a day from the sea, and its
vortex is hundreds of times bigger than that of a tornado (which is a land-based
phenomenon).

The path of a hurricane can be difficult to predict. Sometimes they are steered
by the prevailing winds. But when those winds are weak, they can take an erratic
path. Hurricanes in the northern hemisphere move away from the equator in a
west-northwest direction, which is why Florida and the east coast of the US are
often in the direct line of Atlantic hurricanes.

When hurricanes hit land their full destructive potential is realised.
Destruction levels range from "minimal", the sort of damage caused by Hurricane
Earl in 1998, which uprooted a few trees, to "catastrophic", where
infrastructure can be blown away, as happened in 1969 thanks to Hurricane
Camille.

Hurricanes can cause storm surges, too. A "dome" of water up to 160km (100
miles) wide may sweep a coastline. The greatest damage occurs when the hurricane
is strong and the offshore water is shallow.

On top of this, hurricanes can unleash tremendous quantities of rain, often 15cm
(6in) or more in a few hours. Flooding is a big problem.

Hurricanes in the Atlantic have been getting more frequent since 1995: a record
33 since then, up to 1999. Global warming is unlikely to affect numbers but a
warmer world may affect hurricanes' peak intensity, creating a 5 or 10 per cent
increase in wind speed.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2004 Independent Print Ltd


                          FOCUS - 607 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                            The Independent (London)

                           September 3, 2004, Friday

HURRICANE TWICE SIZE OF CHARLEY TO HIT US

BYLINE: ANDREW BUNCOMBE IN MIAMI A satellite image of Hurricane Frances in the
Caribbean yesterday Reuters/NOAA

SECTION: Final Edition; FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 740 words


AROUND TWO-and-a-half million residents of Florida were yesterday told to
evacuate their homes and seek safety as the threat of Hurricane Frances edged
ever closer, its menacing presence less than 400 miles away.

As the hurricane's 140mph winds whipped and lashed the islands of the southern
Bahamas, almost the entire 300 miles of Florida's east coast was placed on
hurricane warning, meaning hurricane conditions were expected within 24 hours.
Experts predicted the category four hurricane would strike somewhere on
Florida's southern and central east coast late on Friday or early Saturday.

"We can't control the kind of damage that Frances is going to cause, but if
people are smart, lives can be saved," warned Max Mayfield, the director of the
National Hurricane Centre.

The first counties to order mandatory evacuation orders were West Palm Beach and
Broward where up to 500,000 residents on coastal and low-lying areas were
considered to be at risk from waves that could be up to 15 feet high. Those in
mobile homes, shown in previous hurricanes to offer no protection to the storm,
were also told to leave and find an alternative place to stay. Thousands of
tourists were also forced to leave.

Broward County Sheriff Ken Jenne told residents that if they refused to leave
evacuation zones, police would be collecting names and phone numbers for their
next of kin.

Soon after Broward County made its decision, Miami-Dade County also issued an
evacuation order for people living on the coast, including the Miami Beach
district.

In Miami Beach, with its streets of art deco hotels, people were boarding up
windows with plywood and steel, saying they were not prepared to take the chance
that the hurricane would strike further to the north. "I was around during
Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and this is pretty much the same size," said Eddie
Nunez, general manager of the Kent Hotel in Miami Beach, as workmen hurriedly
placed steel covers over the windows. "The thing that is a real worry about here
on the beach is the flooding. You cant afford to risk it."

Elsewhere along Florida's east coast, DIY and hardware stores were besieged with
people queuing up to buy timber to board up their homes and other emergency
supplies. Numerous stores along the east coast shoreline reported running out of
bottled water and canned food as thousands of people prepared to spend the
coming nights in emergency shelters.

What has added to the anxiety is the uncertainty as to where Frances will hit
the coast. Experts at the hurricane centre have been running various computer
models to try and predict which direction the hurricane will take over the next
24 hours.

Overnight on Wednesday it that appeared that the hurricane had shifted slightly
to the south in its likely course, suggesting that southern Florida would be
hit. As Thursday progressed it seemed, in turn, that the eye of the hurricane
was moving slightly to the north.

What appears certain is that Hurricane Frances will cause considerable damage
when it does strike. Images of the hurricane provided by satellite and by naval
planes flying above the storm, suggest it is at least twice the size of
Hurricane Charley which struck just three weeks ago, killing 27 people and
costing $ 7.4bn.

Experts also said that the unusually slow speed of the storm, at 15mph, meant
that when it does strike the damage will be worse than if the storm was moving
more quickly and passed through more speedily.

One of the challenges for emergency services was ensuring local people took the
warnings seriously. Yesterday the weather was calm and sunny and officials,
including Governor Jeb Bush, warned people not to be fooled.

The plans of thousands of British holidaymakers were also thrown into disarray
due to airport closures in the US. Virgin Atlantic announced that 28 flights had
been cancelled over the weekend, affecting more than 9,000 passengers booked to
fly today, tomorrow and Sunday to Orlando or Miami.

In the Bahamas, where flights were curtailed and cruise ships were forced to
switch their routes, the Prime Minister, Perry Christie said his country faced
the most intense storm in its history. "We have made every human effort to
prepare ... we are ultimately in the hands of God," he said. "We have faced many
such perils in the course of the centuries and have always pulled through. With
God's grace we will do so again."

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2004 Independent Print Ltd


                          FOCUS - 608 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                           September 16, 2005 Friday
                                FINAL C Edition

More hurricanes are growing into tempests like Katrina: Scientists say there
aren't more storms, but they are more intense

BYLINE: Tom Spears, Ottawa Citizen

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 502  words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


OTTAWA -- Hurricanes are becoming more violent worldwide, with twice as many
Category 4 and 5 hurricanes -- the strongest types -- as there were 35 years
ago, scientists are warning.

And while they won't blame the ferocity of Hurricane Katrina on this trend, they
say warmer oceans are making the recent natural disaster to hit New Orleans the
face of the future.

The number of hurricanes has not necessarily increased over the past decades,
but a greater proportion are growing into monsters like Katrina, Andrew and
Hugo, says a study by the Georgia Institute of Technology and the U.S. National
Center for Atmospheric Research to be published today in the journal Science.

"What we found was rather astonishing," said lead scientist Peter Webster of
Georgia Tech. "In the 1970s, there was an average of about 10 Category 4 and 5
hurricanes per year globally. Since 1990, the number of Category 4 and 5
hurricanes has almost doubled, averaging 18 per year globally."

He said warmer sea temperatures are feeding hurricanes, making them stronger.
Whether this is due to global warming caused by humans or whether there's a also
natural cycle involved, he won't say.

Wester admits there is a direct relationship between warmer oceans and more
violent storms, but it's not a simple relationship.

"In fact, it's difficult to explain why the total number of hurricanes and their
longevity has decreased during the last decade, when sea surface temperatures
have risen the most."

Between 1975 and 1989, the North Atlantic and Caribbean had 16 of these
hurricanes, the study says. From 1990 to 2004, the number increased to 25.

The western Pacific Ocean went from 85 to 116 strong hurricanes in the same time
frame. The south Indian Ocean went from 23 to 50, and the eastern Pacific from
36 to 49, the study says.

The study also found that Category 4 and 5 storms are making up a larger share
of the total number of hurricanes.

"Category 4 and 5 hurricanes made up about 20 per cent of all hurricanes in the
1970s, but over the last decade they account for about 35 per cent of these
storms," said Judith Curry, also of Georgia Tech.

Many environmentalists and hurricane victims have pointed to Katrina as evidence
that global warming is causing stronger storms. But scientists agree it's
impossible to read a trend in one single storm.

"If you look at Katrina you can say, 'Was that climate change or not?' I don't
know. It's an argument we could debate for a long time," says Canadian climate
scientist Gordon McBean of the University of Western Ontario.

"But in the aftermath of Katrina, the redevelopment strategy for that part of
the U.S. should factor in, in my view, the expectation that the hurricane
intensities of the future will be greater than those of the recent past."

Katrina was a Category 5 over the Gulf of Mexico, dropping slightly to Category
4 just before reaching land. Category 4 hurricanes have sustained winds of at
least 210 kilometres an hour at sea level. Category 5 winds are at least 250
kilometres an hour.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphic/Diagram: (See hard copy for graphic/diagram.)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 609 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

HURRICANE FLOYD: THE FORCES;
Monster Storm Has So Far Danced Steps Mapped by the Experts

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 918 words


In one sense, Hurricane Floyd has been a well-behaved storm. Almost always,
hurricanes deal out surprises that throw the experts off. But in the course of
its two-week life, this storm has developed, grown into a monster, moved
westward and then weakened somewhat, almost precisely as meteorologists expected
it to.

"That is rare for a hurricane," said Fred Gadomski, a meteorologist at
Pennsylvania State University.

If the storm continues to go according to predicted form, it will deal the coast
of central Florida a powerful glancing blow today and plow ashore with highly
damaging sustained winds of more than 140 miles per hour near Savannah, Ga., or
in the Carolinas tonight.

It will then churn northward through the Middle Atlantic States on Friday,
dropping prodigious amounts of rain on a region that this year has endured one
of its worst droughts ever.

"This storm has the potential to be a drought-buster," Mr. Gadomski said.

By that time, the winds should have slackened to a fraction of what they were on
Monday, when the hurricane flexed its muscles to the maximum, rivaling, at least
for a while, some of the most powerful tropical cyclones on record.

The storm owed its early muscle to almost perfect conditions for the development
of a hurricane. It was hatched as a garden-variety cluster of thunderstorms in
West Africa. It moved out into the Atlantic on Sept. 2 (just as the more
unpredictable Hurricane Dennis was hemming, hawing, zigging, zagging and
wandering for days off the North Carolina coast).

As trade winds carried the nascent hurricane westward, it picked up energy from
warm ocean water. The Atlantic has been warmer than usual this year, and the
extra heat imparted extra punch to the growing storm.

Nothing stood in the way of the increasingly more coherent hurricane as it drew
a bead on the northern and central Bahamas over the weekend. It dodged
Hispaniola, whose highlands interfere with hurricanes passing over them.

Conditions aloft were ideal. A dome of tranquil high-pressure air sat over the
ocean, blocking any strong wind streams that might shear apart a developing
hurricane.  (In years when El Nino affects the world's climate, strong winds
from the west tend to suppress hurricanes before they can get going. That is not
the case this year.)

So as the week began, the storm stood on the cusp of blossoming into one of the
all-time most powerful hurricanes -- a Category 5 on the Saffir-Simpson scale of
hurricane intensity, with sustained winds of 156 m.p.h. or higher. Only two
hurricanes that strong have made landfall in the United States: Hurricane
Camille, which struck the Mississippi Gulf Coast in 1969, and an unnamed
hurricane that blasted Florida on Labor Day 1935.

Then, yesterday, an even more powerful atmospheric force came into play. A
continental-scale mass of cool air advanced across the eastern United States
from the west. Along its leading edge, a strong stream of high-level winds,
20,000 to 30,000 feet up, blowing from the south and west, began to impinge on
the hurricane, distorting its shape. This interfered with the functioning of the
storm, inhibiting its ability to vent vertical winds from the top of its
chimneylike eye wall. The venting is essential to maintaining a hurricane's
strength.

As a result, this hurricane remained a less powerful but still extremely
dangerous Category 4, and further fluctuations in strength were anticipated. The
approaching cold front and westerly winds also put up an atmospheric barrier
that turned the storm more to the north. Otherwise, Mr. Gadomski said, it would
have barreled across South Florida just like Hurricane Andrew of 1992, the most
destructive hurricane ever to hit the United States mainland.

Whether the course and development of the storm will continue to fall in line
with predictions remains to be seen. Now that Hurricane Floyd has entered a
meteorological realm where it must interact with another powerful weather
system, the situation could get dicier.

While it looked yesterday as if Florida would be spared a direct hit, the
National Hurricane Center warned that "only a small deviation to the left would
bring the eye to the coast."

History suggests, Mr. Gadomski said, that once the storm makes landfall, the
jutting-out into the ocean of the Carolinas might tend to push the hurricane a
little eastward.  Varying computer models have produced varying versions of the
hurricane's likely course after it comes ashore.

"The pretty likely scenario," Mr. Gadomski said, "is no direct hit on Florida,
the center goes into the Carolinas and at that point begins paralleling the East
Coast."

Yesterday, the National Hurricane Center in Miami forecast a more inland route,
taking the storm's center almost due north after making landfall, past Columbia,
S.C., through North Carolina and Virginia into central Pennsylvania. But other
forecasts place the storm farther east, about on a line for Nantucket, Mass.

Some computer models show the center of the storm moving swiftly northward
through eastern North Carolina and Virginia, and eventually up the Delaware and
Hudson Valleys. The whole range of predictions shows the center moving northward
anywhere in a broad swath ranging from western Pennsylvania to New England. New
York is about in the middle of the range, with the storm's effects -- heavy rain
and strong but much diminished winds -- expected to be felt to some degree
throughout most of the Northeast on Thursday and Friday.


http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: "KEEPING TRACK: Steering the Storm"
Two factors influencing Hurricane Floyd's movement are the jet stream, which is
expected to push the storm to the northeast, ans a receding high-pressure are
over the Atlantic Ocean, which may help the hurricane move farther up the coast.
Map shows probable paths of the hurricane.

                   Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 610 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            November 29, 1993 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

STORM SEASON ENDS

BYLINE: By ELIOT KLEINBERG Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 470 words


Hurricane Andrew may have been the biggest story of 1992. But the 1993 Atlantic
hurricane season, which ends this week, killed 10 times as many people.

Hurricanes Andrew and Danielle caused 30 deaths in America and the Caribbean
last year; this year, tropical storms and hurricanes killed 308 people, most of
them in Central and South America.

The difference, hurricane experts say, is preparation and communication.

This season there were eight named storms, four of them hurricanes. Five of the
eight struck land; all five were killers.

Bret was only a tropical storm when it crossed the Venezuelan coast, but it
sparked mudslides that killed 213.

And an unnamed early-season tropical depression killed seven in Cuba.

Emily, the only hurricane to directly threaten the continental United States,
sent millions scurrying for cover along the seaboard as it marched through the
Atlantic and left forecasters guessing. It killed three people.

The public's increased tension, a legacy of Andrew, may have well been a good
thing, National Hurricane Center forecaster Max Mayfield said.

``I don't think it (Emily) took anybody by surprise,'' he said. ``People did pay
more attention.''

Forecasters say they were not surprised that smaller storms killed so many in
countries with poor communications and construction systems.

``With Emily, we were doing 30-minute updates'' which virtually every television
station along the coast carried live, Mayfield said.

Colorado State University professor William Gray, whose hurricane season
predictions carry a success rate of about 80 percent, was off a bit this year.

He had predicted 11 named storms; there were eight. He had predicted six
hurricanes; there were four. He had predicted two major hurricanes; there was
one.

Last week, Gray predicted the 1994 season will be more active than normal, with
six hurricanes.

He said two storms will reach Category 4, the strength class of hurricanes Hugo
and Andrew.

1992 / 1993 STORMS

1992: 30 KILLED

HURRICANE ANDREW, Aug. 16-28: 26 deaths in United States, three in Bahamas

HURRICANE BARNEY, Sept. 17-30: No landfall

HURRICANE CHARLEY, Sept. 21-27: No landfall

TROPICAL STORM DANIELLE, Sept. 22-26: One death in New Jersey

TROPICAL STORM EARL, Sept. 26-Oct. 3: No landfall

HURRICANE FRANCES, Oct. 23-27: No landfall

1993: 308 KILLED

TROPICAL DEPRESSION NO. 1, May 31-June 2: Seven drown in Cuba.

TROPICAL STORM ARLENE, June 18-21: Floods kill five in Mexico, one in Texas

TROPICAL STORM BRET, Aug. 4-11: Mudslides kill 213 in Venezuela

TROPICAL STORM CINDY, Aug. 14-16: Four killed in Caribbean

TROPICAL STORM DENNIS, Aug. 22-28: No landfall

HURRICANE EMILY, Aug. 21-Sept. 6: Three drown in North Carolina and Virginia

HURRICANE FLOYD, Sept. 7-10: No landfall

HURRICANE GERT, Sept. 14-21: 76 killed in Mexico and Central America

HURRICANE HARVEY, Sept. 18-21: No landfall

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Info box at end of text. Ran all editions.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Chronology

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 1993 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 611 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           December 1, 2005 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

RITA AND KATRINA: HOW HURRICANES COMPARE

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 644 words


KATRINA

Landfall: Aug. 29, 7:10 a.m. Eastern time just south of the city of Buras in
Plaquemines Parish, La.

Category 4

140-mph winds

Similar power to Hurricane Charley in 2004

RITA

Landfall: Saturday, 3:10 a.m. Eastern time near Sabine Pass, Texas.

Category 3

120-mph winds

Similar power to Hurricane Jeanne in 2004

Why Rita was no Katrina:

'It's not as powerful, not as large and it did not hit as populated an area.'

- Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center

'The main difference here is that Rita didn't affect a very populated area. If
it had gone into Galveston or New Orelans we would have seen very serious
damage.'

- Chris Lauer, meteorologist with the National Hurricane Center

'Rita came in through a bunch of ghost towns. There was nobody there to hurt or
kill.'

- R. David Paulison, acting director of FEMA

Gulf hurricanes: Expect more of them

1950s and '60s:

Gulf Coast hit hard and often, as storms such as Audrey, Donna, Betsy and
Camille came ashore.

1970s and '80s:

Gulf region had only one major hurricane, Frederic, which hit Mobile, Ala. in
1979

Since 1990:

The number of big hurricanes in the gulf region is up again and there's no end
in sight.

Says Gerry Bell, a seasonal hurricane forecaster for the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA):

'We can expect continued high levels of hurricane activities and high levels of
hurricane landfalls for the next decade, or perhaps even longer.'

Why?

Forecaster Bell says hurricane cycles are primarily driven by rainfall patterns
in Africa and the Amazon basin. 'Those rainfall patterns tend to last for 20 to
30 years at a time, and as a result, so do the wind and air pressure patterns
over the Atlantic that control hurricane activity.'

What about global warming?

Some scientists think global warming is a factor and some don't. Scientists
point out that ocean temperatures go through cycles as well, and that we're in a
warm cycle.

Max Mayfield, director of NOAA's National Hurricane Center, has said: Increased
hurricane activity 'is due to natural fluctuations' and is 'not enhanced
substantially by global warming.'

Michael Schlacter, a meteorologist with Weather 2000, says: 'The water
temperature is quite essential to the strength of a hurricane, and it only takes
2 to 4 degrees Fahrenheit to be the difference, to being able to support a
Category 3 hurricane and Category 5 hurricane. So (whether) it's global warming,
the cycles, or just a hot summer, those little bits of increase in temperature
can mean a big difference in how severe the storms are.'

Which storm was most powerful?

Hurricane Katrina killed more U.S. residents than any other storm in the past 77
years. But judged by how powerfully it blew for how long, Wilma was by far the
season's fiercest storm. That's mainly because of the Category 5 and 4 winds it
produced as it crept toward and over the Yucatan peninsula.
          Accumulated cyclone energy index*
Arlene                                  2.4
Bret                                    0.2
Cindy                                   1.3
Dennis                                 18.4
Emily                                    32
Franklin                                6.3
Gert                                    0.5
Harvey                                  5.2
Irene                                  12.7
Jose                                    0.5
Katrina                                19.8
Lee                                     0.1
Maria                                  13.9
Nate                                    7.2
Ophelia                                16.3
Phillippe                               5.9
Rita                                   25.2
Stan                                    2.4
Tammy                                   0.6
Vince                                   1.7
Wilma                                  38.6
Alpha                                   0.5
Beta                                    6.6
Arlene                                  2.4
Bret                                    0.2
Cindy                                   1.3
Dennis                                 18.4
Emily                                    32
Franklin                                6.3
Gert                                    0.5
Harvey                                  5.2
Irene                                  12.7
Jose                                    0.5
Katrina                                19.8
Lee                                     0.1
Maria                                  13.9
Nate                                    7.2
Ophelia                                16.3
Phillippe                               5.9
Rita                                   25.2
Stan                                    2.4
Tammy                                   0.6
Vince                                   1.7
Wilma                                  38.6
Alpha                                   0.5
Beta                                    6.6

* What is the 'accumulated cyclone energy index?

It is used to calculate a storm's power over its lifespan. The index is
calculated by estimating the storm's maximum sustained winds every six hours
while it's at least tropical storm strength, then adding the squares of those
speeds.

Which season was the worst?

The total energy index for all this year's storms is 218.3. That's well above
103, the threshold for an 'above normal' season. But it's less than last year's
index total of 225, or the record of 270 set in 1950.

Source: U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  HURRICANES 2005

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC (2 B&W)
 1. STAFF GRAPHIC Comparison of Rita and Katrina 2. STEVE LOPEZ/Staff Artist
2005: Most storms ever 25 named storms: Hurricane record. Source: National
Climatic Data Center

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2005 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 612 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           December 1, 2005 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 561 words


Tropical storm

Category 1

Category 3

Category 2

Category 4

Category 5

Category 4

Category 2

Category 1

Category 3

RITA

KATRINA

Tropical storm

Category 1

Tropical

storm

Category 1

Category 2

Category 3

Category 4

Category 5

Category 4

Category 3

Category 2

Category 1

Tropical

storm

The name Katrina

will probably be retired.

What about Rita?

`I think probably so,'

says Frank Lepore

of the National Hurricane Center.

Gulf of Mexico

Atlantic Ocean

ARTIST:

TEL. EXT.

DATE DUE:

RUN DATE:

SIZE:

FILE NAME:

RitaKatrinaCompare120105

The Palm Beach Post

COLOR

B&W

DESK SIGNOFF

REPORTER:

ASSIGNING EDITOR:

COPY DESK:

CDC:

X

PROOF ONLY

Steve Lopez

4528

11/18/05

12/01/05

6 col. x 11"

Rita and Katrina:

How hurricanes compare

KATRINA

Landfall:

Aug. 29, 7:10 a.m. Eastern time just south of the city of Buras in Plaquemines
Parish, La.

Category 4

140-mph winds

Similar power

to Hurricane Charley in 2004

RITA

Landfall:

Saturday, 3:10 a.m. Eastern time near Sabine Pass, Texas.

Category 3

120-mph winds

Similar power

to Hurricane Jeanne in 2004

Galveston

Houston

Beaumont

New Orleans

Lake Charles

ALA.

LA.

MISS.

FLA.

ARK.

TEXAS

OKLA.

Pensacola

West

Palm

Beach

Key West

Fort Myers

Why Rita was no Katrina:

`It's not as powerful, not as large and it did not hit as populated an area.'

- Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center

`The main difference here is that Rita didn't affect a very populated area.

If it had gone into Galveston or New Orleans we would have seen very serious
damage.'

- Chris Lauer, meteorologist with

the National Hurricane Center

`Rita came in through a bunch of ghost towns.

There was nobody there to hurt or kill.'

- R. David Paulison, acting director of FEMA

Why?

Forecaster Bell says hurricane cycles are primarily driven by rainfall patterns
in Africa and the Amazon basin. `Those rainfall patterns tend to last for 20 to
30 years at a time, and as a result, so do the wind and air pressure patterns
over the Atlantic that control hurricane activity.'

1950s and '60s:

Gulf Coast hit hard and often, as storms such as Audrey, Donna, Betsy and
Camille came ashore.

1970s and '80s:

Gulf region had only one major hurricane, Frederic, which hit Mobile, Ala. in
1979.

Since 1990:

The number of big hurricanes in the gulf region is up again and there's no end
in sight:

Says Gerry Bell, a seasonal hurricane forecaster for the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA):

`We can expect continued high levels of hurricane activities and high levels of
hurricane landfalls for the next decade, or perhaps even longer.'

STAFF GRAPHIC

Gulf hurricanes:

Expect more of them

What about global warming?

Some scientists think global warming is a factor and some don't. Scientists
point out that ocean temperatures go through cycles as well, and that we're in a
warm cycle.

Max Mayfield, director of NOAA's National Hurricane Center, has said: Increased
hurricane activity `is due to natural fluctuations' and is `not enhanced
substantially by global warming.'

Michael Schlacter, a meteorologist with Weather 2000, says: `The water
temperature is quite essential to the strength of a hurricane, and it only takes
2 to 4 degrees Fahrenheit to be the difference, to being able to support a
Category 3 hurricane and a Category 5 hurricane. So (whether) it's global
warming, the cycles, or just a hot summer, those little bits of increase in
temperature can mean a big difference in how severe the storms are.'

Tropical depression

Tropical storm

Tropical depression

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 2, 2005



CORRECTION: Tropical Storm Epsilon formed after the Hurricanes 2005 special
section in today's Palm Beach Post went to press. Epsilon is the 26th named
storm of the 2005 hurricane season.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2005 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 613 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           December 1, 2005 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                                 FINAL EDITION

WHO HAD THE BEST CRYSTAL BALL?

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 264 words


Various experts made forecasts for the 2005 hurricane season, but nobody
predicted the season's record total of 25 named storms, including 13 hurricanes
and seven major hurricanes (Category 3 or higher). Who came closest to the mark
at the start of the season?

Actual season

Named storms: 25

Hurricanes: 13

Major hurricanes: 7

William Gray

Colorado State University (May 31*)

Named storms: 15

Hurricanes: 8

Major hurricanes: 4

National Oceanic and

Atmospheric Administration (May 16**)

Named storms: 12-15

Hurricanes: 7-9

Major hurricanes: 3-5

Weather 2000 Inc. (May)

Named storms: 14-19

Hurricanes: 8-11

Major hurricanes: 4-7

University College London (June 7)

Named storms: 13.8

Hurricanes: 7.8

Major hurricanes: 3.5

*Hurricane season began June 1. Gray adjusted his forecast throughout the
season, finally settling on 20 named storms, 11 hurricanes and 6 major
hurricanes in his Oct. 3 update.

** On Aug. 2, NOAA updated its forecast to 18 to 21 tropical storms, 9 to 11
hurricanes and 5 to 7 major hurricanes.

What William Gray says about global warming: Is it behind all these hurricanes?

"I am very confident that it's not. I mean we have had global warming. That's
not a question. The globe has warmed the last 30 years, and the last 10 years in
particular. And we've had, at least the last 10 years, we've had a pick up in
the Atlantic basin major storms. But in the earlier period, if we go back from
1970 through the middle '90s, that 25-year period - even though the globe was
warming slightly, the number of major storms was down, quite a bit down."

From a Sept. 12 interview with Capitalism Magazine

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  HURRICANES 2005

CORRECTION-DATE: January 10, 2006



CORRECTION: Tropical Storm Epsilon formed after the Hurricanes 2005 special
section in today's Palm Beach Post went to press. Epsilon is the 26th named
storm of the 2005 hurricane season.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2005 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 614 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           December 7, 2005 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

STORM EXPERT RELEASES '06 FORECAST

BYLINE: By TIM O'MEILIA Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 587 words


The hurricane season won't be Greek to us next year, says William Gray's
Colorado State University hurricane-forecasting team, and chances of four major
hurricanes striking the U.S. again are slim.

Yet, Gray is predicting a double-the-average storm season in 2006 with 17 named
storms (reaching only the letter R in hurricane names), nine of which could
become hurricanes and five of which are expected to develop into major storms,
with winds of 111 mph or more.

While that's far fewer than this year's record-setting marks of 26 tropical
storms (forcing the use of the Greek alphabet to name them), 14 of which were
hurricanes and seven of which were major hurricanes, it would be more than any
other recent year.

"After this year, some people may think, '17 named storms? That's not so bad. We
can deal with that,' " said Philip Klotzbach, Gray's top research associate.
"But it's still a very active hurricane season."

By Gray's calculations, Palm Beach County has a 10.1 percent chance of a
tropical storm strike and a 3.1 percent chance of being hit by a hurricane.

Martin County has a 3.8 percent probability of a tropical storm and 1.2 percent
of a hurricane. St. Lucie and Okeechobee counties are even less.

Higher-than-normal Atlantic Ocean temperatures and a weak La Nina in the Pacific
make a busy storm season likely, the forecast said.

The historic average is 9.6 named storms, 5.9 hurricanes and 2.3 major
hurricanes.

Gray said the increased storm activity of the past few years "is likely to
continue in the Atlantic basin for the next 15 to 20 years, but the probability
of seeing another two consecutive hurricane seasons with as many land-falling
hurricanes as was witnessed in 2004 and 2005 is very low."

Klotzbach said the increased storm activity combined with a high pressure ridge
off the U.S. coast worked to steer an unusual number of storms onto the eastern
seaboard or into the Gulf Coast.

Of the 13 major storms that formed the past two years, seven struck the U.S. The
historic average is one of every three.

"The Bermuda high can't be that strong or in the same place every year,"
Klotzbach said.

He said the role of the high will be more clear in the spring. Klotzbach will
take over as the lead forecaster as Gray concentrates on global warming studies.

Still, the team said there's an 81 percent chance at least one major hurricane
will hit somewhere in the United States, compared with the average of 51
percent.

Last December, the Colorado State team forecast 11 tropical storms, which
included six hurricanes, three of which were major - less than half of what
eventually happened - but bumped their prediction up when hurricane season began
in June.

The National Hurricane Center also underestimated the record-breaking season.

"I want the predictions to be spot-on," Klotzbach said, "but the storms to stay
out in the middle of the ocean."

tim_omeilia@pbpost.com

Chances of storm landfall in 2006

The probability that Palm Beach County and the Treasure Coast will be hit by a
tropical storm or worse in 2006 are nearly three times the historic average,
according to researcher William Gray:
           Tropical Historic Hurricane Historic Major           historic
              storm     avg.                     avg. hurricane     avg.
Palm Beach    10.1%     3.8%      3.1%           1.2%      0.8%     0.3%
Martin         3.8%     1.4%      1.2%           0.4%      0.3%     0.1%
St. Lucie      1.4%     0.5%      0.3%           0.1%     <0.1%    <0.1%
Okeechobee     1.4%     0.5%      0.3%           0.1%     <0.1%    <0.1%
Palm Beach    10.1%     3.8%      3.1%           1.2%      0.8%     0.3%
Martin         3.8%     1.4%      1.2%           0.4%      0.3%     0.1%
St. Lucie      1.4%     0.5%      0.3%           0.1%     <0.1%    <0.1%
Okeechobee     1.4%     0.5%      0.3%           0.1%     <0.1%    <0.1%

Source: Colorado State University Department of Atmospheric Science

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions. Info box at end of text.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2005 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 615 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            January 27, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

TROPICAL STORM CINDY GIVEN UPGRADE TO 15TH HURRICANE

BYLINE: By ROBERT P. KING Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 317 words


The 2005 hurricane season racked up yet another milestone Thursday, when
meteorologists officially rebranded Tropical Storm Cindy as a Category 1
hurricane.

That pushes the year's total hurricane count, already an all-time record, to a
new high of 15 in the Atlantic basin.

The season's total of 27 named Atlantic storms - from Arlene to Zeta - remains
unchanged.

The National Hurricane Center reclassified Cindy in its final report on that
storm, which made landfall about 11 p.m. EDT July 5 near Grand Isle, La., south
of New Orleans.

A reexamination of radar data provided evidence that Cindy produced sustained
winds of at least 75 mph near the surface for about three hours, hurricane
center specialist Stacy Stewart said.

The threshold for hurricane strength is 74 mph.

The hurricane center has made similar changes before, declaring Tropical Storms
Gaston in 2004 and Erika in 2003 to be hurricanes after the fact.

Meteorologists also took 10 years to conclude that Andrew, which devastated
Miami-Dade County in 1992, was a Category 5 hurricane, the most catastrophic
tier of storms.

And scientists still are reexamining storms from even earlier decades.

"For the record books, we want to be as complete as possible," Stewart said.

The updated information also should improve the accuracy of computer forecasting
models.

Cindy caused one direct death, drowning an 18-year-old man in a drainage ditch
in Peachtree City, Ga., while knocking out electricity to 278,000 customers and
causing an estimated $320 million in damage, the hurricane center reported.

But it was quickly overshadowed by Hurricane Dennis, which struck the Florida
Panhandle five days later, and its impact on Louisiana was dwarfed by Hurricane
Katrina's catastrophic landfall Aug. 29.

bob_king@pbpost.com

Read the report

The report is available on the National Hurricane Center's Web site at
www.nhc.noaa.gov/

2005atlan.shtml

PalmBeachPost.com

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 616 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             June 1, 2006 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

HURRICANE SEASON IS OFFICIALLY UNDER WAY;
ARE YOU READY? DIFFICULT DAYS AHEAD, EXPERTS SAY;
MAYFIELD: SOME FOLKS NEVER WILL PREPARE

BYLINE: By ROBERT P. KING Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1320 words


Here's a phrase you never heard during 2005: "Maxie, you're doing a heck of a
job."

While other federal officials drew mockery and criticism for their roles in the
Katrina disaster, Max Mayfield and his staff at the National Hurricane Center
attracted widespread praise for their accurate forecasts of the storm's path
across the Gulf of Mexico in August. The center made similarly on-the-nose
forecasts for hurricanes such as Dennis, which struck the Panhandle in July, and
Wilma, which tore through South Florida in October.

But Mayfield, the center's director, doesn't want people to count on forecasts
always being accurate. Any weather prediction is uncertain, he says, and people
have to understand the risks.

Most of all, he hopes people will prepare. That means having your supplies handy
and evacuating if local authorities give the word.

Mayfield answered questions for The Palm Beach Post and other news organizations
at the National Hurricane Conference in April.

Q: For years, when hurricane seasons were quiet, people talked about being
unprepared because of "hurricane amnesia." Is our new problem hurricane fatigue?

A: I've got hurricane fatigue, I know that. But I think that there will always
be some people who don't respond no matter what the message is, even if you have
a mandatory evacuation called for their area.

Q: Are you frustrated by what happened in New Orleans after so many warnings
over the years about what a powerful hurricane would do there?

A: Absolutely. In addition to having a very active hurricane season, I had five
congressional hearings last year. At one of the hearings, they asked me when we
first became concerned about the levees potentially being overtopped, and I
think my answer was something like, "About 60 years ago."

I've been at the National Hurricane Center for 34 years, and we've always said
that the most vulnerable area anywhere in the Gulf of Mexico was that New
Orleans and southeast Louisiana area.

The elderly and the special-needs people, some of that I can understand. . . .
(But) there were a lot of people who did have cars that could have driven out
and they chose not to, and to some extent they tempted fate. They played Russian
roulette and lost.

This is not just unique in New Orleans. In the Florida Keys, talk about your
hurricane fatigue. I mean, those folks, some people evacuated eight times in the
last two years, and that's a real expense for people. . . . But it's the price
you pay for living in paradise.

Q: Do evacuation warnings need to be scarier?

A: People respond not really to our forecasts. . . . People really respond to
what their local officials tell them to do. I don't expect some high-level
person, certainly not the president, to give specific instructions for specific
areas. That needs to come from the local officials. . . . It's incumbent upon
the media and those local officials: They need a plan, too.

Q: What will it take to get people to obey mandatory evacuations - "You're going
to die"?

A: There was this book Isaac's Storm, about the great Galveston hurricane of
1900 (it killed as many as 10,000 people). And it had a little chapter in there
that talked about in the old days, they didn't like to use the word "hurricane"
because it, No. 1, scared the public and was bad for the economy. Sound
familiar? Not much has changed there. It is a big, big impact on the economy to
shut down businesses and schools, tremendous impact. But that's the price you
pay for living on the coastline. History teaches we've had hurricanes, we're
going to continue to have hurricanes. If you can't deal with that, you need to
move somewhere else.

Q: Is the Gulf of Mexico at highest risk this year for another bad hurricane?

A: People are asking if the steering currents will stay the same, and the bottom
line is nobody can tell you that. Sometimes they kind of go in cycles there. In
the 1940s, for example, most of the major hurricanes hit Florida. In the 1950s,
most major hurricanes hit the East Coast. In the '60s, really, the central and
western Gulf of Mexico. But in the '30s, they were scattered from Texas to
Maine. So it's not that simple.

One of my greatest concerns is one going up the East Coast, and especially up in
the Northeast. It's such a rare event up there that they don't worry about
hurricanes routinely.

The 1938 hurricane was a major hurricane, and the initial landfall was on Long
Island. Twenty-four hours before that landfall, it was east of Daytona Beach. .
. . Let's just take that example. If we have something off the Florida coast,
are we going to be able to pinpoint the Outer Banks or Long Island or Cape Cod?
Just a slight difference in that direction of motion makes a big difference in
that landfall point. With the population that we have in the Northeast, that
really scares me.

Q: Should people place more trust in the hurricane center's forecasts based on
its track record of the past few years?

A: I really worry about that. . . . The bar has been raised so high now - I
mean, on Isabel, Ivan and certainly Katrina, Rita, Dennis and Wilma - and
they're not all going to be that good. . . . That cone of uncertainty that we
always show with the track forecast, the good news there is about two-thirds of
the time the actual track of the hurricane stays within the cone. But that means
that the bad news is one-third of the time it goes outside the cone. One of
these days that's going to happen near landfall, and you'll ask me why I didn't
emphasize the uncertainty more.

Q: You've testified before Congress that you do not believe global warming is
the reason we've seen such busy hurricane seasons since 1995. Is that a
unanimous opinion among your staff?

A: It's not unanimous by any means in the scientific community. . . . There's
just not a consensus on that, and it will play out in the scientific literature
as all good science should do.

But from my perspective, even without invoking the global-warming arguments,
we're in this active period. So we need you all in the media to motivate people
to get prepared.

Q: Have you received any suggestions from above in the U.S. Commerce Department,
the hurricane center's parent agency, to toe the Bush administration's line on
global warming (as some scientists have implied)?

A: I think you're asking if I've been gagged or told to say anything -
absolutely not. It's interesting to me that some of the people saying that are
obviously not gagged, so I don't know how they can say things like that.

No one has put any pressure on me from the White House or anywhere else to say
that. And as a scientist, I'm always willing to be convinced. I'm always willing
to look at new data.

Q: Do you have any immediate plans to retire and leave Florida?

A: Not that I know of. Actually, my wife says I go up and down the coast telling
people to have a plan, and we don't have a plan for retirement. I haven't slowed
down to even think about it.

We're having a little debate in the family here. I love South Florida. I've
always joked that I don't even want to live north of Fort Lauderdale. I love the
warm.

- robert_king@pbpost.com

Max Mayfield

Director of the National Hurricane Center since 2000

Age: 57.

Other posts: Fellow of the American Meteorological Society. . . . Chairman of
the World Meteorological Organization's Regional Association IV, which supports
26 members from Atlantic and eastern Pacific countries.

Awards: American Meteorological Society's Francis W. Reichelderfer Award for
exemplary performance in preparedness training. . . . Outstanding Achievement
Award at the 2000 National Hurricane Conference. . . . ABC News 'Person of the
Week' after Hurricane Katrina. . . . Presidential Rank Award for Meritorious
Service in 2005. . . . U.S. Commerce Department Gold Medals for his work during
Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and Hurricane Isabel in 2003, and a Silver Medal for
Hurricane Gilbert in 1988.

Home: Miami-Dade County.

Family: Married with three children.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions. Info box at end of text.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (C)
 Max Mayfield (mug) Director, National Hurricane Center, Miami

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 617 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           November 30, 2006 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

QUIETEST HURRICANE SEASON SINCE '97 BREEZES TO AN END

BYLINE: By ROBERT P. KING Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 862 words


The 2006 hurricane season began amid months of warnings that calamity was just
around the corner.

Two years of hurricanes such as Charley, Frances, Jeanne and Wilma had left
Floridians with torn homes, blue roofs, skyrocketing insurance costs and a sense
of here-we-go-again as the dreaded date of June 1 rolled around. Katrina had
proven, once more, that killer storms won't spare famous American cities. And,
according to all the experts, the season was set for yet another spin in the
tropical Cuisinart.

Instead, we got lucky.

The season turned out to be the Atlantic's quietest since 1997, producing
two-thirds fewer storms than last year's record-shattering 28.

No hurricanes at all struck the U.S. coast, which felt only a trio of tropical
storms. South Florida's only slap came from a fizzling underachiever named
Ernesto.

The season officially ends today, but no Atlantic storm has reared its whirling
head since Oct. 2, when the remnants of Hurricane Isaac gasped their last
breaths east of Newfoundland.

You can thank the unexpected return of El Nino for strangling potential storms
in their cribs, meteorologists say. Meanwhile, some unusual wind patterns kept
the season's strongest hurricanes -- including two Category 3 storms -- spinning
far from land in the mid-Atlantic.

Savor your good fortune, experts advise. Just don't count on a repeat next year.

The Atlantic remains locked in its post-1995 cycle of warm ocean waters and
active hurricane seasons, and it probably will remain there for decades, most
meteorologists believe. Years like 2006 will be an exception -- a pause in which
to finish those repairs and buy more storm supplies.

"People need to prepare," said Gerry Bell, the lead hurricane season forecaster
for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. "We see time and time
again that people who have prepared fare much better than those who have not."

Of course, NOAA and other agencies didn't fare so well in forecasting the
season.

Bell's agency predicted as many as 16 tropical storms in its May forecast --
including eight to 10 hurricanes -- and as recently as August called for a 75
percent chance of an "above normal" season. One of the nation's most-quoted
hurricane soothsayers, Colorado State University researcher William Gray, had
predicted 17 storms, along with a 64 percent likelihood of a major hurricane
hitting the U.S. East Coast.

Even more alarming scenarios came from The History Channel and The Weather
Channel, which aired prime-time specials on the possibility of a catastrophic
hurricane hitting New York City.

In March, the Pennsylvania-based company AccuWeather warned that the entire
Northeast was "staring down the barrel of a gun," overdue for a hurricane that
could strike "perhaps as early as this season." Several newspapers, including
The Palm Beach Post, published reports that low-lying Tampa Bay, long untouched
by hurricanes, could become "the next New Orleans."

Those disasters still might happen, but not this year.

The Atlantic spawned nine storms, the lowest since 1997's total of eight. Only
five of this year's storms became hurricanes, the least since four formed in
2002.

The hurricane center probably will classify the season as "normal," senior
specialist Richard Pasch said. "Normal looks really quiet compared to '04 and
'05."

What went wrong -- or right -- as coastal residents might ask? Mainly,
meteorologists say they didn't expect El Nino to roar back.

El Nino, a global climate pattern signaled by warm water in the eastern Pacific,
creates hostile winds that shred hurricanes in the Atlantic and Caribbean. As
recently as March, federal meteorologists had predicted a continuation of its
opposite pattern, La Nina, which favors Atlantic hurricanes.

But by May, the cycle started to reverse. By September, the federal Climate
Prediction Center was noting a dramatic rise in ocean temperatures off Peru.

Besides the hostile winds, Bell said El Nino contributed to a pattern of stable,
sinking air that helped stifle potential storms over the Caribbean and western
Atlantic.

The season also saw strong winds pushing eastward in the upper atmosphere over
the U.S. East Coast, which helped keep Hurricanes Florence through Isaac
offshore. That was a contrast to 2004 and 2005, when storms kept plowing west
across Florida.

Meteorologists are still debating other causes for this year's doldrums. Some
suggest that huge bursts of dry, dust-laden Saharan air calmed the atmosphere
over the Atlantic, but others noted that dust storms also appeared in 2005.

Bad news: Nobody knows how long El Nino will stay.

NOAA said Monday that El Nino likely will persist through spring, and possibly
into August. But several forecasting models call for a return to "neutral"
conditions -- similar to those of 2005 -- by April, the Australian Bureau of
Meteorology says.

Bell said that since 1995, when the Atlantic's active cycle began, only three
years have produced below-average numbers of hurricanes: 1997, 2002 and this
year. Each featured an El Nino.

"Pretend we're in 2002," he said. "Ask the same questions: What will happen in
2003, 2004, 2005? ... It's far too early to make any inferences."

bob_king@pbpost.com

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Ran all editions.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (C) & GRAPHIC (C) & MAP (2 C)
1. DAVID SPENCER/Staff photo In August, a surfer rides a wave from Tropical
Storm Ernesto off Chastain Beach in Stuart. Forecasters had predicted a busy
hurricaneseason, but it turned out to be one of the Atlantic's quietest. 2.
BRENNAN KING/Staff Artist The calm before the storms? This year's Atlantic
hurricane season was the quietest since 1997 and only the third since the
mid-1990s to produce a below-average number of hurricanes. All three calm years
occurred during El Nino events. But meteorologists warn that the conditions that
have produced hectic seasons almost every year since 1995 are still in place and
could continue for decades. Sources: National Hurricane Center, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration 3. BRENNAN KING/Staff Artist What a difference a
year makes This year's Atlantic hurricane season produced only nine tropical
storms, including five hurricanes. Meteorologists call those totals slightly
below average, but they seemed eerily calm after last year's record-breaking 28
storms. 2006 hurricane season 2005 hurricane season 4. BRENNAN KING/Staff Artist
El Nino to the rescue The warm-water phenomenon known as El Nino returned to the
eastern Pacific this year, increasing the amount of wind shear that tore apart
potential hurricanes in the tropical Atlantic and Caribbean. Separately, unusual
wind patterns off the U.S. East Coast in September helped steer storms away from
land. Sources: National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 618 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                  The Guardian

                     October 5, 2016 Wednesday 11:00 AM GMT

Hurricanes will worsen as planet warms and sea levels rise, scientists warn;
Some say Hurricane Matthew, which slammed Haiti and is headed towards the US, is
the sort of fierce lashing that will be more common due to climate change

BYLINE: Oliver Milman

SECTION: WORLD NEWS

LENGTH: 566 words


Major storms such as Hurricane Matthew, which has slammed into Haiti and is now
headed towards the US, will grow in menace as the world warms and sea levels
rise, scientists have warned.

Related:  Hurricane Matthew: at least six feared dead in Haiti as violent storm
hits

Hurricane Matthew is already feared to have caused seven deaths after it hit
Haiti and the Dominican Republic on Tuesday, bringing 145mph winds, pounding
rain and storm surges to coastal communities.

The category 4 storm, the strongest hurricane to hit Haiti in 50 years, is
expected to surge northwards towards Florida's east coast and up the
south-eastern US coast by the weekend. It follows September's Hurricane Hermine,
which was the first hurricane to hit Florida in nearly 11 years.

While the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's prediction of a
"near-normal" Atlantic hurricane season is still on track, scientists have
pointed to Hurricane Matthew as the sort of fierce lashing that will become more
common due to climate change.

There was previously far more certainty amongst climate scientists over the
increase of temperatures than trends in hurricanes, but government officials are
now confident enough to say there has been a "substantial increase" in Atlantic
hurricane activity since the 1980s, with the destruction set to ratchet up
further as the world warms.

"We expect to see more high-intensity events, category 4 and 5 events, that are
around 13% of total hurricanes but do a disproportionate amount of damage," said
Kerry Emanuel, a climate scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
"The theory is robust and there are hints that we are already beginning to see
it in nature."

Hurricanes draw their energy from the ocean, which is currently acting like a
sponge for the extra heat accumulating in the atmosphere due to human activity.
Warming is thereby supercharging hurricane wind speed, with increased moisture
delivering buckets of extra rain to affected areas. Parts of Haiti are expected
to get 3ft of rainfall from Hurricane Matthew.

Some studies have found that while the number of hurricanes may dip slightly in
the future, the most destructive events will actually increase.

"There will be subtleties with hurricane frequency - it's likely the most
intense ones will increase, while it's unclear what the the weak or moderate
ones will do," said James Done, a project scientist and Willis fellow at the US
National Center for Atmospheric Research.

"The message is that hurricanes that do occur in the future, the major ones,
will be stronger. Category four and five hurricanes could double or triple in
the coming decades."

But while the wind speed may be climbing, it won't, on its own, prove the
greatest killer. The seas are rising at their fastest rate in 2,800 years, with
water disproportionately piling up on the east coast of the US. Storm surges and
flooding caused by hurricanes will be fueled by this heightened sea level,
posing a growing threat to life and limb.

"Storm surges and flooding are big killers, so this is a big worry," Emanuel
said. "If Hurricane Sandy occurred 100 years earlier it may not have flooded
lower Manhattan because the sea was about 1ft lower in 1912.

"We expect another 3ft in sea level rise by the end of the century, so we should
expect steadily increase damage. People moving to the coast really need to be
aware of climate change."

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 619 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 irishmirror.ie

                    September 6, 2017 Wednesday 6:01 AM GMT

'Extremely dangerous' 185-mph Hurricane Irma hits Caribbean islands and is so
powerful it's been picked up by earthquake monitors;
Hurricane Irma is now so powerful it has been causing seismic activity as it
passes over the Caribbean and is even registering on earthquake monitors

BYLINE: By Natalie Evans

SECTION: NEWS,WORLD NEWS; Version:1

LENGTH: 1181 words


Hurricane Irma has become the most powerful ever recorded in the Atlantic as it
barrels down on the British Virgin Islands.

Around 30,000 islanders, nearly all British citizens, are directly in the path
of the monster storm.

Nine emergency shelters were opened and Governor J.U. Jaspert has now advised
everyone to take stay indoors and away from the "extremely dangerous" hurricane.

Irma is a Category 5 hurricane, with sustained winds of 185mph. The storm is now
so powerful it has been causing seismic activity as it passes over the Caribbean
and is showing on seismometers - the equipment used to measure earthquakes.

Some experts say it is about to exceed the maximum theoretical intensity of a
hurricane - leading to suggestions a new 'Category 6' should be added to the
traditional Saffir-Simpson scale to accommodate it.

Bahamas prime minister Hubert Minnis has ordered a mandatory evacuation of some
islands.

Live: Hurricane Irma hits Caribbean islands with winds of 185mph as forecasters
warn of life-threatening wind and rain

WATCH LIVE: Livestream as Hurricane Irma takes force

Residents and tourists in Mayaguana, Inagua, Crooked Island, Acklins, Long Cay
and Ragged Island will be flown out on Wednesday, just before the storm hits.

Mr Minnis said it will be the largest hurricane evacuation in the history of the
Bahamas and anyone who does not leave will be in "great danger".

The strongest hurricane to ever to make landfall on the US coast was the 'Labor
Day' hurricane of 1935 which hit Florida Keys.

Around 500 people were killed and there were reports of bodies being swept from
one end of Florida to the other.

Hurricane Andrew, the most recent Category 5 storm, left the Miami-Dade area
devastated in 1992.

tweet1

tweet

And since then, the city has transformed, adding huge numbers of residents and
reducing the wetlands area which would buffer the storm.

Earlier, business magnetRichard Bransonrevealed he has decided to remain on his
private island in the British Virgin Islands during the storm.

The billionaire says he's survived two hurricanes on the island thanks to his
specialised 'hurricane proof' buildings - but says "nothing can withstand" a
Category 5 storm.

Branson wrote onhis blog: "Generally speaking, we have one hurricane in the
British Virgin Islands around every 10 years.

"Fortunately, most of them drift north of us, but this one is coming straight
for us, with the eye of the storm heading straight for Necker, Moskito Island
and Virgin Gorda.

Hurricane Irma upgraded to 'extremely dangerous' Category 5 with winds of 175mph
set to batter US

"Obviously things can change - hopefully they do, as a category five hurricane
hasn't hit the BVI [British Virgin Islands] full on before.

"On Necker Island we have constructed really strong buildings (with hurricane
blinds) that should be able to handle extreme weather pretty well, though with a
Category 5 hurricane almost nothing can withstand it.

"We had some lovely guests staying on Necker Island who have cut their trip
short for safety reasons, and another group of guests have also postponed.

"I will be on Necker alongside our team, as I have been on the three times we
have had hurricanes over the past 30 years."

Branson, who said he was on the island in 2010 when it was hit by Hurricanes
Earl and Otto, went on to share his concerns for local residents and wildlife.

Hurricane Irma filmed from space looks terrifying

He added: "In the past, many British Virgin Islanders have shrugged off
hurricanes, stayed at home and not gone to shelters.

"This time the BVI Government and the BVI Tourist board have been very active
and providing advice to the local population."

Irma is set to hit Necker Island less than two weeks after Hurricane Harvey
killed 60 people when it battered the United States and surrounding territories.

Hurricane Irma will reach Leeward Islands, east of Puerto Rico, tonight and
could batter Florida by the weekend.

British Airways is already preparing for the worst and flying tourists off the
Caribbean island of Antigua.

A BA spokeswoman told Mirror.co.uk: "We have provided a special flight to
Antigua to get our customers home before Hurricane Irma arrives on the island.

"The Antigua Airport authorities say that operations will be significantly
impacted today, so we have offered all affected customers rebooking options. We
are keeping our flights to other Caribbean islands under review."

Florida has declared an emergency and President Donald Trump has "offered the
full resources of the federal government as Floridians prepare for Hurricane
Irma," reports CNN.

"In Florida, we always prepare for the worst and hope for the best, and while
the exact path of Irma is not absolutely known at this time, we cannot afford to
not be prepared," said Governor Rick Scott in a statement.

Water is expected to rise 9ft (3metres) above normal levels as the storm brings
a predicted 10 inches of rain and "large and destructive waves".

'No way to prevent' chemical plant EXPLODING after it was flooded in Hurricane
Harvey

Irma is forecast to strengthen even more over the next 48 hours.

Forecasters say they cannot predict the exact path the storm will take but,
islands in Irma's path have been warned to brace themselves in preparation for
the intensifyingstormthat could pummel the area with life-threatening winds and
torrential rain.

Hurricane advisories have been issued for territories that dot the West Indies,
including the Leeward Islands, the British and US Virgin Islands and Puerto
Rico.

Not another one! Storm Irma forms in Atlantic and is expected to become
hurricane later this week

Irma was initially a Category 4 hurricane on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale,
meaning sustained winds of 130-156 miles per hour (209-251 kph) with
"catastrophic" outcomes.

This includes the uprooting of trees and downed power lines, water and
electricity outages, and significant property damage causing uninhabitable
conditions, according to the National Hurricane Center.

The NHC said: "There is an increasing chance of seeing some impacts from Irma in
the Florida Peninsula and the Florida Keys later this week and this weekend.

"In addition, rough surf and dangerous marine conditions will begin to affect
the southeastern U.S. coast by later this week."

Texas and Louisiana residents are still reeling from the catastrophic effects of
the deadly Hurricane Harvey.

Harvey struck Texas as a Category 4 hurricane on August 25 and dumped several
feet of rain, destroying thousands of homes and businesses.

In preparation for the storm, the economically struggling Puerto Rico government
on Monday declared a state of emergency and activated the National Guard.

"Despite the economic challenges Puerto Rico is facing, the approved budget has
$15 million for the emergency fund," Governor Ricardo Rosselló said in a
statement.

The island of about 3.4 million people has 456 emergency shelters prepared to
house up to 62,100 people.

To help residents prepare for the storm, the Puerto Rican government activated a
price freeze on basic necessities, including food and water, medicines, power
generators and batteries.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBMGNIRIS


                      Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 620 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 irishmirror.ie

                    September 6, 2017 Wednesday 11:30 PM GMT

Triple threat of hurricanes set to batter Caribbean, Mexico and US leaving a
catastrophic scale of devastation in their wake;
Hurricanes Jose and Katia were upgraded from tropical storms today as Irma
smashed into the Caribbean, British Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, killing at
least three people

BYLINE: By Rachel Bishop

SECTION: NEWS,WORLD NEWS; Version:1

LENGTH: 546 words


A triple threat of hurricanes are set to batter the Caribbean, Mexico and US,
leaving a catastrophic scale of devastation in their wake.

Hurricanes Jose and Katia were upgraded today as Hurricane Irma continued to
surge towards Florida.

Irma has killed at least three people after it smashed into the Caribbean,
British Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico today, as one of the strongest storms
recorded in the Atlantic.

Hurricane Jose is set to follow straight behind it , while the two were also
being shadowed by Hurricane Katia that formed in the Gulf of Mexico on Tuesday.

Jose will pass over the Lesser Antilles early next week, before heading straight
for America, according to data from The National Hurricane Center.

Hurricane Irma live: 185mph winds kill three people as THIRD huge storm follows
fast behind

"The movement is slow and erratic towards the southeast, at a speed of 7 kph
(4.4 mph) because of its interaction with a cold front located in the north of
the Gulf of Mexico," the head of Mexico's water authority Conagua, Roberto
Ramirez said.

Five days of rain are forecast for most of Mexico's territory due to the effects
of Katia, Hurricane Irma and Tropical Storm Jose, said Luis Felipe Puente, the
head of Mexico's national emergency services.

Hurricane Irma has killed at least two people in French territories and one in
Barbuda after it smashed into the Caribbean early this morning as one of the
strongest storms recorded in the Atlantic.

The Caribbean island of Barbuda has been almost entirely wiped out by Hurricane
Irma, with "90 per cent" of all buildings destroyed.

The devastating news was confirmed by an emotional President Gaston Browne to
local TV and radio station ABS.

"It is a total devastation - Barbuda now is literally a rubble," he said.

Island of Barbuda left 'a rubble' by Hurricane Irma as President says 90 per
cent of buildings destroyed

The storm hit the British Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico this evening and is
expected to hit Florida by Sunday - just days before Hurricane Jose is set to
surge behind it.

Category 5 Hurricane Irma has broken world records after raging at 185mph for
more than 24 hours.

Its force was so strong it was being picked up on earthquake monitors - and it
has even been spotted from the International Space Station.

Jose strengthened to a hurricane today and could become a major Category 3 storm
by Friday, the US National Hurricane Center said.

Jose was about 1,040 miles (1,675 km) east of the Lesser Antilles this evening,
packing maximum sustained winds of 75mph.

It is expected to follow the path of Hurricane Irma, heading towards the US next
week.

Katia, a storm off the Mexican coast in the Gulf of Mexico, strengthened into a
hurricane on Wednesday, the US National Hurricane Center (NHC) said.

Katia is 185 miles (295 km) east of Tampico, Mexico, packing maximum sustained
winds of 75 miles per hour (120 kph) and some

additional strengthening is forecast during the next 48 hours, the NHC added.

Models so far show it remaining in the southern Gulf in coming days.

Katia is expected to reach the coastline of oil-producing Veracruz state
sometime between Friday and Saturday as a category 1 hurricane, said Ramirez.

Category 1 is the weakest hurricane designation by the NHC, with sustained winds
of up to 95 mph.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBMGNIRIS


                      Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 621 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 irishmirror.ie

                     September 7, 2017 Thursday 5:49 PM GMT

Billionaire Richard Branson describes "traumatic time" on Necker Island as
185mph Hurricane Irma sends 'doors and windows flying 40 feet away';
In an emotional, first-person account, the billionaire Virgin boss describes how
his luxurious Necker Island home has been "completely and utterly devastated"

BYLINE: By Sophie Evans

SECTION: NEWS,WORLD NEWS; Version:3

LENGTH: 1701 words


Richard Branson has given a heartbreaking, first-person account ofHurricaneIrma,
saying the 185mph storm has sent doors and windows "flying 40 feet away".

In an emotional message, the billionaire Virgin boss describes how his luxurious
Necker Island home has been "completely and utterly devastated" by the
hurricane.

He says entire houses and trees have vanished - and vows to do whatever possible
to support and assist the local community in "this extremely testing time".

"It is a traumatic time here in the British Virgin Islands," says MrBranson, who
spoke the words to Virgin colleagues via a satellite phone that was "just about
working".

"Hurricane Irma is continuing a path of destruction that brought the eye of the
storm to Necker Island, Moskito Island and the whole surrounding area."

He adds: "I have never seen anything like this hurricane.

Richard Branson son posts 'traumatic' video of Hurricane Irma

Catastrophic eye of the storm seen from space as Hurricane Irma prepares to
smash into US mainland

"Necker and the whole area have been completely and utterly devastated. We are
still assessing the damage, but whole houses and trees have disappeared. Outside
of the bunker, bathroom and bedroom doors and windows have flown 40 feet away."

Mr Branson, who bunkered down in a concrete wine cellar with family and friends,
confirms that all of the team on Necker and Moskito Island are "safe and well".

"We took shelter from the strongest hurricane ever inside the concrete cellar on
Necker and very, very fortunately it held firm," he says. "Our thoughts go out
to everyone affected by the disaster elsewhere in the BVI, Caribbean and
beyond."

He also explains: "I'm speaking these words from a satellite phone that is just
about working, but all other communications are down."

Mr Branson's account was posted onVirgin's website. In it, the billionaire urges
others in the Category 5 hurricane's path to "put safety first".

Aerial footage of Caribbean island of Saint Martin shows huge trail of
destruction left behind by 185mph Hurricane Irma

"For those who are still in the path of Hurricane Irma, and Hurricane Jose to
come, I cannot emphasise enough how important it is to put safety first and
prepare as strongly as possible," he says. "Having seen first-hand the power of
this storm, please ensure you stay inside, ideally in organised shelters or
other solid concrete structures with water, supplies and emergency contact
plans."

He adds: "We will do whatever we can to support and assist our local community
through this extremely testing time. If our really strong buildings sustained
such damage, I am so worried for elsewhere in the BVI and Caribbean."

Virgin Atlantic's Antigua flight was today packed with "essential items" to aid
the recovery effort, and Virgin has made a donation to the British Red Cross.

Mr Branson thanked everyone who had sent well wishes and support.

Earlier, his son, Sam Branson, had confirmed no one was hurt on Necker in an
Instagram post.

Deadly 185mph Hurricane Irma flattens Caribbean islands leaving at least nine
dead and thousands homeless as it thunders towards Florida

He said: "Glad to say that all humans on Necker are OK although a lot of
buildings destroyed and main house in uninhabitable."

Sam went on to say that his thoughts are with other Caribbean islands who have
not fared as well.

"Very concerned for our friends and everyone on the neighbouring islands and
people in its path," he added.

"Please don't take this hurricane lightly if it is heading your way.

"If your building is not very solid, do find somewhere safe! Homes can be
rebuilt but lives can't."

Hurricane Irma reached the Leeward Islands, east of Puerto Rico, yesterday
andflattened Barbuda, killing at least eight people, before hitting Necker
Island.

Earlier, the Virgin boss had described his preparations for Irma.

'Pray for me': Brit trapped in stairwell as Hurricane Irma batters Caribbean
live tweets 'apocalyptic' storm with "thunderous sonic boom noises"

"We are expecting to get the full force of the hurricane in around five hours'
time, when we will retreat to a concrete wine cellar under the Great House," Mr
Branson wrote on his blog.

"Knowing our wonderful team as I do, I suspect there will be little wine left in
the cellar when we all emerge."

The business mogul added that everyone at the estate slept in just two rooms
last night as they prepared for the extreme weather.

"The strength of this hurricane is unheard of," he said.

"The atmosphere is eerie but beautiful. Everyone is willing the eye of the storm
to veer away from the BVI in these last few hours.

"Our main concern is safety, for everyone here and for all the people in the BVI
and in the path of the hurricane.

Take a grand tour of Richard Branson's Necker Island

"All of us slept together in two rooms. I haven't had a sleepover quite like it
since I was a kid.

"Strangely, it's a privilege to experience what is turning into possibly the
strongest storm ever with such a great group of young people.

"We were listening to the parrots in their boxes in the next room chattering
away. Watching the tortoises congregating together, as if they sense what is
coming our way."

Mr Branson described how he had survived two hurricanes on the island thanks to
his specialised 'hurricane proof' buildings.

But he said "nothing can withstand" a Category 5 storm.

He wrote: "Generally speaking, we have one hurricane in the British Virgin
Islands around every 10 years.

"Fortunately, most of them drift north of us, but this one is coming straight
for us, with the eye of the storm heading straight for Necker, Moskito Island
and Virgin Gorda.

Hurricane Irma upgraded to 'extremely dangerous' Category 5 with winds of 175mph
set to batter US

"Obviously things can change - hopefully they do, as a category five hurricane
hasn't hit the BVI [British Virgin Islands] full on before.

"On Necker Island we have constructed really strong buildings (with hurricane
blinds) that should be able to handle extreme weather pretty well, though with a
Category 5 hurricane almost nothing can withstand it.

"We had some lovely guests staying on Necker Island who have cut their trip
short for safety reasons, and another group of guests have also postponed.

"I will be on Necker alongside our team, as I have been on the three times we
have had hurricanes over the past 30 years."

Branson, who said he was on the island in 2010 when it was hit by Hurricanes
Earl and Otto, went on to share his concerns for local residents and wildlife.

He added: "In the past, many British Virgin Islanders have shrugged off
hurricanes, stayed at home and not gone to shelters.

Hurricane Irma filmed from space looks terrifying

"This time the BVI Government and the BVI Tourist board have been very active
and providing advice to the local population."

Irma hit Necker Island less than two weeks after Hurricane Harvey killed 60
people when it battered the United States and surrounding territories.

It will likely batter Florida by the weekend.

Florida has declared an emergency and President Donald Trump has "offered the
full resources of the federal government as Floridians prepare for Hurricane
Irma".

"In Florida, we always prepare for the worst and hope for the best, and while
the exact path of Irma is not absolutely known at this time, we cannot afford to
not be prepared," said Governor Rick Scott in a statement.

Water is expected to rise 9ft (3metres) above normal levels as the storm brings
a predicted 10 inches of rain and "large and destructive waves".

'No way to prevent' chemical plant EXPLODING after it was flooded in Hurricane
Harvey

Irma was initially a Category 4 hurricane on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale,
meaning sustained winds of 130-156 miles per hour (209-251 kph) with
"catastrophic" outcomes.

This includes the uprooting of trees and downed power lines, water and
electricity outages, and significant property damage causing uninhabitable
conditions, according to the National Hurricane Center.

The NHC said: "There is an increasing chance of seeing some impacts from Irma in
the Florida Peninsula and the Florida Keys later this week and this weekend.

"In addition, rough surf and dangerous marine conditions will begin to affect
the southeastern U.S. coast by later this week."

Shocking: Hurricane Irma strikes St Maarten

The Red Cross has released an initial 120,000 Swiss francs from its Disaster
Relief Emergency Fund to help some of the islands affected and volunteers have
started making their way to Florida.

Walter Cotte, Americas regional director of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, described the forecast as "extremely worrying".

"We are anticipating major impacts on a number of islands, and we are preparing
to respond to needs that may arise," he said.

"We are especially worried that Irma could affect areas that have been suffering
with severe rainfall in the past months.

"One of the main challenges is going to be logistical, given the isolation of
some the islands. We need to ensure a reliable channel for relief efforts in the
aftermath of the hurricane."

By Christopher Bucktin

A host of celebrities, including Johnny Depp, Eric Clapton, Eddie Murphy and
President Trump, have private islands and homes in Hurricane Irma's path.

The historic Category 5 hurricane is sweeping through the Caribbean and has
already left Mr Branson's Necker Island home in the British Virgin Islands
"uninhabitable".

Hollywood stars Johnny Depp and Eddie Murphy both own private islands in the
Bahamas, as does illusionist David Copperfield.

Their homes in Little Hall's Pond Cay, Rooster Cay and Musha Cay are in Irma's
crosshairs set to be ravaged by wind and rain over the coming days.

The hurricane could also slam into villas owned by Rolling Stones legend Keith
Richards on Parrot Cay and Die Hard star Bruce Willis in Turks and Caicos.

Mick Jagger's property on Mustique - an island in St Vincent and the Grenadines
- as well as Oprah Winfrey and Eric Claton's homes on Antigua, and Chelsea owner
Roman Abramovich's pad on St Barts, are also in the deadly hurricane's path.

Donald Trump's multi-million pound Chateau des Palmiers, or Castle of the Palms,
was in the direct path of Irma as it hit the island of St Martin yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBMGNIRIS


                      Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 622 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             Southeast Texas Record

                             August 24, 2015 Monday

Insurance group warns hurricane season not over yet

BYLINE: David Yates

LENGTH: 374 words


While hurricane season may have officially kicked off June 1, the Insurance
Council of Texas is warning gulf coast residents that some of the strongest and
most damaging storms struck after August.

"We are concerned about the safety of every Texan during hurricane season," said
Mark Hanna, an ICT spokesman, in an Aug. 17 press release.

"Even if a hurricane in the Gulf of Mexico is only a 'Category two' coastal
residents should still make sure they're prepared to protect their property and
evacuate if needed. Texas homeowners and businesses who have been through a
hurricane can tell you how devastating the storms can be."

A "Cat two" refers to the category strength of a hurricane with winds ranging
from 96 to 110 mph. Hurricanes are categorized on a scale from one to five, with
five being the strongest. The category strength of a storm, however, makes no
reference to the hurricane's storm surge or rainfall amounts.

The last major storm to strike Texas, Hurricane Ike in 2008, was a "Cat two"
hurricane, and it claimed more than 100 lives and completely wiped 3,000 homes
and businesses off the Bolivar Peninsula, according to the press release.

Hurricane Ike knocked out power for more than a week to hundreds of thousands of
residents living in the area. Afterwards, city officials in Galveston would not
allow evacuees to return to their homes for more than a week because of the
putrid conditions from floodwaters that had created a health hazard.

Despite the damage caused by Hurricane Ike, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration did not list it as a major hurricane, even though it was by far
the costliest storm to ever hit Texas.

A hurricane must be a "Cat three" or stronger to be listed as a major hurricane.

To adequately prepare for the onslaught of a hurricane, ICT recommends that
coastal residents and businesses have an evacuation plan and make sure their
insurance is up to date.

A person cannot buy a windstorm policy if a named storm is already in the Gulf
of Mexico. And, there is a 30-day waiting period before a flood insurance policy
goes into effect.

ICT is the largest state insurance trade association in the country consisting
of approximately 500 property and casualty insurers writing business in Texas.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2015 SoutheastTexasRecord.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 623 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

U.S. forecasters predict major hurricane season: Storm season starts next week
and runs through November

BYLINE: Shannon D. Harrington, With reporting by Margot Habiby in Dallas,
Samantha Zee in San Francisco and Kim Chipman in Washington., Bloomberg News
Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 870  words


As many as six major hurricanes will form in the Atlantic Ocean in 2006, U.S.
forecasters said Monday, predicting another intense year of storms on the heels
of the most destructive and one of the deadliest seasons ever.

The season, which begins next week and ends in November, will yield 13 to 16
named storms in all, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said.

As many as 10 storms will strengthen into hurricanes, packing winds of at least
74 miles (119 kilometres) per hour, NOAA predicted. A so-called major storm has
winds of at least 111 mph.

While that would be less severe than last year's record-breaking season,
officials said ocean and climate conditions suggest that above-average hurricane
activity may continue for two more decades.

Other forecasters already had predicted another intense hurricane season as
Atlantic Ocean surface temperatures remain warmer than average.

"That's not good news, and the message is very clear: We need to be prepared,"
Max Mayfield, director of coastal and marine resources at NOAA's National
Hurricane Center in Miami, said during a news conference.

Four major storms hit the U.S. last year, including Hurricane Katrina, which
submerged New Orleans and devastated the central Gulf Coast, causing an
estimated $80 billion in damage and killing almost 1,600 people. An average
season has 11 named storms, six of them hurricanes, two of them major.

ECLIPSING THE 1940S

During the past five years, more major hurricanes already have hit the U.S. than
in any decade since the 1950s, according to NOAA data. If this year's forecasts
are right, this may become the fiercest decade for hurricanes on record,
eclipsing the 10 major hurricanes that struck the U.S. in the 1940s.

Last year set the record for total hurricanes with 15, topping the 12 hurricanes
of 1969. The hurricane season, which officially ends Nov. 30, continued into the
new year.

All but two of the last 11 years have produced above-average numbers of tropical
storms or hurricanes as Atlantic Ocean temperatures have remained above normal.

NOAA forecasters say factors that help disrupt storms -- including so-called
wind shear that breaks them up and trade winds that prevent them from forming --
will be weak this year.

"We'll be in this cycle until at least 2015," AccuWeather forecaster Joe
Bastardi said.

He predicted last week hurricanes will strike the U.S. five times, with North
Carolina, South Carolina, New York, New Jersey and the southern New England
coastlines facing the most risk.

Three of those landfalls will be from major hurricanes, according to Bastardi,
who is the firm's chief hurricane forecaster.

"We are in a very, very ramped up cycle of hurricane activity," Bastardi said in
an interview.

The government forecasters said they can't accurately predict how many
hurricanes will come ashore.

Based on past trends, they said, it is "statistically within reason" that two to
four of them may hit the coastal U.S., Conrad C. Lautenbacher, undersecretary of
commerce for oceans and atmosphere, said during the news conference. He
cautioned against reading too much into the numbers, though.

"It only takes one hurricane in your neighborhood to make it a bad season," he
said.

Colorado State University scientists said in April they expect nine hurricanes
to form this season, five of them major. The probability that at least one of
the major hurricanes hits the East Coast is 81 percent, scientists Philip
Klotzbach and William Gray said. Florida has a 64 percent chance of being hit
with a major hurricane, they said.

Other historical patterns suggest that East Coast states could be in for a
beating this year, Bastardi said.

And the western Gulf of Mexico coast could be hit early in the season, he said,
bad news for oil and natural gas production, which still hasn't fully recovered
from the damage done during Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.

As of May 3, 22 percent of the Gulf region's oil production capacity remained
closed because of the hurricanes, a

Minerals Management Service report showed.

Thirteen per cent of gas production remained shut, the report said.

At one point after Katrina, all of the region's oil production and more than 80
percent of its gas output was shut. Crude oil, natural gas and heating oil
prices rose to record highs.

As much as 80 per cent of New Orleans was flooded after Katrina overwhelmed the
city's levee system in August.

Winds of about 200 kilometres per hour levelled entire towns in Mississippi.
Thousands of residents remain displaced.

The hurricane forecast renewed debate between climate experts over what, in the
long term, is driving such an increase in storms and their intensity. Bastardi
and Colorado State's Gray both have said history suggests it is part of a
natural cycle.

At a news conference Monday hosted by Clear the Air, an affiliate of the
national Environmental Trust, others disagreed.

Carbon dioxide and other so-called greenhouse gases spewed from cars, power
plants and other sources are making ocean surfaces hotter, said Kerry Emanuel, a
climate professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, who
last year released a study showing the correlation between storm intensity and
increases in sea surface temperature.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2006 Times Colonist, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 624 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 24, 2011 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hurricane Is Seen as Heading Toward East Coast

BYLINE: By DON VAN NATTA Jr.; Timothy Williams contributed reporting from New
York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 696 words


MIAMI -- Hurricane-preparedness is now all about watching the cone. And on
Tuesday, Hurricane Irene's tracking cone curved just far enough away from the
Florida peninsula to cause emergency officials up and down the state to breathe
a cautious sigh of relief.

''We are out of the cone at the moment, though we have seen it wobble in the
past,'' said Peter Elwell, the town manager in Palm Beach, Fla., referring to
the constantly evolving cone on forecast maps that designates a hurricane's
probable path. ''The cone moving away from us is a mixed bag: you know the
bullet you are dodging is going to hit somebody else.''

The mouth of the dangerous storm's cone took dead aim on Tuesday at North
Carolina, where officials scrambled to get ready. But federal and state
authorities warned residents in other places not to be complacent; they said the
hurricane would probably affect nearly every state along the East Coast.

Forecasters at the National Hurricane Center here said they were becoming
increasingly confident that Hurricane Irene, a Category 1 storm on the
Saffir-Simpson wind scale late Tuesday with sustained winds of 90 miles per
hour, would gradually increase in strength over the warm Gulf Stream waters. The
Bahamas will bear the brunt of the storm over the next several days before it is
expected to veer on a more northward path toward the Carolinas, forecasters
said.

The huge hurricane would most likely make landfall in North Carolina by the
weekend, they said.

''There is still a lot of uncertainty,'' said Jorge Aguirre, a 17-year veteran
meteorologist at the National Hurricane Center. ''These things are often
unpredictable. I would not say Florida is completely off the hook just yet. It's
going to be a very close call.''

Hurricane Irene, the first major storm of the Atlantic hurricane season, could
threaten ''the entire East Coast,'' W. Craig Fugate, head of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, said Tuesday in a conference call with reporters.

The storm was nudged away from its 10-m.p.h. path toward Florida by weakness in
a high pressure system parked over the southeastern United States, forecasters
said. If that system changes, the hurricane could still graze Florida's
coastline, they said.

The last significant hurricane to strike Florida was the ferocious and highly
destructive Wilma, in 2005.

Up and down the Eastern Seaboard on Tuesday, mayors, police chiefs and emergency
preparedness personnel took no chances because the path of the hurricane could
suddenly change. They made plans for the worst while hoping for the best.

''This is a dance we've done many times,'' said Roy Rutland, a spokesman for the
Miami-Dade Police Department. ''If there is a police department prepared for
hurricanes, it's Miami-Dade. Even if this is just a tropical storm in our area,
we have contingency plans in place to deal with it.''

No hurricane has made landfall in the United States since Hurricane Ike barreled
into Texas in 2008. On the social media networks like Facebook and Twitter,
there was great interest in tracking Hurricane Irene's every gyration, at least
until an odd 5.8-magnitude earthquake struck Mineral, Va., at 1:49 p.m. Tuesday,
and was felt as far away as Toronto and Georgia.

Several officials said they were concerned about an unusual ''double-whammy''
hitting the Middle Atlantic States: an earthquake followed by a hurricane.

''Two in one week? Unlucky,'' said Joseph P. Riley Jr., the mayor of Charleston,
S.C., for 35 years. ''If we have a Category 3 storm moving in our direction,
it's smart to take every precaution, even if the cone says it may not. We don't
look at it begrudgingly or as another headache. We see it as an opportunity. We
know our citizens might need our help, and we want to do the best job
possible.''

The National Hurricane Center's tracking cone is based on a 250-mile range of
error in forecasts of the direction of hurricanes over the last five years.

''There is something psychological about the cone,'' said Bryan Koon, the
director of the Florida Division of Emergency Management. ''Once people are out
of the cone, they tend to back off on their preparations. But it's always better
to be prepared.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The hurricane caused flooding in Naguabo, P.R., on Monday.
Chris Jaeger, a landscaping manager, prepared for the hurricane by filling his
truck and 10 five-gallon gas containers in Garden City, S.C., on Tuesday.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY RICARDO ARDUENGO/ASSOCIATED PRESS
 STEVE JESSMORE/THE SUN NEWS, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 625 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                              China Business News

                        May 14, 2013 Tuesday 6:30 AM EST

China Meteorological Administration: WMO Hurricane Committee Considers Lessons
from Sandy

LENGTH: 731  words


Beijing, May 14 -- Lessons learned from Hurricane Sandy are high on the agenda
of a meeting convened by the World Meteorological Organization to review the
2012 tropical cyclone season in the Atlantic and eastern North Pacific and
prepare for the forthcoming season.



The Hurricane Committee of WMO Regional Association IV (North and Central
America and the Caribbean) meets in Curacao 8-12 April to discuss how to
strengthen warning services and regional coordination to protect lives and
property.

The 2012 Atlantic hurricane season was marked by above-average tropical cyclone
activity with the formation of 19 tropical storms, of which ten became
hurricanes.

The numbers of tropical storms and hurricanes were each above the long-term
average (1981-2010) of 12 and 6, respectively. Two of the hurricanes - Michael
and Sandy - strengthened into major hurricanes (Category 3 or stronger on the
SaffirSimpson Hurricane Wind Scale), according to a review of the past hurricane
season prepared by WMO's Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre (RSMC)
Miami. The U. S. National Hurricane Center (NHC) serves as the RSMC for WMO
Regional Association IV.

WMO Deputy Secretary-General Jerry Lengoasa said the massive impact of Hurricane
Sandy on the Caribbean and United States had heightened international awareness
about the threat of tropical cyclones in the region.

"This Hurricane, which caused or contributed to the deaths of almost 300 people
and resulted in total economic losses of over 75 billion US dollars, has left us
many important lessons to learn in forecasting, early warning and
communication," Mr Lengoasa told the opening session of the Hurricane Committee.


"As the diverse impacts of tropical cyclones were once again experienced in
2012, we encounter numerous challenges in improving forecasts and warnings not
only for tropical cyclones themselves, but also for their numerous wind and
water hazards," Mr Lengoasa said. "We are fully aware that, although the
timeliness of hurricane warnings and the accuracy of track forecasts have been
improving steadily over the last few decades, there still is a need to achieve
further progress, particularly in cases of sudden changes in intensity, and for
longer-range forecasts, in order to provide increased lead times for enhanced
response."

The meeting, attended by top hurricane experts from throughout the region, will
consider a range of disaster risk reduction measures, including how to
strengthen warnings on storm surge and rain-induced floods. These water hazards
have historically caused more fatalities than high winds, yet their destructive
potential is not widely understood by the public.

There will be a special session devoted to Sandy, which caused devastation in
Cuba and Haiti before it moved towards the USA. The large category 1 hurricane
made the transition into a powerful extratropical cyclone just before it made
landfall near Atlantic City, New Jersey on 29 October, with an estimated
intensity of 80 miles per hour. At least 147 direct deaths occurred across the
Atlantic basin due to Sandy, with the mid-Atlantic and northeastern United
States recording 72 of these fatalities. This is the greatest number of U.S.
direct fatalities associated with a tropical cyclone outside of the southern
states since Hurricane Agnes in 1972, according to the U.S. National Hurricane
Center.

NOAA's National Weather Service announced, starting June 1, the definitions of
hurricane and tropical storm watches and warnings will be broadened to allow
these watches and warnings to be issued or remain in effect after a tropical
cyclone becomes post-tropical, when such a storm poses a significant threat to
life and property. In addition, it said it would allow the National Hurricane
Center to issue advisories during the post-tropical stage. These changes were
motivated by the special challenges posed by Hurricane Sandy, which was forecast
to evolve from a hurricane to a post-tropical cyclone prior to reaching the
coast Tropical cyclones and hurricanes are named according to a list which
rotates every six years. If a storm is so deadly or costly that the future use
of its name on a different storm would be inappropriate for reasons of
sensitivity, then its name is removed from the list and another name is
selected. The retirement of any previously-used names will be decided this week
by the Hurricane Committee.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2013 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 626 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 26, 2010 Wednesday

Hurricane Awareness Fair set Thursday

BYLINE: Laura B. Martinez, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 417 words


May 26--On the same day the National Oceanic and Atmosphere Administration or
NOAA releases its 2010 Atlantic hurricane outlook, the city of Brownsville will
hold a Hurricane Awareness Fair.

The city's Hurricane Awareness Fair 2010 will be held from 4 p.m. to 8 p.m.
Thursday, at the Brownsville Public Library, 2600 Central Blvd. The event is
free and open to the public.

Various local, state and federal agency representatives will be in attendance to
provide information on how residents can protect their families and homes. In
addition, they will also answer questions and concerns the public may have.

"We are trying to get out as much information to the public about hurricane
preparedness," said Sig Cantu, administrator for the city's Office of Emergency
Management. This is why the city is holding the hurricane fair.

Cantu said there will be a series of ongoing presentations on hurricane topics
and the public can pick and choose which they want to attend. The topics will be
posted inside the library.

He added that representatives from the National Weather Service will also be on
hand to give updates regarding new information the NWS will be using this
hurricane season.

The fair is being held during National Hurricane Preparedness Week, which runs
through Sunday. Officials are encouraging residents to begin preparing for the
2010 hurricane season, which begins on Tuesday.

Because the 2009 hurricane season was uneventful, officials don't want residents
to become complacent this year.

"We want people to be prepared this year because they are saying we are going to
have an average or above average year this year," Cantu said, referring to other
forecasters who are already predicting an active season. NOAA will release its
Atlantic hurricane outlook on Thursday.

Cameron County Judge Carlos H. Cascos in an earlier interview said residents
should start putting together checklists to determine what items they already
have and what they might need to purchase before a hurricane strikes the South
Texas coast.

Hurricane season runs from June 1 through Nov. 30.

To see more of The Brownsville Herald, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.brownsvilleherald.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Brownsville Herald,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100526-BV-Hurricane-Awareness-Fair-set-Thursday-0526

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2010 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 627 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 28, 2010 Friday

Trouble Ahead? Officials warn of active hurricane season

BYLINE: Laura B. Martinez, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 724 words


May 28--While the Rio Grande Valley and the entire United States witnessed an
uneventful hurricane season last year, Brownsville resident Ofi Farrar isn't
about to become complacent this year.

Farrar knows the dangers such storms can bring and remembers hiding under the
bed as a child when Hurricane Beulah made landfall near the mouth of the Rio
Grande in 1967.

"I remember that hurricane so well I crawled under the bed and I cried...I was
praying and crying," said Farrar, as she waited for Thursday's Hurricane
Awareness Fair 2010 to begin at the Brownsville Public Library. The event,
sponsored by the city of Brownsville was to provide residents with as much
information as possible about hurricanes and the dangers they can bring.

Farrar, a lifetime Brownsville resident, said she would not be surprised if a
hurricane made landfall near the Valley sometime this hurricane season. U.S.
government officials are predicting at least seven major hurricanes for the 2010
Atlantic season that begins Tuesday.

"We are well, well over due for a hurricane," Farrar said. "It's probably
because of all this different type of weather we have been having."

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA, released its
predictions on Thursday stating there will be between 14 to 23 tropical storms
and up to seven major hurricanes that could reach Category 3 or a higher status.
A Category 3 hurricane has winds of at least 111 mph.

"If this outlook holds true, this season could be one of the more active on
record," NOAA administrator Jane Lubchenco said in an agency press release. "The
greater likelihood of storms brings an increased risk of landfall. In short, we
urge everyone to be prepared."

The last time the U.S. experienced such an active season was in 2005, with 27
named storms and 15 of those becoming hurricanes. It was also the year that
Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast killing thousands.

NOAA's preparation message is also being reiterated by local officials who
continue to encourage residents to start making preparations now.

"My message is not going to change from what we've talked about the last several
years," Cameron County Judge Carlos H. Cascos said on Thursday. "Now is the time
(for residents) to begin an evaluation of their households and prepare."

"We've (Cameron County) been preparing all year long. For us, hurricane
preparation is not a six-month deal," the county judge said.

Angie Alatorre, another Brownsville resident who also attended Thursday's fair,
said she taped an advertisement announcing the event to her refrigerator so she
would be sure to attend.

"I think it's very helpful for us to find out information as to what we have to
do to get prepared," Alatorre said. "God willing like last year, we don't get
anything, but we never know" what could happen this year.

NOAA officials state the outlook range exceeds the seasonal average of 11 named
storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes. Other forecasters also had
predicted this year would be a busy hurricane season.

According to NOAA's hurricane outlook, there will be 14 to 23 storms, 8 to 14
hurricanes with top winds of 74 mph or higher and 3 to 7 major hurricanes out on
the Atlantic.

Forecasters attribute their predictions to the weakening of El Nino in the
eastern Pacific, warmer water temperatures in the Atlantic and a high activity
era.

Cascos said he wasn't surprised with the NOAA's outlook because there are years
when forecasters predict active seasons while there are other years when they
predict less active seasons.

"Whether it's going to be 14 or 6 the preparations have got to be the same, the
county judge said. "All it takes is one storm to hit us. It doesn't matter.

"We always assume that we are going to be hit and we have to prepare for that.
If it doesn't happen that great news, but if does at least we have taken all the
necessary steps and preparation to safeguard lives."

To see more of The Brownsville Herald, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.brownsvilleherald.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Brownsville Herald,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100528-BV-Trouble-Ahead-Officials-warn-of-active-hurricane-season-0528

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2010 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 628 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                             May 18, 2005 Wednesday

Expert says don't downplay storms;
Beaches didn't take a direct hit last season

BYLINE: Caren Burmeister

SECTION: Pg. L-1

LENGTH: 762 words


Duval County's top hurricane expert said Beaches residents could be complacent
about this year's upcoming hurricane season because they mistook the wind gusts
and rain from the outer bands of last year's four storms as direct hits.

Hurricane Jeanne caused some shoreline and sand dune erosion at the Beaches.

Hurricane Frances ripped the roofs off several condos near 20th Avenue South in
Jacksonville Beach, blew down several trees and left thousands of Atlantic Beach
residents on the JEA system without electricity for days.

But the 40- to 75-mph winds in the Beaches area were nothing like the sustained
winds of 120 to 140 mph from Category 3 and 4 storms in Fort Pierce, Pensacola,
Punta Gorda and other places that took direct hits, said Chip Patterson, chief
of the Duval County Emergency Operation Center.

Last year's four hurricanes, Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne, were directly
responsible for about 48 deaths in the U.S. and led to about $22 billion in
insured property losses, according to the National Hurricane Center.

"I don't want people to think that what we experienced last year is what we
would feel if we had a direct hit," Patterson said.

This year, for the first time, Beaches residents have a fourth evacuation route
with the Wonderwood Connector, a four-lane highway that opened in July, leading
from Mayport over the Intracoastal Waterway to Arlington.

"It will provide some extra relief," Patterson said.

As a result, Mayport residents who need to use an evacuation center would be
closest to shelters such as Landmark Middle School at 101 N. Kernan Blvd. or
Abess Park Elementary School at 12731 Abess Blvd. off the Wonderwood Connector.

On June 1, the first day of hurricane season, residents can take advantage of a
sales-tax break on hurricane-preparedness items such as batteries, flashlights,
first-aid kits, tarps, coolers, gas cans and generators. The tax break ends June
12.

"It sounds like a way to encourage people to prepare early," Patterson said.
"Studies show most people simply wait."

William Gray, professor of Atmospheric Science at Colorado State University,
estimates that 2005 will have about 13 named storms, about seven of which may
turn into hurricanes and three of them intense category 3, 4 or 5 hurricanes.
The average number of hurricanes each year is about six.

Gray attributed the higher-than-average hurricane season to continued Atlantic
Ocean warming and to a diminishing likelihood of El Nino conditions, a
disruption of the ocean-atmosphere system in the Tropical Pacific.

On Monday , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted a
similar pattern for the 2005 hurricane season.

Jacksonville Beach officials met for a "lessons learned" session two weeks ago
to analyze what they could do to improve hurricane preparations, said Fire Chief
Gary Frazier, who also handles the city's emergency preparations.

"With four of them [hurricanes] last year, we're much better prepared," he said.

The look back led to a citywide hurricane zoning map for search and rescue,
damage assessment and debris management. The map, which breaks the city into 22
geographic zones, contains the elevations and Global Positioning System data for
each zone.

Frazier said he is also considering buying some satellite phones, which worked
well in hurricane-devastated parts of Florida when cell phone towers and phone
lines were damaged.

The city has also added pumps to keep lift stations working in case of a long
electrical outage and city officials are scanning important records on computer
disks to make it easier and faster to evacuate City Hall. Last year, the city's
Planning Department alone packed 280 boxes for evacuation.

Staff writer Caren Burmeister can be reached at (904) 249-4947, extension 21, or
via e-mail at caren.burmeister@jacksonville.com.

HURRICANE BILLS

The Legislature passed several hurricane preparedness and protection bills this
year. The bills would:

Prohibit insurance companies from refusing to renew policies until 90 days after
hurricane repairs are completed and require insurance companies to offer
easy-to-read policies, including financial disclosures and a checklist that
details what is and what isn't covered.

Allow the state to create a tax-free hurricane savings account, structured like
health savings accounts, that will help coastal residents cover the hefty
insurance deductible and certain other costs associated with hurricanes. Unused
balances would roll over from year-to-year.

For the hurricane savings accounts to start, Congress will have to grant a
federal tax-exempt designation.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
Gary Wilcox/staff A Quick Stop Gas Station on Beach Blvd in Jacksonville after
Hurricane Frances.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2005 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 629 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Victoria Advocate (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 11, 2008 Thursday

Another active hurricane season on tap for 2009: Early predictions say Gulf
Coast has 38 percent chance of getting hit

BYLINE: David Tewes, Victoria Advocate, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 495 words


Dec. 11--The 2009 hurricane season could be a repeat of this year's season,
which brought two hurricanes and a tropical storm to Texas.

"That's pretty much what we're seeing right now," said Phil Klotzbach with the
Colorado State University hurricane forecast team. "Obviously, there's a lot of
uncertainty this far in advance."

The university's first forecast for 2009 calls for 14 named storms, with seven
of those becoming hurricanes. Three of the hurricanes are forecast to become
major storms with sustained winds greater than 110 mph.

What will that mean for the Gulf Coast when hurricane season begins June 1?

"We can't say months in advance where the storms are going to go," Klotzbach
said. "The average probability for the last century is a 30 percent chance that
a major hurricane is going to make landfall along the Gulf Coast."

The 2009 forecast puts the probability at 38 percent for the area from
Brownsville to the Florida Panhandle.

Jeb Lacey, Victoria County's emergency management coordinator, said the new
forecast is similar to the one issued a year ago for 2008.

"They've been very successful in getting us in the ballpark over the last few
years," he said. "But once again, it's just a very vague estimate as to what
could happen."

That's why the emergency management office always prepares for a worst-case
scenario, Lacy said.

In 2008, Hurricane Dolly moved inland just north of Brownsville in July. It was
followed in August by Tropical Storm Edouard, which made landfall near Beaumont.

September brought Hurricane Ike, which had a bead on the Middle Texas Coast
until turning northward and devastating the Galveston area.

The Colorado hurricane researchers said their forecast mirrors a pattern with
which hurricane-weary coastal residents are all too familiar.

"We are currently in an active period for Atlantic hurricane activity," William
Gray, another Colorado State forecaster, said in a press release.

The active cycle is expected to continue for another decade or two before
becoming calmer, he said.

But Klotzbach said people shouldn't be overly alarmed yet about next year.

"The thing the public should do is take a break," he said. "Hurricane season
isn't for seven months."

2009 STORM PREDICTION

14 named storms

7 hurricanes

3 intense hurricanes.

A normal year would bring 10 named storms, six hurricanes and two intense
hurricanes.

Hurricane season runs from June 1 through Nov. 30.

SouRce: Colorado State University 2009 hurricane forecastMORE INFORMATION

The entire hurricane forecast is available athurricane.atmos.colostate.edu.

To see more of Victoria Advocate, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.thevictoriaadvocate.com. Copyright (c) 2008, Victoria Advocate, Texas
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20081211-VI-Another-active-hurricane-season-on-tap-for-2009-1211

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VI


                        Copyright 2008 Victoria Advocate


                          FOCUS - 630 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 30, 2013 Friday

Washington: Issue #103: 2013 Hurricane Season Continues Record Inactivity

LENGTH: 507  words

DATELINE: Washington


The Heartland Institute has issued the following news release:

This week marks the halfway point of the 2013 Atlantic hurricane season - and
not a single hurricane has formed anywhere in the Atlantic. This year's lack of
hurricanes continues an ongoing, beneficial trend of fewer hurricanes coinciding
with moderately warming temperatures as the planet continues its recovery from
the Little Ice Age. The decline in hurricanes also coincides with global warming
alarmists ramping up a deceptive public relations campaign designed to convince
the public that global warming skeptics are causing more hurricanes.

The lack of hurricanes so far in 2013 is remarkable in several particulars.

First, hurricanes have posted a giant goose egg so far on the 2013 hurricane
scoreboard. This isn't just hurricane strikes in the United States; this is
hurricane formation anywhere in the Atlantic.

Second, this year's hurricane inactivity continues what was already a record
lack of recent hurricanes. Although President Barack Obama is well into his
fifth year in office, the Obama administration is tied for the fewest number of
U.S. hurricane strikes for any one- or two-term presidency in history.

Third, the silent 2013 hurricane season extends an amazing record regarding
major hurricane strikes of Category 3 or higher. The United States is currently
undergoing its longest period in history without a major hurricane strike.

Fourth, the record lack of major hurricane strikes continues a longer-term
decline. During the past five decades, an average of 5.6 major hurricanes struck
the United States per decade. During the preceding five decades, an average of
8.4 major hurricanes struck the United States.

Fifth, a fairly typical number of small tropical storms continue to form in
2013, but the tropical storms are not growing into hurricanes. This runs counter
to alarmist claims that global warming puts tropical storms on steroids.

Sixth, the silent 2013 Atlantic hurricane season continues a longer-term decline
in global hurricane activity. The global number of tropical storms and
hurricanes has been in slow but steady decline since at least 1970, bringing
40-plus years of relief from the planet's most devastating storms.

Nevertheless, alarmists are doubling down on false hurricane claims, all the
while engaging in name-calling and personal attacks against the "deniers" who
defer to objective facts and real-world hurricane data.

The 350 Action group garnered substantial media attention this week by engaging
in just such misleading and personal attacks. The global warming activist group
released a video proposing to name hurricanes after prominent legislators who
"deny" that global warming causes more hurricanes.

There is an important lesson to learn from the alarmists' attempt to smear
people who defer to objective evidence and factual data rather than misguided
speculation and alarmism: The "denier" label applies most fittingly to global
warming activists rather than skeptics.

For more information please visit: http://heartland.org/

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 631 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                    September 6, 2017 Wednesday 1:01 PM GMT

Who names hurricanes? Why is this storm called Irma? All you need to know on how
tropical storm names are chosen

BYLINE: Francesca Gillett

SECTION: WORLD; Version:1

LENGTH: 597 words


The eyes of the world have been on the US Gulf Coast and Caribbean over the past
fortnight as hurricanes Harvey and Irma rip through the region.

Experts predicted this year's Atlantic hurricane season - which runs from April
to November - to be more active than usual and so far 10 named storms and four
hurricanes have been recorded.

Hurricane Irma, the most powerful Atlantic hurricane ever recorded, is the
latest to make landfall after reaching the Caribbean on Wednesday morning.

For anyone named Irma - or Katrina, Sandy or Matthew- the association with a
devastating storm can be strange.

This is how hurricanes are named.

Who names hurricanes?

The Atlantic storm lists were originally created by the National Hurricane
Centre in the 1950s and are now managed by the World Meteorological Organisation
(WMO), which decides when names are struck off and replaced.

Hurricane Irma, the most powerful Atlantic hurricane ever, is being followed by
tropical storm Jose. (REUTERS)

There are different storm name lists for different parts of the world. These
listsare managed by the WMO but separate regions' meteorological organisations
may compile the names.

For Atlantic storms, there are six lists which are rotated every six years.

Why are hurricanes named?

Storms are given names for a number of reasons.

According to the WMO, names are easier to remember than numbers or technical
terms which means they can be easily identified in warning messages and the
media.

There is also less likelihood of making an error if you name storms, rather than
using latitude-longitude identification methods. Naming helps ships, coastal
bases and monitoring stations easily exchange information.

Some experts suggest naming storms even helps the community prepare better and
heightens interest in warnings.

How are hurricanes given names?

Names are chosen from an alphabetical list which is worked through
chronologically each hurricane season.

For storms in the Atlantic and Eastern North Pacific regions, there are six
lists which are rotated every six years.

Traditionally, just female names were used before alternate men's names were
introduced in 1979.

Planes pass through the eye of Hurricane Irma

There are 21 names on the Atlantic season list - with the letters Q, U, X, Y and
Z never used.

The WMO makes it clear that hurricane or cyclones are not named after particular
people, but are names selected which are familiar to people in each region.

In some areas - like the central north pacific - a new list is not started on at
the beginning of each year. There are four lists and names are worked through
sequentially until they reach the bottom.

When are names struck off the list?

Names are removed from the rotating lists, or "retired", if a hurricane is so
devastating it would be insensitive to use the name again.

In that case, an annual WMO committee meeting will decide to strike off the name
and another name is selected.

Examples of names which will never be used again include Katrina (2005), Sandy
(2012) and Matthew from last year.

Can I have a tropical storm named for me?

Not really; the WMO committee does not take applications for new hurricane or
cyclone names.

Read more

I'm so scared says Londoner trapped in path of hurricane

The best chance is Australia where the Bureau of Meteorology - which submits new
names to the WMO - receives many requests from the public to name storms after
people.

The Bureau acceptsrequests received in writing and the name will be added to a
supplementary list.

But it can take many decades for a suitable slot to be found, the Bureau warned.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2017 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 632 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                     September 8, 2017 Friday 10:15 AM GMT

Hurricane Irma path latest: Where will the storm hit next and when will it reach
Florida?

BYLINE: Jonathan Mitchell

SECTION: WORLD; Version:2

LENGTH: 566 words


Hurricane Irma is continuing to cause devastation across the Caribbean, with the
Turks and Caicos islands the latest to be battered by the deadly storm as it
hurtles towards Florida.

At least 14 people are believed to have killed inthe category 5 storm, the
strongest to ever form in the Atlantic Ocean, which has flattened buildings and
left thousands homeless.

The state of Florida is bracing itself for Irma's impact this weekend, with the
storm having already shifted slightly northwards to put it on a collision course
with the United States.

A state of emergency has already been declared at the tourist hotspot, while
large areas have also been evacuated.

Here's where Hurricane Irma is expected to hit next and when it will arrive in
Florida:

Cuba - Friday, 8pm to Saturday, 8am EDT (Saturday, 1am to 1pm BST)

Having barrelled through northern Haiti and the Turks and Caicos islands, the
storm is continuing its journey towards the northern coast of Cuba.

Hurricane warnings are in place across more than half of its coastline, where
officials are said to be bracing for a potentially devastating impact.

Read more

Turks and Caicos islands devastated as 'nuclear' hurricane heads to US

The economy has barely creaked along since the fall of the Soviet Union and
still suffers under US economic sanctions.

Many tourists have made a run for Havana airport and a Norwegian cruise liner
sailed for Miami one day early.

The storm could barrel across the coast for about 12 hours as it makes its
approach to the United States.

Hurricane Irma Continues to Devastate As It Hurtles Towards US

Southern Florida - Sunday, 2am EDT (7am BST)

By Saturday morning, Hurricane Irma is expected to turn northwards towards
Florida, where because of its huge size it could impact both coasts.

The National Hurricane Center (NHC) said Irma could make landfall just east of
Key Largo, which would bring the eye of the hurricane directly over Miami on the
east coast.

The expected path of the storm as of Friday morning (The National Hurricane

Center

)

At about 11.30pm local time on Thursday the storm was roughly 580 miles
east-southeast of the cityof Miami.

The NHC told NBC: "During this weekend, all significant hurricane impact threats
are possible, including especially life threatening storm surge flooding and
damaging winds."

About 31,000 people have reportedly already fled the Florida Keys.

People grab supplies in the US state of Miami (AFP/Getty Images)

Central and northern Florida - Sunday, 8pm EDT (Monday, 1am BST)

Hurricane Irma will continue its path up the eastern coast of America after
hitting Miami, but is expected by then to have lost most its force.

Read more

Trump's Mar-a-Lago resort evacuated as it faces direct hit from storm

UK pledges £32m to Hurricane Irma victims as second storm rages

Exclusive hotel owned by Pippa Middleton's in-laws ruined by hurricane

Winds are predicted to have fallen to about 120mph when it reaches the central
part of the state before falling to 85mph in the north.

In the centreof the US state, which includes the major cities of Melbourne, a
hurricane watch is under effect rather than a hurricane warning.

Storm damage: the scene in the Dominican Republic after Hurricane Irma passed
over the Caribbean(REUTERS)

The storm is believed to have already peaked in intensity as it crossed over the
Caribbean, but hurricane force winds are still extending about 70 miles from its
centre.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2017 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 633 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                     September 8, 2017 Friday 11:48 AM GMT

Who names hurricanes? Why is this storm called Irma? The process behind choosing
tropical storm names

BYLINE: Francesca Gillett

SECTION: WORLD; Version:1

LENGTH: 595 words


Hurricane Harvey and Irma have ripped through the US Gulf Coast and Caribbean
over the past fortnight leaving atrailof devastation.

Experts predicted this year's Atlantic hurricane season - which runs from April
to November - to be more active than usual and so far 10 named storms and four
hurricanes have been recorded.

Hurricane Irma, the most powerful Atlantic hurricane ever recorded, is the
latest to make landfall after reaching the Caribbean on Wednesday morning.

For anyone named Irma - or Katrina, Sandy or Matthew- the association with a
devastating storm can be strange.

This is how hurricanes are named.

Who names hurricanes?

The Atlantic storm lists were originally created by the National Hurricane
Centre in the 1950s and are now managed by the World Meteorological Organisation
(WMO), which decides when names are struck off and replaced.

Hurricane Irma, the most powerful Atlantic hurricane ever, is being followed by
tropical storm Jose. (REUTERS)

There are different storm name lists for different parts of the world. These
listsare managed by the WMO but separate regions' meteorological organisations
may compile the names.

For Atlantic storms, there are six lists which are rotated every six years.

Why are hurricanes named?

Storms are given names for a number of reasons.

According to the WMO, names are easier to remember than numbers or technical
terms which means they can be easily identified in warning messages and the
media.

There is also less likelihood of making an error if you name storms, rather than
using latitude-longitude identification methods. Naming helps ships, coastal
bases and monitoring stations easily exchange information.

Some experts suggest naming storms even helps the community prepare better and
heightens interest in warnings.

How are hurricanes given names?

Names are chosen from an alphabetical list which is worked through
chronologically each hurricane season.

For storms in the Atlantic and Eastern North Pacific regions, there are six
lists which are rotated every six years.

Traditionally, just female names were used before alternate men's names were
introduced in 1979.

Planes pass through the eye of Hurricane Irma

There are 21 names on the Atlantic season list - with the letters Q, U, X, Y and
Z never used.

The WMO makes it clear that hurricane or cyclones are not named after particular
people, but are names selected which are familiar to people in each region.

In some areas - like the central north pacific - a new list is not started on at
the beginning of each year. There are four lists and names are worked through
sequentially until they reach the bottom.

When are names struck off the list?

Names are removed from the rotating lists, or "retired", if a hurricane is so
devastating it would be insensitive to use the name again.

In that case, an annual WMO committee meeting will decide to strike off the name
and another name is selected.

Examples of names which will never be used again include Katrina (2005), Sandy
(2012) and Matthew from last year.

Can I have a tropical storm named for me?

Not really; the WMO committee does not take applications for new hurricane or
cyclone names.

Read more

I'm so scared says Londoner trapped in path of hurricane

The best chance is Australia where the Bureau of Meteorology - which submits new
names to the WMO - receives many requests from the public to name storms after
people.

The Bureau acceptsrequests received in writing and the name will be added to a
supplementary list.

But it can take many decades for a suitable slot to be found, the Bureau warned.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2017 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 634 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                     September 11, 2017 Monday 3:26 PM GMT

Hurricane Jose path: Weakened storm lingers near Caribbean after Irma
devastation

BYLINE: Jonathan Mitchell

SECTION: WORLD; Version:1

LENGTH: 345 words


Hurricane Jose is continuing to rage in the Atlantic Ocean, buthas moved away
from its collision course with Caribbean islandsdevastated by Irma.

The category 3 storm, which has been barreling behind the deadly Hurricane Irma,
has weakened over the Atlantic and turned northwards away from the Caribbean in
the past few days.

It provides some welcome relief for the islands devastated by Hurricane Irma,
which has flattened buildings, left thousands homeless and killed at least 28
people.

But officials have warned Hurricane Jose could still impact some areas towards
the northof the Caribbean over the next five days.

Moving northwest at just 10mph, its current path is still difficult to predict.

Hurricane Jose is expected to linger of the Atlantic in the coming days
(National Hurricane Centre)

Swells are due to effect parts of Haiti and the Dominican Republic, the Bahamas,
and the Turks and Caicos Islands, over the next couple of days.

According to the National Hurricane Centre (NUC), Hurricane Jose is currently
about 255 miles northeast of Grand Turk Island.

Winds are currently moving at a speed of 105mph, but they are expected to weaken
over the next two days.

Read more

Storm chasers slammed for risking lives by filming in hurricane

Expats and holidaymakers 'scared and nervous' as Hurricane Irma hits

Full devastation of Hurricane Irma revealed in shocking pictures

The NUC said: "Swells generated by Jose will affect portions of Hispaniola, the
Bahamas, and the Turks and Caicos Islands over the next couple of days."

There are no hurricane or storm warnings currently in place for Jose.

Hurricane Irma is continuing to cause havoc in the region having made landfall
in the US state of Florida over the weekend.

At least five people are believed to have died in the tourist hotspot and
billions of pounds worth of damage caused.

The storm barrelled up the state, flooding entire neighbourhoods, though has
since been downgraded from a category 4 to category 1 storm.

As many as four million people were left without power as the 100mph winds
caused widespread destruction.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2017 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 635 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                     September 18, 2017 Monday 6:14 PM GMT

Hurricane Maria strengthens to category 4 as it follows Irma's path of
destruction towards Caribbean

BYLINE: Hatty Collier

SECTION: WORLD; Version:3

LENGTH: 594 words


Hurricane Maria rapidly strengthened tocategory 4as it hurtled towards British
overseas territories and the Caribbean, US forecasters said.

It was following roughly the same path as Hurricane Irma which devastated the
region and claimed dozens of lives earlier this month.

The National Hurricane Centre based in Miami said the weather front is predicted
to be a category three hurricane, with winds of up to 120mph set to lash islands
in its path.

The centre said Maria was expected to be near major hurricane strength while
crossing through the Leeward Islands late Monday on a path aiming toward Puerto
Rico, the Dominican Republic and Haiti.

Category 3 hurricane: Soldiers board a Navy landing craft during an evacuation
in advance of Hurricane Maria (REUTERS)

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office is advising against all travel to the
British Virgin Islands, Montserrat and Anguilla, which have hurricane warnings
in place.

Maria is expected to make landfall there on Tuesday or Wednesday, with severe
damage and warnings of coastal flooding. Surges may be nine feet higher than
normal tide levels.

Path of Hurricane Maria - map

The hurricane could make a direct hit on Puerto Rico which was spared the full
brunt of Irma, though power was knocked out to much of the island.

Officials were preparing hundreds of shelters, while evacuations were being
carried out where possible.

Army soldiers wait with their belongings on a beach on the British Virgin
Islands for transport on a Navy landing craft while evacuating in advance of
Hurricane Maria (REUTERS)

International Development Secretary Priti Patel said the Government is under no
illusion about the possible impact of Maria and added they are taking steps to
prepare communities.

Ms Patel said British troops, police and aid experts are working relentlessly to
help the victims of Irma, and said they will now be tasked with also preparing
for the impact of Maria.

"We are under no illusions about the possible impact of Hurricane Maria and are
taking every measure possible to prepare communities which have already been
devastated by Hurricane Irma," she said.

Up to 12ins of rain is predicted to fall, with "isolated maximum amounts of 20
inches" expected to hit the British Virgin Islands through Wednesday night.

In Anguilla a maximum amount of up to eight inches could fall.

The National Hurricane Centre has warned that "rainfall on these islands could
cause life-threatening flash floods and mudslides".

Chris Austin, head of the UK's Joint Task force, said: "We are planning for the
unexpected, we are planning for the worst.

"We need to demonstrate our own resilience because there is a real chance that
Hurricane Maria may significantly impact on our existing efforts to provide
relief."

UK experts have been working closely with national authorities to prepare for
the approaching hurricane, which comes less than two weeks after Irma.

Read more

Hurricane Maria hurtles towards Caribbean islands devastated by Irma

DFID, the military and other government departments are already working on plans
to deal with the hurricane's aftermath and are in close contact with governors'
offices.

This includes getting people to public shelters and securing loose materials and
debris which could cause further injuries.

More than 1,100 UK troops are in the region. They were sent to help with relief
and repair work after Hurricane Irma unleashed devastation.

HMS Ocean, which is carrying another 60 tonnes of aid to complement the 75
tonnes that has already arrived and been distributed, is set to anchor in the
area this weekend.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2017 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 636 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                     September 18, 2017 Monday 6:14 PM GMT

Hurricane Maria strengthens to category 4 as it follows Irma's path of
destruction towards Caribbean

BYLINE: Hatty Collier

SECTION: WORLD; Version:2

LENGTH: 589 words


Hurricane Maria rapidly strengthened tocategory 4as it hurtled towards British
overseas territories and the Caribbean, US forecasters said.

It was following roughly the same path as Hurricane Irma which devastated the
region and claimed dozens of lives earlier this month.

The National Hurricane Centre based in Miami said the weather front is predicted
to be a category three hurricane, with winds of up to 120mph set to lash islands
in its path.

The centre said Maria was expected to be near major hurricane strength while
crossing through the Leeward Islands late Monday on a path aiming toward Puerto
Rico, the Dominican Republic and Haiti.

Category 3 hurricane: Soldiers board a Navy landing craft during an evacuation
in advance of Hurricane Maria (REUTERS)

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office is advising against all travel to the
British Virgin Islands, Montserrat and Anguilla, which have hurricane warnings
in place.

Maria is expected to make landfall there on Tuesday or Wednesday, with severe
damage and warnings of coastal flooding. Surges may be nine feet higher than
normal tide levels.

The hurricane could make a direct hit on Puerto Rico which was spared the full
brunt of Irma, though power was knocked out to much of the island.

Officials were preparing hundreds of shelters, while evacuations were being
carried out where possible.

Army soldiers wait with their belongings on a beach on the British Virgin
Islands for transport on a Navy landing craft while evacuating in advance of
Hurricane Maria (REUTERS)

International Development Secretary Priti Patel said the Government is under no
illusion about the possible impact of Maria and added they are taking steps to
prepare communities.

Ms Patel said British troops, police and aid experts are working relentlessly to
help the victims of Irma, and said they will now be tasked with also preparing
for the impact of Maria.

"We are under no illusions about the possible impact of Hurricane Maria and are
taking every measure possible to prepare communities which have already been
devastated by Hurricane Irma," she said.

Up to 12ins of rain is predicted to fall, with "isolated maximum amounts of 20
inches" expected to hit the British Virgin Islands through Wednesday night.

In Anguilla a maximum amount of up to eight inches could fall.

The National Hurricane Centre has warned that "rainfall on these islands could
cause life-threatening flash floods and mudslides".

Chris Austin, head of the UK's Joint Task force, said: "We are planning for the
unexpected, we are planning for the worst.

"We need to demonstrate our own resilience because there is a real chance that
Hurricane Maria may significantly impact on our existing efforts to provide
relief."

UK experts have been working closely with national authorities to prepare for
the approaching hurricane, which comes less than two weeks after Irma.

Read more

Hurricane Maria hurtles towards Caribbean islands devastated by Irma

DFID, the military and other government departments are already working on plans
to deal with the hurricane's aftermath and are in close contact with governors'
offices.

This includes getting people to public shelters and securing loose materials and
debris which could cause further injuries.

More than 1,100 UK troops are in the region. They were sent to help with relief
and repair work after Hurricane Irma unleashed devastation.

HMS Ocean, which is carrying another 60 tonnes of aid to complement the 75
tonnes that has already arrived and been distributed, is set to anchor in the
area this weekend.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2017 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 637 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                     September 18, 2017 Monday 6:14 PM GMT

Hurricane Maria strengthens to category 3 as it follows Irma's path of
destruction towards Caribbean

BYLINE: Hatty Collier

SECTION: WORLD; Version:1

LENGTH: 589 words


Hurricane Maria rapidly strengthened to Category 3 as it hurtled towards British
overseas territories and the Caribbean, US forecasters said.

It was following roughly the same path as Hurricane Irma which devastated the
region and claimed dozens of lives earlier this month.

The National Hurricane Centre based in Miami said the weather front is predicted
to be a category three hurricane, with winds of up to 120mph set to lash islands
in its path.

The centre said Maria was expected to be near major hurricane strength while
crossing through the Leeward Islands late Monday on a path aiming toward Puerto
Rico, the Dominican Republic and Haiti.

Category 3 hurricane: Soldiers board a Navy landing craft during an evacuation
in advance of Hurricane Maria (REUTERS)

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office is advising against all travel to the
British Virgin Islands, Montserrat and Anguilla, which have hurricane warnings
in place.

Maria is expected to make landfall there on Tuesday or Wednesday, with severe
damage and warnings of coastal flooding. Surges may be nine feet higher than
normal tide levels.

The hurricane could make a direct hit on Puerto Rico which was spared the full
brunt of Irma, though power was knocked out to much of the island.

Officials were preparing hundreds of shelters, while evacuations were being
carried out where possible.

Army soldiers wait with their belongings on a beach on the British Virgin
Islands for transport on a Navy landing craft while evacuating in advance of
Hurricane Maria (REUTERS)

International Development Secretary Priti Patel said the Government is under no
illusion about the possible impact of Maria and added they are taking steps to
prepare communities.

Ms Patel said British troops, police and aid experts are working relentlessly to
help the victims of Irma, and said they will now be tasked with also preparing
for the impact of Maria.

"We are under no illusions about the possible impact of Hurricane Maria and are
taking every measure possible to prepare communities which have already been
devastated by Hurricane Irma," she said.

Up to 12ins of rain is predicted to fall, with "isolated maximum amounts of 20
inches" expected to hit the British Virgin Islands through Wednesday night.

In Anguilla a maximum amount of up to eight inches could fall.

The National Hurricane Centre has warned that "rainfall on these islands could
cause life-threatening flash floods and mudslides".

Chris Austin, head of the UK's Joint Task force, said: "We are planning for the
unexpected, we are planning for the worst.

"We need to demonstrate our own resilience because there is a real chance that
Hurricane Maria may significantly impact on our existing efforts to provide
relief."

UK experts have been working closely with national authorities to prepare for
the approaching hurricane, which comes less than two weeks after Irma.

Read more

Hurricane Maria hurtles towards Caribbean islands devastated by Irma

DFID, the military and other government departments are already working on plans
to deal with the hurricane's aftermath and are in close contact with governors'
offices.

This includes getting people to public shelters and securing loose materials and
debris which could cause further injuries.

More than 1,100 UK troops are in the region. They were sent to help with relief
and repair work after Hurricane Irma unleashed devastation.

HMS Ocean, which is carrying another 60 tonnes of aid to complement the 75
tonnes that has already arrived and been distributed, is set to anchor in the
area this weekend.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2017 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 638 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                     September 19, 2017 Tuesday 8:11 PM GMT

Hurricane Maria: Caribbean islands brace for 'potentially catastrophic' impact
as storm barrels towards Puerto Rico;
One person haskilled and two others are missing afterthe category five storm
made landfall on Tuesday

BYLINE: Jonathan Mitchell

SECTION: WORLD; Version:2

LENGTH: 894 words


Caribbean islands already devastated by Irma are bracing for another
"potentially catastrophic" storm as the category five Hurricane Maria continues
to barrel towards Puerto Rico.

One person has already been killed byafter the stormmade landfall on the French
island of Guadeloupe, with the Hurricane Maria battering the island with 160mph
winds.

The island of Dominica was also left ravaged by the storm, with Prime Minister
Roosevelt Skerrit saying ithad left behind"mind-boggling" destruction.

The storm is now expected to sweep through the Caribbean over the next couple of
days, hitting Puerto Rico and the British Virgin Islands on Wednesday.

The islands are still recovering from the devastation of Hurricane Irma two
weeks ago, which left dozens dead and flattened buildings across the Caribbean.

Maria had briefly been downgraded to a category four storm after making landfall
in Dominica on Monday, but US Air Force Reserve Hurricane Hunter aircraft
reported it had returned to the highest level.

Emergency steps are being undertaken on the BVI to prepare for the looming
onslaught, although an official co-ordinating the operation has warned the
islands had been "weakened" by Irma and the situation "doesn't look good".

Path of Hurricane Maria - map

Pictures have emerged of residents on the island boarding up their homes in
Puerto Rico and the British Virgin Islands as people brace for more destruction.

The National Hurricane Centre (NHC) called Maria is a "potentially catastrophic"
storm, adding: "Some fluctuations in intensity are likely during the next day or
two, but Maria is forecast to remain an extremely dangerous category four or
five hurricane until it moves near or over the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico."

Another British overseas territory, Montserrat, has been issued with a hurricane
warning amid fears Maria could bring a devastating storm surge, while torrential
rain could trigger deadly flash floods.

UK International Development Secretary Priti Patel said the Government is under
no illusion about the possible impact of the strengthening hurricane and said
they were taking steps to prepare communities.

A man covers the windows of a supermarket in preparation for Hurricane Maria in
San Juan, Puerto Rico (REUTERS)

The Foreign Office is advising against all travel to the BVI, warning residents
to identify shelter "immediately" and be ready to take cover when the hurricane
approaches, as well as all but essential travel to Montserrat.

Following a similar path to Irma, Maria is expected to reach the British Virgin
Islands late on Tuesday night and into Wednesday.

Read more

This is where the devastating Hurricane Maria is headed next

Prime Minister shares haunting messages as hurricane destroys his home

Hurricane Maria spreads 'mind-boggling devastation' as storm hits land

Brigadier John Ridge, the second in command of the UK's Joint Task Force, said
whichever direction the hurricane went, "it is bad".

"They are either going to get the wind, which will pick up all the debris that
is lying around," he said.

"And also, irritatingly, where they have made progress in getting covers over
the houses and power lines up, it will potentially damage that again.

Hurricane Maria is heading straight towards Puerto Rico and the British Virgin
Islands (EPA)

"Or they get a huge amount of rain, which is also bad because of the blockages
in the drainage channels - so the potential for some quite serious flooding as
well.

"Whatever happens, it doesn't look good sadly."

Meanwhile the NHC has issued a hurricane watch, meaning hurricane conditions are
expected somewhere within the area, for the island of Anguilla, a British
overseas territory badly affected by Hurricane Irma.

Up to 15in (38cm) of rain is predicted to fall as Maria barrels across the
Caribbean, with "isolated maximum amounts of 20in (51cm)" expected to deluge the
British Virgin Islands.

In Anguilla up to 8in (20cm) could be recorded. The NHC has warned that
"rainfall on these islands could cause life-threatening flash floods and
mudslides".

(AFP/Getty Images)

Brigadier Ridge said the combination of tidal surges and flooding on the British
Virgin Islands is something that is worrying the governor, Gus Jaspert.

"They had an hour's rain a few days ago and that created four foot of flooding,
so if you get potentially 12 hours of rain you can imagine how much worse that
will be," he added.

Dominica's prime minister Roosevelt Skerrit said the hurricane had wrought
"widespread devastation" and the islanders had "lost all what money can buy and
replace".

He said in a Facebook post: "The winds have swept away the roofs of almost every
person I have spoken to or otherwise made contact with."

A motorist drives through flood water in Fort de France (AFP/Getty Images)

Hurricane Maria arrived in the region less than two weeks after Hurricane Irma,
one of the most powerful storms in decades, unleashed devastation.

More than 1,300 UK troops are currently deployed in the region, and were sent to
help with relief and repair work after Hurricane Irma caused chaos.

An additional 42-strong military resilience team has also been deployed to the
BVI ready to offer support and assistance after Maria has hit.

HMS Ocean, which is carrying another 60 tonnes of aid to complement the 75
tonnes of DfID relief items which have already arrived, will drop anchor in the
region this weekend.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2017 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 639 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                     September 19, 2017 Tuesday 8:11 PM GMT

Hurricane Maria: Caribbean islands brace for 'potentially catastrophic' impact
as storm barrels towards Puerto Rico;
One person haskilled and two others are missing afterthe category five storm
made landfall on Tuesday

BYLINE: Jonathan Mitchell

SECTION: WORLD; Version:1

LENGTH: 894 words


Caribbean islands already devastated by Irma are bracing for another
"potentially catastrophic" storm as the category five Hurricane Maria continues
to barrel towards Puerto Rico.

One person has already been killed byafter the stormmade landfall on the French
island of Guadeloupe, with the Hurricane Maria battering the island with 160mph
winds.

The island of Dominica was also left ravaged by the storm, with Prime Minister
Roosevelt Skerrit saying ithad left behind"mind-boggling" destruction.

The storm is now expected to sweep through the Caribbean over the next couple of
days, hitting Puerto Rico and the British Virgin Islands on Wednesday.

The islands are still recovering from the devastation of Hurricane Irma two
weeks ago, which left dozens dead and flattened buildings across the Caribbean.

Maria had briefly been downgraded to a category four storm after making landfall
in Dominica on Monday, but US Air Force Reserve Hurricane Hunter aircraft
reported it had returned to the highest level.

Emergency steps are being undertaken on the BVI to prepare for the looming
onslaught, although an official co-ordinating the operation has warned the
islands had been "weakened" by Irma and the situation "doesn't look good".

Path of Hurricane Maria - map

Pictures have emerged of residents on the island boarding up their homes in
Puerto Rico and the British Virgin Islands as people brace for more destruction.

The National Hurricane Centre (NHC) called Maria is a "potentially catastrophic"
storm, adding: "Some fluctuations in intensity are likely during the next day or
two, but Maria is forecast to remain an extremely dangerous category four or
five hurricane until it moves near or over the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico."

Another British overseas territory, Montserrat, has been issued with a hurricane
warning amid fears Maria could bring a devastating storm surge, while torrential
rain could trigger deadly flash floods.

UK International Development Secretary Priti Patel said the Government is under
no illusion about the possible impact of the strengthening hurricane and said
they were taking steps to prepare communities.

A man covers the windows of a supermarket in preparation for Hurricane Maria in
San Juan, Puerto Rico (REUTERS)

The Foreign Office is advising against all travel to the BVI, warning residents
to identify shelter "immediately" and be ready to take cover when the hurricane
approaches, as well as all but essential travel to Montserrat.

Following a similar path to Irma, Maria is expected to reach the British Virgin
Islands late on Tuesday night and into Wednesday.

Read more

This is where the devastating Hurricane Maria is headed next

Prime Minister shares haunting messages as hurricane destroys his home

Hurricane Maria spreads 'mind-boggling devastation' as storm hits land

Brigadier John Ridge, the second in command of the UK's Joint Task Force, said
whichever direction the hurricane went, "it is bad".

"They are either going to get the wind, which will pick up all the debris that
is lying around," he said.

"And also, irritatingly, where they have made progress in getting covers over
the houses and power lines up, it will potentially damage that again.

Hurricane Maria is heading straight towards Puerto Rico and the British Virgin
Islands (EPA)

"Or they get a huge amount of rain, which is also bad because of the blockages
in the drainage channels - so the potential for some quite serious flooding as
well.

"Whatever happens, it doesn't look good sadly."

Meanwhile the NHC has issued a hurricane watch, meaning hurricane conditions are
expected somewhere within the area, for the island of Anguilla, a British
overseas territory badly affected by Hurricane Irma.

Up to 15in (38cm) of rain is predicted to fall as Maria barrels across the
Caribbean, with "isolated maximum amounts of 20in (51cm)" expected to deluge the
British Virgin Islands.

In Anguilla up to 8in (20cm) could be recorded. The NHC has warned that
"rainfall on these islands could cause life-threatening flash floods and
mudslides".

(AFP/

Getty

Images)

Brigadier Ridge said the combination of tidal surges and flooding on the British
Virgin Islands is something that is worrying the governor, Gus Jaspert.

"They had an hour's rain a few days ago and that created four foot of flooding,
so if you get potentially 12 hours of rain you can imagine how much worse that
will be," he added.

Dominica's prime minister Roosevelt Skerrit said the hurricane had wrought
"widespread devastation" and the islanders had "lost all what money can buy and
replace".

He said in a Facebook post: "The winds have swept away the roofs of almost every
person I have spoken to or otherwise made contact with."

A motorist drives through flood water in Fort de France (AFP/

Getty

Images)

Hurricane Maria arrived in the region less than two weeks after Hurricane Irma,
one of the most powerful storms in decades, unleashed devastation.

More than 1,300 UK troops are currently deployed in the region, and were sent to
help with relief and repair work after Hurricane Irma caused chaos.

An additional 42-strong military resilience team has also been deployed to the
BVI ready to offer support and assistance after Maria has hit.

HMS Ocean, which is carrying another 60 tonnes of aid to complement the 75
tonnes of DfID relief items which have already arrived, will drop anchor in the
region this weekend.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2017 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 640 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         Morning Star (Wilmington, NC)

                           August 10, 1996, Saturday

IT WASN'T THE BIG ONE; Though Bertha left plenty of damage, winds were below
hurricane force in most areas

BYLINE: By JEFF SELINGO, Staff writer

SECTION: Local/Regional; Pg. 1A, 4A

LENGTH: 608 words


Think you've been through a hurricane? Think again.

No one on land experienced the strongest winds from Hurriane Bertha, say experts
at the National Hurricane Center, which released its preliminary report on the
storm this week.

The highest recorded surface wind gust and sustained wind in the Carolinas
occurred offshore at Frying Pan Shoals. The gust of 116 mph was recorded a
little after noon on July 12, while the highest sustained wind of 88 mph was
measured two hours later.

Over land, the highest wind gust was recorded at New River, just north of
Topsail Island, which experienced the worst damage from Bertha. The gust of 108
mph was measured at 4:21 p.m. on July 12.

Wilmington didn't even get sustained hurricane-force winds - 74 mph or greater.

The airport measured sustained winds of 53 mph. But a gust of 88.5 mph was
measured at the state port.

The storm surge - a bulge of water brought ashore by a hurricane - was between 4
and 6 feet above the normal tide level along the coast.

The highest surge of 7 to 8 feet hit just east of Camp Lejeune around 5 p.m.
July 12, said Dan Pearson, a coastal geologist based at Wrightsville Beach.

The numbers add up to a warning from hurricane experts: Don't get complacent
because Bertha did little damage to you or your property.

"It's not a good thing for people to look at Bertha as the norm," said Sam
Houston, a researcher with the Hurricane Center in Miami. "North Carolina was
really lucky."

Bertha wasn't a typical hurricane because it hit early in the season and its
strongest punch remained over the Atlantic Ocean, Mr. Houston said.

Usually, some area over land experiences the highest hurricane-force winds.

But the track of Bertha and the geography of Southeastern North Carolina kept
the eastern portion of the storm, and the strongest winds, over the Atlantic
Ocean. By the time the eastern part of the storm made landfall in the Morehead
City area, Bertha had weakened, Mr. Houston said.

"If Bertha came in below Wilmington, then you would have seen stronger winds,"
Mr. Houston said.

A warmer Gulf Stream would have made the storm even stronger, researchers say.

Before Bertha hit the coast last month, it intensified some after crossing the
Gulf Stream. But the water was cooler in July than it is in September, when
hurricanes normally affect the East Coast. And the warmer the water, the more
likely a hurricane will stengthen.

The wind data from Bertha should serve as warning to those who want to stay
behind on barrier islands in future storms, Mr. Houston said.

"People have to decide for themselves, but a lot of people haven't experienced
hurricanes," Mr. Houston said. "People in Wilmington didn't experience true
hurricane winds."

Surface observations reported to the National Hurricane Center from Hurricane
Bertha.

The National Hurricane Center released these statistics for Hurricane Bertha's
path up the East Coast. Wind gusts are peak bursts; sustained winds are those
measured for more than one minute. Because some measuring stations were damaged
or not operating during the storm, the center did not have complete information
from all measuring sites.

New RiverGust 108 mph, 4:21 p.m.

Wrightsville Beach

Banks ChannelGust 92 mph

Wilmington airportGust 70.1 mph, 3:02 p.m.;

Sustained winds: 52.9 mph, 4:28 p.m.

State PortGust 88.5 mph

Kure BeachGust 92 mph, 2:35 p.m.

Sustained winds: 56.35 mph

SouthportGust 85.1 mph, 1:03 p.m.

Sustained winds: 63.25 mph

Frying Pan ShoalsGust 116.5 mph, 12:10 p.m.

Sustained winds: 88.5 mph

Myrtle BeachGust 59.8 mph

Staff art / CAROL COLLIER.


LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Staff photo / TYLER HICKS. Winds at Southport gusted up to 85.1 mph
during the height of the storm. ; Staff photo / JAMIE MONCRIEF. Houses at North
Topsail Beach saw some of the most serious damage.

                   Copyright 1996 Wilmington Star-News, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 641 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                       Sunday Star-News (Wilmington, NC)

                           November 30, 1997, Sunday

HURRICANE SEASON; Forecaster sees more storms coming in 1998

BYLINE: By AARON HOOVER, Staff writer

SECTION: Local/Regional; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 354 words


Next year's Atlantic hurricane season won't be as tame as the one ending today,
a noted hurricane forecaster says.

Colorado State University professor William Gray on Friday predicted an "average
or a little below average" number of hurricanes for the 1998 season starting
June 1.

He said an average season is 10 named storms, six hurricanes and two major
hurricanes. He wouldn't release specific predictions, saying researchers are
still working on numbers due out Friday.

"We are pretty sure it won't be a huge hurricane season like '95 or '96, but it
will certainly be more active than this year," Dr. Gray said.

Largely because of the Pacific winds of El Nino, this year's Atlantic hurricane
season was unusually slow. There was one hurricane - Hurricane Danny - with
steady winds of 111 mph or higher, two smaller hurricanes and seven tropical
storms.

While El Nino is expected to cause a colder, wetter winter across much of the
East, Dr. Gray predicted it will have little or no effect on next year's
hurricane season. Other weather patterns point to an average year, he said.

El Nino, in which warmer than average water in the eastern Pacific disrupts
climate patterns, is blamed for hurricanes in the West, including Hurricane
Pauline, which tore across Mexico in September.

Dr. Gray had accurately forecast the number of tropical storms and hurricanes
for 14 Atlantic seasons, but his predictions were way off this year. He forecast
11 tropical storms, with seven leading to hurricanes, including three major
hurricanes with winds up to 111 mph.

But that was before this year's El Nino, the strongest in recorded history.

"Where we went wrong was there's no way we could have foreseen the El Nino would
have been this strong," he said.

The remnants of Hurricane Danny drenched North Carolina's midsection with up to
4 inches of rain, causing damage to crops and flooding in Charlotte. The state
was untouched by the other storms.

The 1997 season was a sharp contrast to 1996, when Hurricanes Fran and Bertha
caused billions of dollars in damage to coastal communities and inland.


LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Atlantic storm season: 1996. Hurricane names: Arthur, Bertha, Cesar,
Dolly, Edouard, Fran, Gustav, Hortense, Isidore, Josephine, Kyle, Lili, Marco.
Atlantic storm season 1997: Hurricane names: Ana, Bill, Claudette, Danny, Erika,
Fabian, Grace

                   Copyright 1997 Wilmington Star-News, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 642 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         Morning Star (Wilmington, NC)

                           December 9, 1999, Thursday

Hurricane forecasters: Get set for near repeat of 1999

BYLINE: AMY E. TURNBULL, Staff Writer

SECTION: Front Page; Pg. 1A, 4A

LENGTH: 789 words


How accurate is he?

William Gray and his team at Colorado State University say their forecast for
1999 was one of the best ever. How will their latest effort compare?

1999 forecast: 14 named storms, 9 hurricanes (4 major)

1999 actual season: 12 named storms, 8 hurricanes (5 major)

2000 forecast: 11 named storms, 7 hurricanes (3 major)

Weather researchers said Wednesday that next year's hurricane season may be much
like the busy season that ended last week.

William Gray, a professor of atmospheric science at Colorado State University,
and his team of scientists and statisticians predicted 11 named storms in the
Atlantic in 2000, seven of which will become hurricanes.

They believe three of the hurricanes will become intense, meaning they will
reach at least Category 3 or greater on the Saffir-Simpson scale. Category 3
storms have sustained winds between 111 and 130 mph.

While making for an active year in the Atlantic Basin, the predicted number of
storms is fewer than 1999's 12 named storms, eight hurricanes and five major
hurricanes.

In fact, it is the lowest number predicted in three years, leading the team to
call the 2000 hurricane season "moderate."

Dr. Gray's team also believes the hurricane season will start earlier than in
recent years.

"Relatively moderate seasons frequently start earlier, which is why we think
we'll see more storms earlier in the summer of 2000," Dr. Gray said.

The hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30.

For Dr. Gray's team, the storm prediction for 1999 was one of the most accurate
in their 16 years of publishing seasonal forecasts. The group predicted 14 named
storms, nine hurricanes and four intense hurricanes.

By Nov. 30, the Atlantic had spawned 12 named storms and eight hurricanes. Five
hurricanes were classified as intense.

"Dr. Gray has been fairly accurate in the past and he's one that emergency
managers pay attention to. We just hope none of them make land|fall," said Tom
Hegele, chief information officer for the N.C. Division of Emergency Management.

Dr. Gray and his team reported that there is an above-average probability that a
major hurricane will make landfall in the United States.

The professor's 2000 forecast says the U.S. Atlantic coast has a 45 percent
chance of being hit by a storm with winds above 100 mph. The long-term mean is
31 percent.

"Quite frankly, I hope he's wrong," Mr. Hegele said from a disaster field office
in Raleigh. "We're still trying to wrap up this year. Of course, we're
constantly looking at what we can do to improve the system, make it more
responsive."

Mr. Hegele thinks educating the public about the seriousness of storms is the
most important preparation officials can make.

The state Emergency Management Division is developing educational materials that
he hopes will include "exciting, inventive or creative ways to get people to pay
attention."

Mr. Hegele said experts have told him "it often takes 20 or more times of people
hearing a message before they comprehend it, and then having to experience it
personally before they take it seriously."

His division hopes to get the message through before people have to experience
storm tragedy firsthand.

Although he admitted that all the public awareness programs in the world may not
get through to everyone.

"You hear a lot of people saying, 'It's only a Category 1 or Category 2
hurricane. It's no big deal.'" he said. "Floyd was a Category 2 and 51 people
died."

On the heels of the second-costliest hurricane season on record for insurance
companies, the predictions are disheartening to local agents.

"We've already discussed it in here and we're just dreading it," said Lorie
Alford, an agent at Southeastern Insurance Inc. in Wilmington. "This year was
really, really difficult."

She explained that insurance agencies here went through long periods when they
couldn't put policies into effect because of approaching hurricanes. And the
storms came in such rapid succession that agencies didn't have much time in
between to write policies.

"This year was just really stressful with that," Ms. Alford said. "All we're
going to do is sit here and worry about it until next year."

The last five hurricane seasons have been the most active consecutive years on
record in the Atlantic Basin, with 65 named storms, 41 hurricanes and 20 major
hurricanes.

Dr. Gray believes that the La Nina phenomenon, a cooling of the Pacific Ocean
that has been present for two years, will weaken by next Atlantic hurricane
season.

Because the numbers of hurricanes and typhoons in the Pacific Ocean have
decreased, Dr. Gray believes the increase in Atlantic hurricanes is not the
result of global warming.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1999 Wilmington Star-News, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 643 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         Morning Star (Wilmington, NC)

                          November 30, 2000, Thursday

HURRICANE SEASON COMES TO AN END; 8 hurricanes, but none hits U.S.

BYLINE: BRIAN FEAGANS, Staff Writer

SECTION: Front Page; Pg. 1A, 4A

LENGTH: 922 words


CAROLINA BEACH - An unusually active Atlantic hurricane season will end today
without leaving much of a mark on the U.S. shoreline.

From Alberto to Nadine, there were 14 named storms in the Atlantic this year,
eight of which strengthened into hurricanes. The figures were well above the
historical averages of 9.3 named storms and 5.8 hurricanes a season.

Yet for the first time since 1994, no hurricane crossed the U.S. coastline. Only
tropical storms Gordon and Helene made landfall, both along Florida's Gulf
Coast.

"We were lucky this year," said Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane
Center in Miami. "Normally the more storms you have form, the more make
landfall."

An upper-level trough that sat over the Eastern United States in August and
September deflected some storms out to sea and weakened others, Mr. Mayfield
said.

The tranquility was a welcome breather for Cape Fear Coast residents still
trying to catch their breath from six hurricanes in the previous four seasons.

Elizabeth Fox, manager of the SeaWitch Motel & Cafe in Carolina Beach, said she
was a bit nervous when the newly remodeled inn opened on the oceanfront in
March.

Over last winter, the new owners refitted the complex's two buildings with
hurricane-resistant siding, added fresh white trim and renovated the rooms. In a
bold stroke, they installed a larger pool to replace the one that Hurricanes
Fran, Bonnie and Floyd all filled with sand.

"I was saying, 'Please don't have us go through that again,'" Ms. Fox said. "And
we didn't. This season has been great with no hurricanes."

Last year, the one-two punch of Hurricanes Dennis and Floyd left motel rooms
here empty from September through the end of the year.

"This year we were sold out the weekend before Thanksgiving," Ms. Fox said.

It's a welcome turn for a region that hasn't gotten many breaks from the tropics
lately.

Fran started its $ 6 billion trail of devastation at Carolina Beach in 1996.
Bonnie dumped sand and floodwaters onto the streets here in 1998. And Floyd did
the same thing as it grew into the most expensive and deadly natural disaster in
state history last year, claiming 52 lives statewide.

Though people are still piecing together their lives farther inland, greater
Wilmington got back on its economic feet this year, said Judith Grizzel,
president of the Cape Fear Convention and Visitors Bureau.

Room tax revenues had double-digit increases for most of the summer months this
year, she said.

"From an overall business standpoint, we were in desperate need of this season,"
she said.

But tourist spending is still lagging behind the rapid expansion that led up to
Hurricane Fran in 1996, Ms. Grizzel said. The spate of hurricanes has made
travelers wary of booking rooms months in advance.

"A lot of the travel we saw was last-minute," she said. "They wanted to wait and
make sure we had good weather."

The 14 storms that swirled up from the tropics this year were more evidence that
the Atlantic is in the midst of a prolonged period of increased activity.

With 26 hurricanes, the last three seasons have been the most active three-year
period in recorded history. The 2000 hurricane season also entered the record
books as the finale to the busiest six-year period in the Atlantic, the
hurricane center's Mr. Mayfield said.

"We don't want to drop our guard," he said. "You can just look in the history
books, especially along the North Carolina coast, to know that."

Mark Sudduth, owner of Hurricane Maps Enterprises Inc., cited another key
indicator - the number of intense hurricanes - to make the same point.

From 1990 to 1994, there were only five storms reaching at least Category 3 on
the Saffir-Simpson scale, meaning sustained winds are at least 111 miles per
hour.

Since then there have been 23 powerful storms.

That does not bode well for the U.S. coast, said Mr. Sudduth who travels around
the Southeast to track hurricanes.

"If we see that kind of pattern continue in the next 10 to 20 years, the damage
will be unprecedented," he said.

From the deck of a second-story room at the SeaWitch Motel, Ms. Fox faced into
calm winds fitting of the season. Ms. Fox said that although she's an optimist
by nature, she hasn't forgotten the region's recent hurricane history after only
one tranquil year.

"It's going to happen again - that's a given," she said. "But when it does, you
hope it's not as devastating as in the past."

Want to go?

Hurricane tracker Mark Sudduth, who owns Hurricane Maps Enterprises Inc., will
lead a seminar today on recent trends in hurricane activity.

The meeting will begin at 7 p.m. in the upstairs meeting room at the University
of North Carolina at Wilmington's DeLoach Hall. It is open to the public.

Active season ends

The 2000 hurricane season was unusually busy, with 14 named storms. However,
only two of those storms, reached the U.S. mainland.

Storm names

A - Alberto*

B - Beryl

C - Chris

D - Debby*

E - Ernesto

F - Florence

G - Gordon

H - Helene

I - Isaac*

J - Joyce*

K - Keith*

L - Leslie

M - Michael*

N - Nadine

* Hurricanes $ M Hurricane stats Avg.  2000 season Number of named storms 9.3 14
Number of hurricanes 5.8 8 Intense hurricanes 2.2 3

Alberto lasted 19 days, the third-longest-lived storm in recorded history.

Hurricane Isaac had the strongest winds of the season, 140 mph.

Staff art / STEVEN PIPES


LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Staff photo / MARK COURTNEY. Elizabeth Fox, manager of the SeaWitch
Motel in Carolina Beach, says it's a relief to have the 2000 hurricane season
over without any damage to our area. The motel was refurbished last winter.;
Staff photo / MARK COURTNEY. Jonah Recko, 3, runs back into his Carolina Beach
home through a downpour. The rains were generated by Tropical Storm Gordon.

                   Copyright 2000 Wilmington Star-News, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 644 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                              May 10, 2005 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

'Cane poll results startle Many still don't plan to prepare

BYLINE: DINAH VOYLES PULVER - ENVIRONMENT WRITER

SECTION: SECTION A; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 482  words


Forget the masking tape. Skip the candles. But shore up those survival skills
and buy your hurricane supplies now. That's the message from a national effort
launched Monday to promote hurricane awareness to residents of coastal states
from Texas to Maine.

Hurricane season starts June 1. A recent poll of 1,000 people in those states,
commissioned by the National Hurricane Survival Initiative, had some startling
and disappointing results for officials who have preached hurricane preparedness
for years. A majority of those surveyed don't know what they need and aren't
ready. More than half, for example, said they thought masking tape would prevent
windows from shattering. It doesn't. And nearly 40 percent did not realize that
low-lying evacuation routes could be cut off hours before a storm arrives. Max
Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center, said he finds the results
"upsetting." "We need to do better," Mayfield said during a Monday news
conference. The survey showed too many people still don't understand the deadly
nature of hurricanes or the accidents that can happen afterwards, Mayfield said.
More people died as an indirect result of last year's hurricanes than during the
storms, he said. In house fires caused by candles, for example, he said. And too
many people still dont realize the dangers of inland flooding. Only about half
those surveyed said they have a plan if their home is threatened by a serious
hurricane, something emergency management folks have been preaching for years.
The results were a little more encouraging among those who had actually
experienced a tropical storm or hurricane, but still not as good as Mayfield and
others would like. Jade Jacobson of Deltona said she wont be caught without a
hurricane plan again.

We werent prepared last year, Jacobson said. This year she has flashlights,
batteries and canned goods on hand but she plans to stock up on other supplies.
But Jacobson said she was surprised to learn that hurricane season starts so
soon. Weather experts say its highly unlikely Floridians will face another four
land-falling hurricanes this year, but they are predicting another busy cycle of
tropical activity. The time to prepare for that season is now, said Charlie
Craig, emergency management operations coordinator for Volusia County. State
legislators have granted Floridians a tax- free holiday for buying some
hurricane supplies during the first 12 days of June. But groceries are always
tax-exempt and plywood isnt covered. So Craig said people should start shopping
for those things now and beat the rush. Among the agencies participating in the
hurricane initiative are the Salvation Army, the National Emergency Management
Association, the National Hurricane Center and the Florida Division of Emergency
Management. To learn more about the National Hurricane Survival Initiative,
visit www.hurricanesafety.org.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Caption: Photo 1: A visitor climbs the stairs to tour a Lockheed WP- 3D
Orion aircraft used by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to
fly into hurricanes during the planes stop Friday at Jacksonville International
Airport. The plane was on tour for Hurricane Awareness Day. Tail stickers
representing 68 different hurricanes are evidence of some of the action the
29-year-old aircraft has seen.Associated PressPhoto 2: Max Mayfield

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2005 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 645 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                             June 1, 2005 Wednesday
                    Flagler/palm Coast News-tribune Edition

ARE YOU READY?Major storms expected in 2005

BYLINE: AARON LONDON - STAFF WRITER

SECTION: SECTION A; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 475  words


After suffering through 2004's hurricane season, the last thing residents want
to hear is a prediction of more of the same in 2005. But that seems to be the
consensus of forecasters looking at the hurricane season that begins today. The
forecasting team at Colorado State University, headed by William Gray and Philip
Klotzbach, increased their forecast for the 2005 season and now call for a
"significantly above-average" Atlantic basin hurricane season. "All of the
information we have collected and analyzed . . . indicates that the 2005
Atlantic hurricane season will be an active one," said Gray in a news release.

"We expect this year to continue the trend witnessed over the last decade of
above-average hurricane seasons." Gray said the hurricane activity will be about
135 percent of the long-term average and the probability of a major hurricane
making landfall in the United States is 140 percent of average. An earlier
forecast by the Colorado State team called for 11 named storms, six hurricanes
and three intense hurricanes. In May, those estimates were updated to forecast
15 named storms with eight expected to develop into hurricanes and four expected
to become major hurricanes at category 3, 4 or 5 strength on the Saffir-Simpson
scale. Storms of that magnitude have sustained winds of 111 miles per hour or
more. Gray said an El Nino event in the Pacific could reduce the number of
Atlantic hurricanes, but that significant El Nino activity this summer and fall
are less likely. "If the next few months verify our beliefs about the lack of
significant El Nino conditions, it is likely that we will be raising our
forecast numbers," Klotzbach said. "As it stands today, conditions in the
Atlantic are very favorable for an active hurricane season. The National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administrations National Hurricane Center is also predicting an
above- normal hurricane season for 2005.

NOAAs prediction for the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season is for 12 to 15 tropical
storms, with seven to nine becoming hurricanes, of which three to five could
become major hurricanes, said Conrad C. Lautenbacher, undersecretary of commerce
for oceans and atmosphere and NOAA administrator, in a news release. Officials
at the National Weather Service emphasized the time to plan for the hurricane
season is now.

Last years hurricane season provided a reminder that planning and preparation
for a hurricane do make a difference, said Max Mayfield, director of the NOAA
National Hurricane Center. Residents in hurricane vulnerable areas who had a
plan, and took individual responsibility for acting on those plans, fared far
better than those who did not. NOAAs hurricane outlook reflects an expected
continuation of above-average activity that began in 1995. Over the past 10
years, all but two Atlantic hurricane seasons have been above average.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2005 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 646 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                             April 17, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

'Cane cause debate brewing Scientists disagree on global warming's role

BYLINE: DINAH VOYLES PULVER - ENVIRONMENT WRITER

SECTION: SECTION A; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 794  words

DATELINE: ORLANDO


ORLANDO Neil Frank, the former National Hurricane Center director known for his
genial on-air demeanor in the face of disaster, gets fire in his eyes when he
hears anyone blame hurricanes on global warming. No way, said Frank, now chief
meteorologist for a Houston television station. He and other experts who have
studied tropical storms and cyclones for 30, 40 or like Frank 50 years say the
Atlantic is in a natural, but deadly, hurricane cycle. But several climate
change scientists disagree. They say more intense hurricanes are being seen in
the North Atlantic hurricane basin and worldwide because man-made increases in
greenhouse gases may be warming the oceans and fueling the storms. The debate
has captured the interest of the hurricane-beleaguered public, which may not
understand the science but definitely would like to know what the heck is going
on. "You can't help but wonder," said Bob Rogers with the Deltona Fire
Department. Rogers watched last week as the debate took center stage at the
National Hurricane Conference. Two scientists presented opposing views: Judith
Curry, a professor from the Georgia Institute of Technology, and James O'Brien,
the Florida state climatologist and a professor of climate science at Florida
State University. Curry, who co-authored a paper with two colleagues on the
effects of warming on hurricanes, argued the recent increase in hurricane
activity, especially in intense hurricanes, can't be explained solely by natural
history. From 1851 until the 1970s, the number of storms closely mirrors
variations in sea surface temperature, Curry said. But there is "substantial
evidence," she said, that the upswing in activity since the '70s can't be
explained by known climate variations. Climate model experiments seem to show
it's because global tropical sea surface temperatures have risen a little more
than 1 degree Fahrenheit since the 1970s, she said. Between the natural cycles
and greenhouse warming, Curry warned the North Atlantic may be in for a "triple
whammy" in the next couple of decades. But O'Brien argued the climate models are
flawed and don't include enough area of the ocean. Showing charts that indicate
the Gulf of Mexico was perhaps a degree or two warmer than normal only near its
extreme northern shores last August, O'Brien scoffs at statements made by one
scientist that those temperatures powered Katrina into a super storm.

It was August, people," O'Brien said Friday. "Put your toe in the Gulf of Mexico
in August. It's hot!" Ocean temperatures in the overall Atlantic hurricane basin
or in the world's other hurricane regions have not been warming more than normal
during the storm seasons, he said. "It's very difficult to interpret multiple
cycles and how they work together." Deltona's Rogers said the debate was
interesting, but not convincing either way. Ultimately, both Curry and O'Brien
said more research is needed. Many of the experts now studying hurricanes agree.
James Franklin, a hurricane specialist at the National Hurricane Center, said
there's not enough firm data on either side to come down on either extreme.
Franklin's colleague, the science officer at the center, Chris Landsea, has done
extensive research of old ships' logs and history books to identify long-
forgotten hurricanes.

I know how many holes there are in the data. I put it together," Landsea said
Friday. Landsea resigned from an international panel on climate change last year
after its chairman made public statements linking global warming and hurricanes.
He said the statements were scientifically unfounded and compromised the
committee's impartiality. Landsea is a former student of Dr. William Gray, who
studied global climate patterns and began predicting seasonal hurricane
probability more than 20 years ago. Gray is an outspoken critic of the global
warming theories and made that point repeatedly at the conference. Frank walked
away from the debate shaking his head. Methods now used to measure intensity
weren't even widely used until the hurricane center sent its current director,
Max Mayfield, around the world in the late 1980s to teach other countries how to
use it. And before satellites and hurricane reconnaissance flights, no one knows
how many storms there were or how strong they were, Frank said.

You can't compare data when we didn't have satellites to today when we do," he
said. He contends the hurricane center is naming several storms each year more
than they would have when he was at the center. Does Global Warming Build
Intense Storms?NO: The Atlantic is in a natural hurricane cycle, says Neil
Frank, former National Hurricane Center director.YES: Intense storms can't be
explained by natural history, says Judith Curry, Georgia Institute of Technology
professor.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Caption: Uncaptioned satellite photo of hurricane.

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2006 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2006 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 647 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             April 7, 2011 Thursday

Gray predicts active 2011 hurricane season

BYLINE: Karen Hollish, The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 464 words


April 07--Virgin Islanders should brace themselves for an active hurricane
season with a 46 percent chance of a hurricane tracking within 100 miles of the
territory, Dr. Philip Klotzbach of Colorado State University said Wednesday.

Klotzbach and his co-author, renowned forecaster William Gray, released the
latest update to the annual Atlantic Seasonal Hurricane Activity and Landfall
Strike Probability report. They predict 16 named storms, nine hurricanes and
five major hurricanes for 2011.

It is "significantly more activity" than the average seasons between 1950 to
2000, the report said.

Last year's weak spring winds resulted in warmer-than-usual waters in the
tropical Atlantic, Klotzbach said. The temperatures are a factor in creating
active hurricane seasons, he said.

Last year's study predicted 15 named storms and eight hurricanes; at the end of
the 2010 season, three major storms had hit the territory. Because of the
substantial flooding, rock slides and mud slides caused by those storms,
President Barack Obama declared three separate disasters that brought federal
response aid to the territory.

Klotzbach and Gray said that while there has been an "upswing" in major
hurricane activity in the Atlantic basin since 1995, research does not suggest
it is linked to global warming.

"It has been tempting for many who do not have a strong background of hurricane
information to jump on this recent increase in major hurricane activity as
strong evidence of a human influence on hurricanes," Klotzbach and Gray said.

The authors went on to say the recent 16-year period has been no more active
than the 16-year period between 1949-1964, when Atlantic Ocean conditions were
similar to those observed in the last 16 years. That earlier period had as many
major hurricanes as the more recent chunk of time, even though the amount of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere was lower than it has been in more recent
years, Klotzbach and Gray said.

However, the 46 percent chance of a hurricane tracking within 100 miles of the
territory is higher than the average historical probability of about 30 percent,
Klotzbach said.

He encouraged residents to start readying themselves now.

"Whether our forecast verifies itself or not," Klotzbach said, "people need to
remember it only takes one storm to make an active season for you."

- Contact reporter Karen Hollish at 774-9772 ext. 304 or email
khollish@dailynews.vi

To see more of The Virgin Islands Daily News, or to subscribe to the newspaper,
go to http://www.virginislandsdailynews.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, The Virgin
Islands Daily News, St. Thomas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services. For more information about the content services offered by
McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110407-1VI-Gray-predicts-active-2011-hurricane-season-0407-20110407

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2011 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 648 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                             Daily News (New York)

                             June 10, 1997, Tuesday

A STORMY YEAR SEEN FOR COAST

BYLINE: By ROBERT GEARTY

SECTION: Suburban; Pg.  9

LENGTH: 324 words


This could be another busy year for hurricanes along the East Coast.

Global weather patterns continue to support above-average hurricane activity
this year, according to Colorado State University's highly regarded team of
hurricane forecasters.

Led by Prof. William Gray, the team is predicting 11 tropical storms will form
this year, with seven hurricanes and three intense hurricanes developing.

On average, 9.3 tropical storms, 5.8 hurricanes and 2.1 major hurricanes form
annually.

If the team's predictions materialize, 1997 would be the third consecutive
above-average hurricane season, making the period between 1995-1997 the most
active three-year hurricane period in the past 120 years.

Last year, there were 13 tropical storms, nine hurricanes and six major
hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean, the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico.

Gray and his team predicted 11 tropical storms, seven hurricanes and three
intense hurricanes in 1996 in a series of forecasts between November 1995 and
last August.

"We experienced a downturn in hurricane activity from the early 1970s to the
early 1990s, where there were fewer intense hurricanes," Gray said. "Now it
appears we are entering a period of increased hurricane activity similar to the
late 1940s to the late 1960s, when there were many more major hurricanes making
landfall along the East Atlantic Coast, Florida and the Caribbean."

The last big hurricane to hit Long Island was Gloria in 1985.

But that hasn't stopped emergency management offices on Long Island from gearing
up to deal with a hurricane should one head this way.

"Dr. Gray has a very good track record and is highly regarded, so we follow his
predictions quite closely," said Nassau Police Officer Elaine Biegner, who is
assigned to the county Emergency Management Office. "During the course of the
year, we are constantly prepared for any emergency, whether man-made or
natural."

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                        Copyright 1997 Daily News, L.P.


                          FOCUS - 649 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                           The Ledger (Lakeland, FL)

                             June 1, 2004, Tuesday

POLK COUNTY OVERDUE FOR HURRICANE

BYLINE: KADESHA THOMAS The Ledger

SECTION: Hurricane 2004; Pg. S2

LENGTH: 1090 words


Dee Davis-Campbell sat on her father's lap with a flashlight and watched
Hurricane Donna rip through Polk County in September 1960.

With 135-mph winds, the hurricane knocked out power all over the county for a
week and left a blanket of green oranges from blown-over citrus trees on the
yard outside Davis-Campbell's family home in Fort Meade.

"I stayed up the whole night scared to death," said Davis-Campbell, a lifelong
Polk County resident who was in seventh grade when the storm hit.

"You could see the silhouette of trees whipping around," she said. "After the
storm it was silent, dead silent."

Polk County hasn't seen a rip 'em up-tear 'em down hurricane since Donna, but
this season's hurricane predictions warn residents not to get too comfortable,
especially because this area is overdue for a hurricane.

Could this be the year?

Researchers at the National Hurricane Center in Miami said the Atlantic region
has been in a high activity period, meaning 10 or more named storms with six
becoming hurricanes, since around 1995.

This season, from June 1 to Nov. 30, activity is expected to be well above
normal.

The National Hurricane Center predicts 12 to 15 tropical storms, with winds of
at least 39 miles per hour for the Atlantic, Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico.

Of those tropical storms, six to eight are expected to become hurricanes, with
winds of at least 74 mph.

And two to four of those are expected to turn into major hurricanes with winds
faster than 110 mph.

These predictions are consistent with a more specific forecast from Bill Gray,
national hurricane expert at the Department of Atmospheric Science at Colorado
State University.

His predictions are:

14 named storms

Eight hurricanes

Three intense hurricanes

Gray's research, based on probability, concluded that there is a 71 percent
chance that a hurricane will touch the United States' mainland, which is
anywhere from Maine to Texas.

From the Florida Peninsula up the East Coast, the likelihood is 52 percent.

The Gulf Coast, from the Florida Panhandle to Brownsville, Texas, has a slightly
better chance of being spared but still faces a 40 percent probability of seeing
a hurricane make landfall.

"This can't keep going," Gray warned about the nation not getting hit by a major
hurricane since Andrew 12 years ago. "Climatology will eventually right itself.
We're going to see hurricane damage like you've never seen it."

Predictions for an active season are based on atmospheric signals, such as the
absence of vertical shearing. Vertical shearing disrupts a storm's formation. It
occurs when upper-level winds are stronger and blowing in a different direction
than the weaker winds in the lower level.

Sea surface temperatures are also an indication. Atlantic Ocean temperatures are
above normal, which is 80 degrees Fahrenheit, increasing the chance for strong
storms to develop. Tropical storms feed off warm water -- and the warmer the
water, the stronger the storm.

With the exception of Hurricane Andrew's rampage through South Florida in 1992,
the Peninsula has escaped any major blow. A hurricane hasn't rolled through
Central Florida in 44 years, although the area has had a series of storms brush
past.

"People have been scratching their heads, wondering why we aren't getting hit,"
Jarvinen said. "But that could change at any time. Eventually we are going to
have something."

Jarvinen said that, regardless of past hurricane activity, there is no way to
tell exactly where a hurricane will hit.

"Mother Nature doesn't work that way," he said.

James Elsner, climatologist at Florida State University, predicts a slightly
calmer season than Gray or the National Hurricane Center, due to a climate
change.

"My recollection is that they are not anticipating El Nino to develop until
after the season," Elsner said. "I think we are going to start seeing El Nino
develop in August."

Right now neither El Nino and La Nina have formed in the Central Pacific off of
South America to impact this season's predictions, said Brian Jarvinen, a
forecaster for the National Hurricane Center in Miami.

El Nino usually means fewer storms in the Atlantic because Central Pacific
waters are warmer than normal, which creates more rain and disrupts hurricane
activity.

La Nina promotes storm activity because waters in the Central Pacific are cooler
than normal and there is less rain to interfere with the Atlantic storms.

Because he predicts El Nino developing later in the season, Elsner said he
predicts Florida has a 35 percent to 40 percent chance of being hit by a
hurricane this season.

"With a few exceptions, we haven't gotten our share of hurricanes in the last 50
years compared to the past 200 years," Elsner said. "Overall, this season is not
going to be as active as the last couple."

Because Polk County is not on the coast, residents can relax a little, said Pete
McNally, the county's emergency management programs manager.

Polk County is less vulnerable to a hurricane than areas right off the ocean,
but residents can still be impacted.

Think of Hurricane Andrew in 1992 when the storm went from one coast to another.
McNally said that if the storm was further north on the peninsula, Polk County
could have been right in its path.

Florida is only 120 miles across from coast to coast.

"That could be the width of the storm," McNally said.

In 1999, Hurricane Floyd threatened Polk County. McNally said the storm was
large enough to cover the state, but blew up the East Coast, mostly affecting
the Carolinas.

It caused the largest evacuation in U.S. history, including 1,600 Polk County
residents who left their homes as a precaution.

No matter where the storm hits, "it all depends on the size and strength of the
storm," McNally said. "That's why we shouldn't lull ourselves into thinking that
we are not going to face winds.

"Just because we are inland, doesn't mean we are safe," he said.

Though Davis-Campbell hasn't seen anything like Hurricane Donna in over four
decades, she said she still prepares just in case another hurricane hits.

"I have the utmost respect for them," Davis-Campbell said. "When the season is
approaching, I start storing water, batteries, canned food and candles.

"If you don't have a plan, then you're running around like a chicken with its
head cut off," Jarvinen said. "Maybe that's why we haven't had one in a while,
because people are prepared."

Material from The Associated Press was used in this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

             Copyright 2004 Lakeland Ledger Publishing Corporation


                          FOCUS - 650 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                           The Ledger (Lakeland, FL)

                             June 1, 2004, Tuesday

'03 STORMS KILLED 71

BYLINE: NICOLE COLON Special to The Ledger

SECTION: Hurricane 2004; Pg. S6

LENGTH: 856 words


While Florida was spared again in 2003, seven hurricanes hit all around the
state, in the Gulf of Mexico and along the eastern seaboard from North Carolina
all the way to Nova Scotia in Canada.

Those seven hurricanes were blamed for the deaths of 71 people.

The deadliest was Hurricane Isabel, a long-lived storm that reached Category 5
status.

Isabel rolled ashore in mid-September 2003 near Drum Inlet on the Outer Banks of
North Carolina as a Category 2 hurricane.

Isabel is considered to be one of the most significant tropical cyclones to
affect portions of northeastern North Carolina and east-central Virginia since
Hurricane Hazel in 1954 and the Chesapeake-Potomac Hurricane of 1933.

Isabel was responsible for 50 deaths. The total damage was estimated to be about
$ 3.37 billion.

And in a rare occurrence, Hurricane Juan survived the cold waters of the
northern Atlantic to hit near Halifax, Nova Scotia, in late September 2003 as a
Category 2 hurricane. It was recorded as one of the most damaging tropical
cyclones in modern history for Halifax.

The last time the city of Halifax was hit by the eyewall of a hurricane was Aug.
22, 1893. Halifax Harbor recorded an all-time record water level of 4.9 feet
above the normal tide levels.

There were eight deaths in all.

Hurricane Claudette made landfall in Texas in mid-July 2003 as a Category 1
hurricane July 15 with 50 mph winds. The total damage estimate was $ 180
million.

Claudette was also responsible for three deaths.

In late July, Hurricane Danny made a large looping path over the north-central
Atlantic Ocean, but did not directly affect land and was mainly a threat to
shipping.

There were no reports of damages or casualties associated with Danny. Danny was
a tropical cyclone that lasted a little more than four days.

Hurricane Erika made landfall in extreme northeastern Mexico in mid-August 2003
shortly after reaching hurricane strength.

The hurricane was responsible for two deaths.

Hurricane Fabian was a long-lived, powerful hurricane that struck Bermuda with
Category 3 intensity in early September 2003. It caused extensive damage on that
island, where it was reported to be the worst hurricane since 1926.

Fabian was directly responsible for eight deaths.

Hurricane Kate became a powerful hurricane at subtropical latitudes over the
east-central Atlantic.

But it did not approach land as it spun north into the cold Atlantic waters in
late September and early October. There were no reported casualties.

Although none of these hurricanes hit Florida last season, the state has
attracted a long list of hurricanes from 1900 to 1996.

The National Hurricane Center says that 36 percent of all hurricanes that have
affected the United States hit Florida.

The southeast part of the state has been hit the hardest with 26 hurricanes.
Seven of those were Category 3 storms with minimum winds of 111 mph or higher,
four were Category 4 storms with minimum winds of 131 mph and one, Andrew, was a
Category 5 storm with minimum winds of 156 mph.

Northwest Florida has been battered with 24 hurricanes, with seven Category 3
storms.

The 1928 San Felipe-Lake Okeechobee hurricane was the deadliest hurricane in
Florida's history and second deadliest in U.S. history, killing more than 1,800
people, possibly as many as 2,500 or more, and doing a reported $ 25 million in
damage.

The nation's deadliest was the hurricane that hit Galvaston, Texas, in 1900,
killing at least 8,000, and possibly as many as 12,000. Both those storms were
Category 4.

In 1992, Hurricane Andrew devastated much of southern Miami-Dade County and is
the most expensive hurricane in U.S. history to date, with damage estimates at $
26.5 billion.

It was only the third Category 5 hurricane known to have hit the United States.

The second was Hurricane Camille, which hit Mississippi and Louisiana in 1969.

The most intense storm recorded was the 1935 Labor Day Category 5 hurricane that
hit the Florida Keys, killing 405 people. Its pressure was recorded at 892
millibars, a unit used to measure atmospheric pressure.

Hurricane Donna ranks sixth on the list of most intense storms.

It became the first hurricane recorded to travel the entire East Coast of the
United States.

In 1964, Donna hit the eastern coast of Florida with 180 mph winds and a 13-foot
storm surge. It then moved along the coast to South Carolina and its destructive
path ended in the New England states, where it produced more than 5 inches of
rain over Maine.

The Hurricane of 1938 came as a surprise in the northeastern United States.

At the time, radar was not in use so residents in the New England states were
not prepared for the hurricane.

It struck in September with wind gusts of up to 186 mph.

More than 600 people were killed in the storm and property damage was estimated
to be $ 300 million.

Adjusted for 2001, that translates into damage of $ 4.7 billion.

In the aftermath of the storm, drinking water was contaminated and phone service
for as many as 301,000 phones was out.

There was additionally fear of typhoid.


LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Ledger: Chart

             Copyright 2004 Lakeland Ledger Publishing Corporation


                          FOCUS - 651 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                           The Ledger (Lakeland, FL)

                            March 24, 2005, Thursday

THE SEASON LOOMS AHEAD; EDITORIAL

BYLINE: The Ledger

SECTION: News; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 538 words


In just over two months from now, the long, slow march of summer will begin:
First with Arlene, then Bret, Cindy, Dennis, Emily, Franklin, Gert ...

The 27th annual National Hurricane Conference is going on all week in New
Orleans in preparation for the season that begins June 1. Mike Brown, director
of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, was scheduled to speak Wednesday on
lessons learned during the last season's hurricane processional.

As the hurricane season came to a close last year, Max Mayfield, director of the
National Hurricane Center, told The Palm Beach Post that the state had come out
fairly well because the hurricanes weakened as they approached the state.
Frances dropped to a Category 2 before making landfall; Jeanne was a Category 3
hurricane retracing Frances' path; Ivan was a Category 5, but weakened to a
Category 3; Charley came ashore as a Category 5 storm, but it moved extremely
quickly and weakened as it moved inland, so areas were subjected to high winds
for a shorter period.

What particularly concerns him, he told The Post, is a rapid, overnight
intensification of an approaching hurricane that also makes an abrupt change of
course: "We still haven't had that nightmare scenario where people go to bed
prepared for a Category 1 hurricane and wake up to a Category 4. That's going to
happen one of these days, and it's going to be devastating."

One of his major hurricane predictions has already come true. Mayfield said
about five years ago that coastal development and inflation would mean new
hurricanes would be replacing others on the list of costly hurricanes.

While Andrew (1992) remains the most costly at $ 33 billion, three hurricanes of
past year now rank as the second (Charley, $ 15 billion), third (Ivan, $ 14.2
billion) and sixth (Jeanne, $ 6.9 billion) costliest storms in history.

He and other researchers also warned in a publication several years ago that the
areas "along the United States Gulf and Atlantic coasts where most of this
country's hurricane-related fatalities have occurred are also now experiencing
the country's most significant growth in population. This situation, in
combination with continued building along the coast, will lead to serious
problems for many areas in hurricanes."

The coming hurricane season is 69 days away. It's not too early to begin making
preparations for evacuation, housing pets, emergency food, water supplies and
safety precautions.

And yet, many people still haven't recovered from last season. There are still
blue tarps covering rooftops. Storm damage still remains on Polk homes.
Thousands of families across the state haven't found permanent replacement
housing.

The hurricane conference will end Friday when expert hurricane forecaster
William Gray of Colorado State University will give an update of his 2005
forecast. His preliminary one projects 11 named storms, six of which will become
hurricanes with three of those becoming Category 3 or greater.

The East Coast, including peninsula Florida, will have about a 50 percent chance
of being hit by a hurricane, greater than the historical 30 percent.

As Floridians have learned, it's never good to play the odds with hurricanes.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

             Copyright 2005 Lakeland Ledger Publishing Corporation


                          FOCUS - 652 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                  The State Journal-Register (Springfield, IL)

                           September 18, 2005 Sunday

'Divine Wind' comes across as eerie prologue to Katrina

BYLINE: DAVID BLOOMBERG CORRESPONDENT

SECTION: BOOKS; Pg. 65

LENGTH: 708 words


"Although it was clear almost immediately that the magnitude of the tragedy
completely overwhelmed local and state resources, the federal government was
slow to respond."

This statement could have come out of any newspaper in the past two weeks,
describing the response to Hurricane Katrina. And it does indeed refer to
hurricane damage, but it is in reference to Hurricane Andrew, which hit Florida
in 1992. The quote is from the new book, "Divine Wind: The History and Science
of Hurricanes" (Oxford University Press). Written by Kerry Emanuel, a hurricane
expert and professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the book
could not be timelier. Its Sept. 1 release was the same day President Bush was
trying to explain to the nation why federal relief had not materialized more
quickly after Katrina destroyed so many lives.

There are many other statements throughout the book that will strike readers as
being almost premonitory. The first sentence: "Of all the natural phenomena that
affect our planet, the hurricane is among the most deadly and destructive."
Later, after mentioning the Labor Day Hurricane of 1935 and the Galveston
Hurricane of 1900 - the worst natural disaster in United States history -
Emanuel discusses the belief of some that the ability to predict hurricanes and
warn people means such disasters could never again happen. He doesn't agree,
noting, "It is a sad fact that the United States may not have seen its last
Galveston."

Perhaps the spookiest statement in "Divine Wind" is part of Emanuel's discussion
of the difficulty of forecasting where a hurricane will go and how the
government should respond. One example is of a hurricane moving through the Gulf
of Mexico and potentially headed toward New Orleans: "Much of that city is below
sea level and relies on pumps to keep the water out. A strong storm surge
coupled with heavy rain could overwhelm the pumps and submerge most residents
and one-story buildings." Should an evacuation occur? "Underwarn and thousands
of lives are placed at risk. Overwarn and lives are lost in automobile
accidents, many millions of dollars are wasted on unnecessary evacuations ...
and the act of crying wolf may lead some to ignore future evacuation orders."

But "Divine Wind" was not meant to predict Katrina. It covers a wide range of
scientific and historical topics related to hurricanes. Indeed, it is not
intended for the light reader, as the scientific chapters discuss the physics of
hurricanes and include equations that will take people back to their high school
and college science days. But a reader doesn't need to fully absorb the
equations to understand the main points about how hurricanes form, grow, move
and destroy.

Among the most interesting aspects of "Divine Wind" are Emanuel's discussions of
how hurricanes have affected history. For example, twice Kublai Khan tried to
invade Japan - and twice typhoons smashed his fleet, forcing him to give up on
that particular conquest.

Similarly, in the 1500s, a hurricane stopped a French invasion of Florida,
allowing it to remain in Spanish hands. In 1780, the British fleet was severely
weakened by three hurricanes in the Caribbean when it needed strength to fight
the American Revolutionary War.

While not as dramatic, Katrina already has had historical effects. The director
of FEMA has resigned, and who knows what other political and social effects
might result?

But will Katrina succeed where so many other storms have failed, and teach us a
lesson about hurricane preparedness? Emanuel's assessment: "The ancient Mayans
learned by experience to build their cities inland, away from the reach of
hurricanes and their storm surges. Yet despite centuries of hurricane disasters,
our society continues to disregard collective experience and invite future
tragedy by building more and more structures in surge-prone coastal regions ...
it is unlikely that this system will change anytime soon, as we march blindly on
to the next hurricane disaster."

While we cannot stop hurricanes, we can learn to better understand them. "Divine
Wind" provides readers a good background for this, which could lead to greater
national dialogue, perhaps helping to prevent another disaster.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LOCAL

                   Copyright 2005 The State Journal-Register


                          FOCUS - 653 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     June 1, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition

FACTS ABOUT HURRICANES

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; HURRICANE!; THE STORM APPROACHES; Pg. 20G

LENGTH: 555 words



Before dismissing the 1993 season as insignificant, remember that 301 people
lost their lives to Arlene, Bret, Emily and Gert.

The condensation heat energy released by a hurricane in one day can be the
equivalent of energy released by the fusion of 100 20-megaton hydrogen bombs.
Converted to electricity, that energy could meet the Unites States' electrical
needs for about six months.

Half of the hurricanes experienced by Florida residents in the 20th  century
made landfall between Sept. 1 and Sept. 15. Elena, which stalled 80  miles off
Tampa Bay but killed four and injured 471, was a Labor Day weekend  visitor in
1985.

    After an average of eight to 10 days of blowing, the typical hurricane  dies
when it travels too far from the tropical latitudes of its birth or hits  land,
which hinders the free flow of winds and does not offer the supply of  moisture
needed to keep the storm going.

    Wire services report that Bangladesh in south Asia has had seven of this
century's deadliest storms. The worst one killed 500,000 people in 1970. The
deadliest U.S. storm this century hit Galveston, Texas, in 1900, killing  6,000.

As with other devastating storms, Hurricane Gilbert, which crashed into  Jamaica
in 1988; Hurricane Hugo, which battered South Carolina in 1989; and  Hurricane
Andrew, which ripped through South Florida in 1992, have been  banished from the
World Meteorological Association's list of Atlantic  hurricane names.

The first hurricane warning in the United Staes was flashed in 1873, with the
Signal Corps warned of a storm approaching the coast between Cape May, N.J.,
and New London, Conn.

The Sept. 16, 1928, hurricane, a category 4 storm, killed more than 2,000
people when it swept ashore in South Florida. Many of those who died were
killed when Lake Okeechobee levies broke. Faced with an overwhelming task in
the storm's aftermath, searchers resorted to burning many of the bodies.

The first hurricane warning in the United States was flashed in 1873, with  the
Signal Corps warned of a storm approaching the coast between Cape May,  N.J.,
and New London, Conn.

    In an average year, more than 100 disturbances with hurricane potential  are
seen in the Atlantic, Gulf and Caribbean. But, on an average, only 10 of  these
reach the tropical storm stage and only six mature into hurricanes.

  In general, hurricane strength is unrelated to overall size - but very  strong
hurricanes usually have relatively small eyes, less than 10 miles in  diameter.


    William McKinley, 25th president of the United States (1897-1901),
reportedly said he was more afraid of a hurricane than of the Spanish Navy. In
1898, an effort was made to establish a comprehensive hurricane warning  system.

Against the norm, 11 hurricanes were observed in 1916 and 1950; no  hurricanes
in 1907 and 1914.

In 1843, Col. Joseph Duckworth made the first international plane
reconnaissance into the eye of a hurricane.

On April 1, 1960, the first weather satellite was placed in orbit, giving
hurricane forecasters the ability to detect storms before they hit land.

The most violent activity of the storm takes place in the area immediately
around the relatively calm eye and is known as the eyewall.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 654 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Historic Hurricane Could Catch Northeast With Its Guard Down

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS

SECTION: Section C;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Science Desk;  The Environment Page

LENGTH: 1574 words


SOONER or later, meteorological circumstances will conspire to hurl another
storm as strong as the legendary hurricane of September 1938 against a
complacent Northeastern United States, and its cost in lives and property could
be the highest ever exacted by a hurricane in this country. Or so concludes a
new analysis of past hurricane behavior and present Northeastern development.

Only sheer chance kept this from happening in 1985 and 1991, when Hurricanes
Gloria and Bob, respectively, struck the Northeast, according to the author of
the study, Dr. Nicholas K. Coch, a geologist at Queens College. Had either of
those storms drifted into a certain meteorological "slot" as the 1938 hurricane
did, it could well have been more catastrophic than Hurricane Andrew, the most
destructive tropical storm ever to hit the United States mainland. Andrew struck
southern Florida in August 1992.

This would have been true, says Dr. Coch, even though Andrew was the much
stronger and more intense storm. It was rated as a category 4 storm(with
sustained winds of 131 to 155 miles an hour) on the Saffir-Simpson scale of
hurricane intensity. Category 5 hurricanes, with winds above 155 miles an hour,
are the strongest. They are never seen in the Northeast, because the cooler
waters of the northern ocean impart less energy to the storm than the warm seas
of the tropics. Category 4 storms are considered only remotely possible in the
Northeast. But if conditions are right, the 111-to-130-mile-an-hour winds
whirling about the eye of a strong category 3 hurricane (the rating of both
Gloria and Bob) could be boosted suddenly to category 4 strength by the extra
jolt imparted by strong winds off the Northeast coast.

It happens this way:

The hurricane, initially propelled westward by winds in the tropics, travels
around the western side of the big midocean mass of high-pressure air known as
the "Bermuda high," and then drifts northward. Another high-pressure system over
the Eastern United States acts in concert with the Bermuda high to create a
north-south slot of low pressure into which the hurricane has no choice but to
move.

As the storm moves north, the "steering winds" in which it is embedded become
progressively stronger. When this increased wind speed is added to that of the
counterclockwise winds on the eastern side of the hurricane itself, those
east-side winds get a boost that elevates the storm, in effect, to category 4 --
just in time to drive it across some part of the metropolitan area.

How Middling Storms Turn Deadly

The storm's increasing forward speed makes it more formidable in two other
respects as well: It allows the hurricane to race across the cooler northern
waters before they can weaken it too much, and the momentum enables the storm to
punch its swath of destruction many miles inland.

The meteorological setup that makes all this possible, which occurs perhaps 10
times a year, hurricane or not, is precisely what developed as the 1938
hurricane approached Long Island on a course that eventually took it deep into
New England. It turned a category 3 storm into what still ranks as the seventh
most costly hurricane in United States history and the most disastrous ever
recorded in the Northeast. Today, because 56 years' worth of development and
population growth have expanded the possibilities for disaster enormously, and
because Northeasterners have not experienced a truly big hurricane in decades
and are largely unprepared, a similar storm could be far more catastrophic than
Hurricane Andrew, Dr. Coch concluded.

While Dr. Coch's general analysis is correct, whether a northern hurricane would
eclipse Andrew would depend largely on where in the metropolitan area the storm
struck, said Brian Jarvinen, a research meteorologist at the National Hurricane
Center in Coral Gables, Fla. The closer the storm's track was to New York, he
said, the greater the damage would be. And while such a storm could develop in
any given hurricane season, he said, "based on climatology you'd expect to see a
hurricane in the region every 12 years" on average.

Dr. Coch has been purveying this message for some time, only to be received much
like Cassandra, whose warnings of disaster were invariably greeted by disbelief.
"We talk and we publish," he says, "but I've just about given up."

His latest publication on the subject is called "Hurricane Hazards Along the
Northeastern Atlantic Coast of the United States." It is to appear in a book
called "Coastal Hazards: Perception, Susceptibility and Mitigation," to be
published within the next few weeks by the Coastal Education and Research
Foundation in Charlottesville, Va.

In it, he identifies two accidents of geography that can conspire to help turn a
middling-strong hurricane into a killer when it hits the Northeast. Both involve
the angle formed by the north-south coast of New Jersey and the east-west coasts
of Long Island and southern New England. When a northward-moving hurricane runs
parallel to the coast, its weaker left side strikes the coast. But if and when
it crosses Long Island -- the most likely path, based on historical records --
the full force of its stronger right side is brought to bear on areas east of
the storm's eye. Unfortunately, as Dr. Coch writes, the Long Island shoreline
"is the most densely populated and developed hurricane-prone coastal area in
America."

Worst-Case Scenario

Moreover, the storm drives a surge of sea water ahead of it. When the surge
encounters the right angle made by the coast to form what is called the New York
Bight, the water tends to pile up there as the hurricane gets closer. When the
storm arrives, its rotating winds drive these waters against the New Jersey
coast, into New York Harbor and against such places as Coney Island, Rockaway
and Long Beach on western Long Island. The surge on Long Island is heightened
further by a wide, gently sloping portion of the continental shelf.

The disastrous northeasters of December 1992 and March 1993 provided a foretaste
of the pattern of damage to be expected from this convergence of factors, Dr.
Coch writes. But the severity of the damage could be much greater; the 1992
storm's maximum winds were equal only to those of a category 1 hurricane, and
then only in gusts.

The "worst-case" scenario for the New York metropolitan area, Dr. Coch writes,
would be a category 3 hurricane that bears inland across central New Jersey on a
northwesterly track. In this case, the powerful right side of the hurricane
would strike the metropolitan area squarely, according to the Coch paper,
producing a storm surge of 20 feet in Raritan Bay and New York Harbor, 15 to 19
feet along highly urbanized parts of Brooklyn and Queens and 22 to 24 feet along
the north side of Jamaica Bay in the communities of Howard Beach, Canarsie,
Gerritsen Beach, Mill Basin and Flatlands.

This worst-case hurricane, said Mr. Jarvinen, could cause damages amounting to
between $50 billion and $100 billion. By contrast, Hurricane Andrew's damages
are expected to amount to about $30 billion once all claims are settled.

Winds, especially the inevitable gusts that are stronger than the sustained
winds that define a category 3 storm, would rip up trees, which in turn would
drag down power lines. They would lift the roofs off houses and expose the
interiors to heavy rain damage. They would strip the outer coverings off the
upper stories of high-rise shoreline buildings and blow out their interiors,
while the lower floors would be inundated by storm surge, according to the
study. Dr. Coch notes that high-rise construction along the coasts of New York
and New Jersey has never been tested by a major storm. The damage to high-rises
inflicted by Hurricane Andrew "should be appreciated more" by this area's
inhabitants, he writes.

Some scientists believe that the frequency of Atlantic hurricanes rises and
falls in sequences of two decades or so. If so, a period of relatively less
frequent hurricanes is nearing its end and a period of relatively more frequent
ones is about to begin. If this belief is borne out and Dr. Coch's analysis is
correct, the odds will rise on the prospect of more frequent category 3
hurricanes in the Northeast, and on their chances of encountering the conditions
that would convert them into Andrew-sized killers.

Better Hurricane Preparedness

"Chance can easily make any one of them the next big one," Dr. Coch writes.

Should such a storm materialize, Dr. Coch says, its impact could be worsened by
the region's lack of recent experience with a true monster hurricane. Since the
area has not experienced one since 1938, lack of awareness would probably make
the necessary evacuations more difficult, Dr. Coch concludes.

Increasing hurricane awareness is one measure that could help, he writes. Others
include updating building codes to make structures more hurricane-resistant.
(Mr. Jarvinen said that in southern Florida codes were designed to cope with
storms of category 3 or less, that this was far from adequate to cope with
Andrew and that codes in the Northeast are probably not as stringent.)
Protective beaches and dunes, eroded by development over the last few decades,
should also be restored, Dr. Coch says, and adequate evacuation and sheltering
procedures should be devised -- before the big one arrives.

But arrive it will, Dr. Coch says. The only question is when.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  When conditions are right, a strong category 3 storm with winds of 111
to 130 miles an hour can get an extra jolt from strong winds off the Northeast
coast and move up to a severe category 4 storm that can penetrate far inland.
(Source: Dr. Nicholas K. Cody/Queens College)
Diagram: "How a Killer Hurricane Is Pushed North"

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 655 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                THE KOREA HERALD

                          September 24, 2005, Saturday

Putting science, engineering to proper use

LENGTH: 901 words



The most shocking statement in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina was President
George W. Bush's remark that "I don't think anybody anticipated the breach of
the levees" that were supposed to protect New Orleans from flooding. New Orleans
is a city mostly below sea level, and the levees were its line of defense
against flooding. Concern that the levees might break in the midst of a powerful
hurricane was widespread among scientists, engineers, and emergency-prevention
experts. Yet Bush apparently did not know of these concerns, even days after the
hurricane destroyed the levees and flooded the city.  There is a simple fact on
display here, one that goes well beyond this particular hurricane, and even this
particular president. There is a deep disconnection in American politics between
scientific knowledge and political decisions. Bush bears much responsibility for
this. He has proven to be one of America's least knowledgeable presidents when
it comes to science - and one of the most ready to turn science into a political
issue.  In recent months, Bush undermined the biological theories of evolution
in favor of Christian fundamentalist dogmas. He disdains climate change science
and public health science when it conflicts with the beliefs - and interests -
of his core supporters. Simply put, Bush's record on science policy is
miserable.

Climate scientists have warned for years that global warming caused by manmade
emissions of greenhouse gases will generate more extreme storms. While there is
no scientific way to link a particular hurricane such as Katrina to the
long-term trend - in the sense that Katrina might have been bad luck rather than
a sign of man-made climate change - the energy of hurricanes throughout the
world has been rising markedly. Bush, alas, led an aggressive effort to
discredit climate science rather than to respond to its findings. He called for
delays in reducing greenhouse gas emissions that cause global warming, which in
turn causes the energy of hurricanes to rise.

According to the underlying science that Bush ignores, hurricanes take their
energy from the warmth of seawater. That is why hurricanes occur in hot tropical
regions, and at the end of the summer months, when the sea surface temperatures
are at their annual maximum. Man-made global warming raises not only air
temperatures, but sea-surface temperatures as well. Higher sea-surface
temperatures translate into more powerful storms in the world's oceans.

Hurricanes are measured according to three dimensions: frequency, intensity, and
duration. The frequency of hurricanes has not changed much, if at all. The big
changes are in hurricanes' intensity and duration.

Intensity measures a hurricane's force, which includes wind speeds, and there
has been some recorded increase. The biggest change, however, has been in the
duration of hurricanes: how many days each hurricane lasts. Duration has risen
markedly around the world. The total energy of a hurricane is found by
multiplying the intensity of the hurricane by its duration. This, too, has risen
sharply, and more is in store as temperatures rise.

Scientists and engineers who work on climate change stress that governments need
to adopt two main responses. The first, called "mitigation," means reducing the
amount of man-made climate change.

This can be done by changing the world's energy system to limit emissions of
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere - the main driver of man-made climate change.
One option is a shift to non-carbon energy sources, such as renewable energy
(solar and wind power) and nuclear energy. Another option is to combine
carbon-based energy (coal, oil, and gas) with new technologies that prevent the
emission of airborne carbon.  The second response to climate change, called
"adaptation," requires that we ready ourselves for the climate change now
underway and the increased climate change to come in future years. This means
preparing for hurricanes that are more powerful in both intensity and duration.

An attentive national government would surely have realized that the Gulf region
of the United States is more vulnerable to high-energy hurricanes. Indeed,
Hurricane Katrina was the third most intense hurricane ever to make landfall in
the United States. Such a government would have taken more action to strengthen
levees.

The Bush administration's negligence is especially shocking given the remarkable
amount of scientific expertise that exists in the United States. Somehow,
scientists have been pushed aside by political operators. But the U.S.
government's failings are matched in many parts of the world, and certainly in
the poorest countries, where scientific expertise is scarce, and where many
governments do not have scientific advisory councils to turn to for guidance.

Hurricane Katrina is a wake-up call, not only for the United States but for the
world. We are entering a period when good science is vital for our survival. On
a crowded planet with threats to our climate, oceans, forests, food production,
and water supply, and with global travel and high population densities
increasing the risk of worldwide disease epidemics, we must turn to the best of
our scientific and engineering knowledge to find a safe passage.

Jeffrey Sachs is professor of economics and director of the Earth Institute at
Columbia University. - Ed.

(Project Syndicate)

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

Copyright 2005 The Korea Herald


                          FOCUS - 656 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                           September 26, 2010 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Damage Control; Four hurricanes in 20 days is unprecedented in the Atlantic, so
what's driving it? Experts say warmer seas are responsible, and scientists
predict even worse storms as the world heats up.

BYLINE: Brian K. Sullivan And Alex Morales, Bloomberg

SECTION: CONTEXT; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 1041  words


The four major Atlantic hurricanes that spun toward the Caribbean in the past
month were fuelled by record warm seas and formed in an unprecedented 20 days.
With 10 weeks left in the hurricane season, more may be coming.

That's difficult news for thousands of Newfoundlanders assessing the damage from
hurricane Igor, a storm that this week caused widespread damage and prompted
states of emergency in two-dozen communities.

The strong early start to hurricane season has also revived questions about the
future, as scientists predict climate change will further warm the seas, which
gives hurricanes their power.

The storms that were born off West Africa gathered strength by absorbing the
ocean's heat and swelled into Category 4-level hurricanes on the five-step
Saffir-Simpson scale. While none hit land at full speed, each packed winds of at
least 210 km/h, stronger than Katrina's Category 3 winds when it devastated New
Orleans at the end of August in 2005.

After Igor churned past Bermuda and cut power to two-thirds of the colony's
residents, tropical storm Lisa formed in the east Atlantic. While the six-month
season is past its statistical peak, forecasters and insurers said warmer seas
can lengthen the danger period to property, from beach homes in Florida to roads
in Newfoundland and rigs and refineries in the oil-rich Gulf of Mexico.

"The hotter the water, the higher the octane level, and there is going to be far
more Category 4 and 5 hurricanes," said Jim Rouiller, a U.S. air force
meteorologist for 20 years who works for Planalytics Inc. in Berwyn, Pa.

The season may be busy for another month, said Simon Young, chief executive of
insurer Caribbean Risk Managers Ltd.

"All the ingredients" were in place for major hurricanes to form this year, he
said.

The U.S. National Hurricane Center predicts 2010 will have as many as 20 storms
of at least 62-km/h winds, meaning they'll be named, compared with 11 in a
typical year. Lisa's formation brought this year's tally to 12. The Miami-based
centre has identified five major hurricanes in 2010 compared with two in an
average season when waters are cooler.

The season runs June through November, peaking around Sept. 10. After that,
major storms can and do still form. In 2005, hurricane Rita's winds peaked at
286 km/h on Sept. 22.

The Atlantic has had record temperatures since March, and by the end of August,
a swath of the ocean was 1.7 C above average, Gerry Bell, lead hurricane
forecaster at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Camp
Springs, Md., said in an interview. The records date from 1854.

Hurricanes gather energy from the warmth of the sea, one of several factors that
increase their punch, such as having similar wind speeds at various altitudes.
This year's record warmth may help prolong the season, as will conditions
associated with La Nina, a weather pattern that reduces high-altitude winds that
impede Atlantic storm development.

Prior to this year, 1958, 1969 and 2005 were among the warmest for the Atlantic.
While the average season produces two major hurricanes, 1958 and 1969 had five
and 2005 spawned seven.

"Warmer than normal water temperatures, with all other factors being equal, do
provide the opportunity for hurricanes to reach higher intensities," said Chris
Landsea, science and operations officer for the National Hurricane Center.

Still, even when seas are warm, dry air from the Sahara and high wind shear --
meaning wind speed changes more with altitude -- both can hinder hurricane
formation, said Julian Heming, tropical prediction meteorologist at the U.K. Met
Office in Exeter, England.

Hurricanes can be devastating. Eight of the 10 most expensive U.S. catastrophes
were hurricanes, including Katrina, the most costly at $41 billion, according to
the New York-based Insurance Information Institute.

Hurricanes "account for the majority of top catastrophes in dollar terms," said
Robert Hartwig, president and economist at the Insurance Information Institute,
a New York-based trade group.

Swiss Reinsurance Co., the world's second-largest reinsurer, is among the
insurance companies gearing up their research into the heat eff ect, one of
several natural phenomena that intensify hurricanes, in light of scientific
reports that forecast a warming of oceans this century.

Climate change may add 50 per cent to the storm damage costs incurred by some
Caribbean nations over the next two decades, Swiss Re said last month.

The concern of insurers and forecasters is supported by the intensity and
frequency of hurricanes catalogued this year by the hurricane centre.

The Atlantic's heat and uptick in intense hurricanes are fuelling the debate on
the role played by global warming.

"There are always natural fluctuations going on but the long-term upward trend
seems to be a global-warming signal," said Kerry Emanuel, professor of tropical
meteorology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge.

Greg Holland, head of the National Center for Atmospheric Research's Earth
Systems Laboratory, and Tom Knutson, a National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration climate modeller, say the strongest hurricanes will be more
frequent as the world heats.

If temperatures rise by 2 C by 2100, it will stoke the formation of Category 4
and 5 hurricanes, though the number of weaker systems will drop, according to
Knutson, who in January cowrote a paper on the topic in the journal Science.

"Building up over the course of a century, we basically saw a doubling" in the
frequency of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes, Knutson said. That "translates into a
30 per cent increase in damage potential, not taking into account any sea-level
rise."

As early as 2004, James McCarthy, biological oceanography professor at Harvard
University, noted that the world's oceans were approaching 27 C or warmer during
the summer. This increases the odds of major storms.

When water reaches such temperatures, more of it evaporates, priming hurricane
or cyclone formation.

Once born, a hurricane needs only warm water to build and maintain its strength
and intensity.

"As emissions of greenhouse gases continue to trap more of the sun's energy,
that energy has to be dissipated, resulting in stronger storms, more intense
precipitation and higher winds."

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Ulises Rios, AFP-Getty Images; Residents carry their  belongings along a
flooded street in Veracruz, Mexico, last week  after hurricane Karl struck.;
Photo: Mary Lou Antle For Postmedia  News; A road is washed out by rains from
hurricane Igor in Beau  Bois, Nfld., 300 kilometres from St. John's.;
Photo: AFP-Getty  Images; A man wades through a flooded street in Veracruz,
Mexico,  last Monday following hurricane Karl.; Chart/Graph: Source: Pew  Centre
For Global Climate Change; More storms in the north;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2010 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 657 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1998, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Scientists Looking to Improve Measure of Storm Dangers

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 38; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Nov. 26


As the Central American nations devastated by Hurricane Mitch struggle to pick
up the pieces, meteorologists here are beginning to consider devising a new
scale for measuring hurricanes in an effort to give the public a broader view of
the potential danger.

The National Hurricane Center, which tracks most storm systems in the Atlantic,
the Caribbean and the eastern Pacific, has begun informal discussions on how to
devise a scale to measure some geographic and sociological factors that often
play crucial roles in determining how damaging a hurricane will be.

The current yardstick used to classify hurricanes, the Saffir-Simpson scale,
measures a storm mostly by the strength of the winds at its center. An
additional scale could include "a matrix of factors that contribute to a
hurricane disaster and a computer model of that," said Jerry Jarrell, the
director of the National Hurricane Center.

Ideas on creating a new scale, which would co-exist with Saffir-Simpson, are
still at an embryonic stage, and no financing for such a project has yet been
procured, Mr. Jarrell said. Yet the disaster wrought by Hurricane Mitch has led
many experts who study hurricanes to reassess how they are classified.

"Mitch is what brought this to the forefront a little bit," said Stephen P.
Leatherman, the director of the International Hurricane Center at Florida
International University. "The community is stoked up on this."

Hurricanes are defined as tropical cyclones with winds of at least 74 miles an
hour. The strongest type of hurricane under the Saffir-Simpson scale is a
Category 5, with winds of at least 155 miles an hour.

Hurricane Mitch, which is estimated to have killed at least 11,000 people in
Honduras and Nicaragua in the worst storm disaster in more than 200 years, had
winds that had fallen short of hurricane force by the time it touched down over
Central America last month. Most of its destruction was caused by the system's
snail-like pace and its persistent rains, which drenched the region for days,
causing landslides in the mountainous terrain that buried thousands of people
under sheets of mud.

In contrast, Hurricane Andrew, ranked as a Category 4 to Category 5 storm,
killed 41 people in Florida and Louisiana. Hurricane Andrew moved quickly, had
less rain and struck a mostly flat landscape.

Besides a hurricane's winds, its ability to create a storm surge, or a dramatic
rise in sea level, has traditionally been another main factor in determining its
strength. Yet a recent study by a meteorologist at the National Hurricane Center
suggests that most deaths from hurricanes in recent years have come from
flooding, rather than from storm surges, Mr. Jarrell said. Coastal communities
have developed effective evacuation plans, which reduce the danger and deaths
from storm surges.

Indeed, the Saffir-Simpson scale may be more accurate in describing hurricanes
that travel over water and in coastal areas than in measuring a storm's behavior
on land, where the topography often causes changes in its strength and speed,
Mr. Leatherman said. Hilly terrain can slow a hurricane, causing it to drench an
area with rain, creating mudslides, as in Central America and in Virginia, parts
of which were devastated in the early 1970's by the rains of Agnes, a tropical
storm.

One idea for a new scale, Mr. Jarrell said, would be to devise a list of factors
like rain and topography, among others, and create a model weighting each factor
on a scale. Another possibility would be to have a list of factors that
different regions could consider to estimate how a hurricane would affect an
area.

For example, Mr. Jarrell noted, if a storm was over water, it would go on a
lower scale than one that moved over a populated area. If people were well
prepared, that would downgrade a storm. Hilly terrain would enhance a storm's
rating, while striking an area with strict building codes and zoning laws would
lower the rating, he said.

"Suppose we list 50 factors, such as terrain, preparedness, population, flash
floods, et cetera," Mr. Jarrell said. "You can go down and see how it applies. I
think there are ways to do this and I think it's important."

Still, devising a scale that could apply to regions as diverse as Central
America's mountain ranges, Florida's flat topography and the many island nations
that dot the Caribbean could take years to devise and might prove difficult to
implement, experts warned.

"It would be an excellent idea to have another measure of possible damage that a
storm can do," said Bruce Albrecht, a professor of meteorology at the University
of Miami. "But from my perspective it's hard to put hurricanes in a real
category. There is a wide range of variability among the systems."

In addition, a complex measuring stick that takes into account many factors
would also have to be one that people could easily understand to know how to
prepare for a storm, Mr. Albrecht noted.

And because the hurricane season, which lasts from June 1 to Nov. 30, does not
produce that many storms, it may be difficult to make generalizations about the
characteristics of hurricanes, he added.

Yet few dispute that the Saffir-Simpson scale probably did not adequately
portray Hurricane Mitch's menace to the residents of Honduras and Nicaragua who
were aware of it days before the storm came ashore. As it hurtled toward land,
the hurricane's winds increased to a maximum strength of 180 miles an hour and
then slowed considerably before striking land.

"This may have relaxed people," Mr. Jarrell said. "We expected there to be a
disaster, I don't think anyone expected 10,000 or 12,000 dead. I don't think we
were giving the real flavor of the impending disaster."


LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The winds from Hurricane Mitch had fallen below hurricane force,
but the storm's snail-like pace and persistent rain led to mudslides and
flooding, causing real destruction in places like Tegucigalpa, Honduras.
(Suzanne DeChillo/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 658 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 3, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hurricane Forecaster Predicts Active Storm Season for '99

BYLINE: By JIM CARRIER

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 664 words

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla., April 2


This year's hurricane season in the Atlantic is likely to be "very active" with
a chance of damaging storms striking Florida and the East Coast, a leading
hurricane forecaster said today.

William Gray, an atmospheric scientist and hurricane expert at Colorado State
University, predicted that there would be 14 tropical storms, with 9 of them
hurricanes in the hurricane season beginning June 1 and ending Nov. 30.

Four of the hurricanes could be major, Category 3 or higher, meaning winds of at
least 111 miles per hour, on a scale of 1 to 5. Hurricanes have winds of at
least 74 m.p.h. and tropical storm warning are issued when winds reach 55 m.p.h.

Mr. Gray discussed his forecast at the annual meeting of the National Hurricane
Conference, an organization of hurricane experts.

Based on "climate signals" from stratospheric winds and warmer currents in the
north Atlantic, Mr. Gray said the "odds are" that the 1999 hurricane season
could look like that of last year, when there were 14 storms, 10 of them
hurricanes, with 3 of them classified as major.

Mr. Gray said his hurricane-forecast record had been slightly better than a
simple projection of climatological records since 1984 when he began making it.

From 1995 to 1998, there were 33 hurricanes, a record for a four-year period.
That could signal a return to a cycle of high hurricane activity that lasts two
or three decades, scientists at the meeting said. The last such cycle was seen
in the 1940's and 1950's.

Mr. Gray also announced a new effort to estimate the sites where hurricanes
would strike. His preliminary calculations show that Florida and the East Coast
are 4.5 times more likely to get a major storm this year than in the 1970-1994
period. The odds of a major storm on the Gulf Coast are about the same as during
that period, he said.

Christopher Landsea, a research meteorologist at the Federal Government's
hurricane research division laboratory in Miami, said the 1970's and 1980's
appeared to have been one of the periodic lulls.

"We've been lucky," Dr. Landsea said. No major storm struck Florida from 1965 to
1992 when Hurricane Andrew caused $33 billion in damage. Since the 1960's,
millions of people have moved to the Eastern coastline and built expensive
homes, which will make storm damage much more costly, Dr. Landsea said.

"So it shouldn't come as a huge surprise that we have incredible damages now,"
Dr. Landsea said in an interview.

The possibility of more major storms striking the built-up coast "scares me to
death," said James Lee Witt, director of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, who has been pushing pilot programs to hurricane-proof homes and
removing as many as 500 homes from flood-prone areas. Hurricane damage in the
United States last year totaled $7.3 billion.

Mr. Witt described small-scale hurricane-proofing, costing $1,000 to $15,000,
that is to be encouraged in dozens of communities, the first Deerfield Beach,
Fla.

The coastal situation is a "time bomb," said Rade Musulin, a vice president of
Farm Bureau insurance concern in Florida. Mr. Musulin said that many of the
modern coastal houses were particularly vulnerable, built with large windows,
vaulted ceilings and pools.

As the 1999 hurricane season approaches, experts are taking a number of
initiatives to improve warnings to coastlines. The National Hurricane Center
announced that it would issue gale warnings up to six hours earlier, or 24 hours
beforehand, rather than the current 18.

Jerry Jarrell, the director of the center, also urged Florida to do something
about "the Key West problem," including completing construction of a four-lane
highway from Key West to the mainland, 100 miles away. When Hurricane Georges, a
Category 2 storm, struck last October, 30,000 people elected to stay on the
Florida Keys. Computer models show that in a Category 4 storm, Key West would be
under water, Mr. Jarrell said. "We would have massive casualties," he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 659 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                     June 17, 1999, Thursday, Final Edition

Mock Storm Buffets Emergency Officials; Officials Prepare for Hurricane

Raja Mishra, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: SOUTHERN MARYLAND EXTRA; Pg. M03

LENGTH: 1006 words


As fictional Hurricane Zeke lashed the Eastern Shore last week with its 145-mph
winds, 75 disaster management experts from three states gathered in a hurricane
"war room."

Computer screens projected large overhead images of massive traffic congestion
as people streamed inland. The storm's violent path from Antigua, across Puerto
Rico and up the Atlantic coast was tracked on another screen. Sirens sounded,
and newscasters made dire predictions.

The team quickly identified dozens of alternative escape routes and started
rerouting traffic. Police crossed state borders to help out. Calamity was
avoided.

Zeke existed only on computer screens in Smyrna, Del., and in the minds of these
experts, but the simulation was a significant step forward in Maryland's
preparations for natural disaster, experts said.

Forecasters say this is likely to be a busy summer for storms on the Atlantic
coast. It has been 44 years since a hurricane, Connie, hit Maryland. Most
residents have not lived through one, so they do not understand the potential
devastation, experts said.

The Zeke simulation was the state's latest effort to understand how to deal with
disaster if it strikes. The participating officials and experts from Delaware,
Maryland and Virginia reacted as if state borders did not exist. Police were
shared. Residents of one state were evacuated to another.

"This is a regional issue. Hurricanes don't stop at our borders," said Clay
Stamp, who has been emergency management director for Ocean City, Md., for 23
years and has seen his share of dangerous storms. "It was the first time in one
room you had all the Delmarva hurricane players."

During an actual storm, these officials would not gather. Instead, they would
regularly dial a secret telephone number -- only 60 people have access to it --
for regional disaster planning conference calls throughout the storm. A
designated moderator would run the meetings. The same decisions made during the
Zeke exercise would be made more quickly over the phone.

"The communications thing is the really big development to come out of this,"
said David McMillion, director of the Maryland Emergency Management Agency.

The urgency of these preparations is in stark contrast to the casualness with
which most Marylanders view hurricanes. "The fact that it is not hit frequently
may make Maryland even more vulnerable," said Barbara Watson, warning
coordination meteorologist for the National Weather Service's
Baltimore-Washington office.

She cites Hurricane Agnes, which was a tropical storm when it hit Maryland in
1972 and caused $ 55 million in damage and 21 deaths. It even forced the
evacuation of 10,000 people in Montgomery County.

"It was a pretty weak storm, and we use it as a lesson that it doesn't have to
be a full-fledged hurricane to be a disaster," she said.

Hurricane Connie in 1955 was the only hurricane of the century to travel
straight up the Chesapeake Bay into Maryland, dumping 10 inches of rain on
Baltimore, killing 14 people in a boating accident and causing $ 2.5 million in
damage. But numerous hurricanes have given state officials pause in recent
years.

"After brushes with Hurricane Bonnie last year, Hurricanes Bertha and Fran in
1996 and close calls with Hurricane Felix in 1995, Hurricane Gordon in 1994 and
Hurricane Emily in 1993, Marylanders should be more aware of the hurricane
threat and be prepared," McMillion said.

Ocean City has learned through rough experience. In 1985, the entire peninsula
was evacuated during Hurricane Gloria. In 1993, Hurricane Emily triggered
evacuation preparations before heading out to sea.

Ocean City is, in many ways, a hurricane disaster waiting to happen, experts
said. The permanent population, less likely to evacuate, is growing, as are the
numbers of vacationers heading there every summer. There is only one direct road
inland, Route 50.

"If a hurricane is coming, we have to evacuate and evacuate early," said Stamp,
Ocean City's hurricane expert.

The "cry wolf" syndrome has become a problem for planners such as Stamp. They
issue dire warnings to assure that residents take storm threats seriously. Media
outlets intensify the warnings. But most of the time, the storms pass or change
course. "Only for one of the 10 will the warning be necessary, but we have no
choice. We have to assume the worst," Stamp said.

And if someone ignores warnings and finds themselves in the midst of a
hurricane? "Get in a brick building, go to the second floor, avoid windows," he
said. "And keep your fingers crossed."

Getting Ready for Tropical Storms and Hurricanes

Forecasters say this summer will be a busy season for tropical storms and
hurricanes along the Atlantic coast. Here are some recommendations for how to
prepare for them. Beachgoers and Eastern Shore residents should be particularly
wary.

Advance planning:

* Have supplies on hand: flashlight, extra batteries, battery-operated radio,
first aid kit, emergency food and water, nonelectric can opener, essential
medicines, cash and credit cards, sturdy shoes.

* Evacuation routes: Know the quickest way to get to a location at least 20
miles inland. Call the Maryland Emergency Management Agency to find nearby
shelters. (410-486-4422 or 800-636-2872)

* Pets: Pets often are not permitted in storm shelters. Make arrangements to
have them placed in kennels or contact the local Humane Society chapter.

If a storm is approaching:

* Listen to local news stations for storm progress.

* Fuel car.

* Bring in outdoor objects like toys, lawn furniture and garden equipment. Tie
down objects that must remain outside.

* Secure window shutters or nail marine plywood over glass windows.

* Turn refrigerator and freezer to coldest settings.  Open only when absolutely
necessary.

* Store drinking water in clean bathtubs, jugs, bottles, and cooking pots.

* Review evacuation plan.

* Secure boats or trailers with strong rope or chains.

Source: Maryland Emergency Management Agency.


LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: IG

                       Copyright 1999 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 660 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                     June 17, 1999, Thursday, Final Edition

Make-Believe Hurricane Is Practice for Real One; Delmarva Officials Working to
Plan Storm Response

Raja Mishra, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: WEEKLY - MD - MONTGOMERY; Pg. M03

LENGTH: 1002 words


As fictional Hurricane Zeke lashed the Eastern Shore last week with 145-mph
winds, 75 disaster management experts from three states gathered in a hurricane
"war room."

Computer screens projected large images overhead of massive traffic congestion
as people streamed inland. The storm's violent path from Antigua, across Puerto
Rico and up the Atlantic coast was tracked on another screen. Sirens sounded,
and newscasters made dire predictions.

The team quickly identified dozens of alternative escape routes and started
rerouting traffic. Police crossed state lines to help out. Calamity was avoided.

Zeke existed only on computer screens in Smyrna, Del., and in the minds of these
experts, but the simulation was a significant step forward in Maryland's
preparations for natural disaster, experts said. Forecasters say this will be a
busy summer for storms on the Atlantic coast. It has been 44 years since a
hurricane, Connie, hit Maryland. Most residents have not lived through one, so
they do not fear the potential devastation, experts said.

The Zeke simulation was the state's latest effort to understand how to deal with
disaster if it strikes. The participating officials and experts from Delaware,
Maryland and Virginia reacted as if state lines did not exist. Police were
shared. Residents of one state were evacuated to another.

"This is a regional issue. Hurricanes don't stop at our borders," said Clay
Stamp, who has been emergency management director for Ocean City, Md., for 23
years and has seen his share of dangerous storms. "It was the first time in one
room you had all the Delmarva hurricane players."

During an actual storm, these officials would not gather. Instead, they would
dial a secret telephone number--only 60 people have access to it--and a regional
disaster planning conference call would take place regularly throughout the
storm. A designated moderator would run the meetings. The same decisions made
during the Zeke exercise would be made more quickly over the phone.

"The communications thing is the really big development to come out of this,"
said David McMillion, director of the Maryland Emergency Management Agency.

The urgency of these preparations is in stark contrast to the casualness with
which most Marylanders view hurricanes. "The fact that it is not hit frequently
may make Maryland even more vulnerable," said Barbara Watson, warning
coordination meteorologist for the National Weather Service's
Baltimore-Washington office.

She cites Hurricane Agnes, which was a tropical storm when it hit Maryland in
1972 and caused $ 55 million in damages and 21 deaths. It even forced the
evacuation of 10,000 people in landlocked Montgomery County.

"It was a pretty weak storm, and we use it as a lesson that it doesn't have to
be a full-fledged hurricane to be a disaster," she said.

Hurricane Connie in 1955 was the only hurricane of the century to travel
straight up the Chesapeake Bay into Maryland, dumping 10 inches of rain on
Baltimore, killing 14 people in a boating accident and causing $ 2.5 million in
damage. But numerous hurricanes have given state officials pause in recent
years.

"After brushes with Hurricane Bonnie last year, hurricanes Bertha and Fran in
1996 and close calls with Hurricane Felix in 1995, Hurricane Gordon in 1994 and
Hurricane Emily in 1993, Marylanders should be more aware of the hurricane
threat and be prepared," McMillion said.

Ocean City has learned through rough experience. In 1985, the entire peninsula
was evacuated during Hurricane Gloria. In 1993, Hurricane Emily triggered
evacuation preparations before heading out to sea.

Ocean City is, in many ways, a hurricane disaster waiting to happen, experts
said. The permanent population, less likely to evacuate, is growing, as are the
numbers of vacationers heading there every summer. There is only one direct road
inland, Route 50.

"If a hurricane is coming, we have to evacuate and evacuate early," said Stamp,
Ocean City's hurricane expert.

The "cry wolf" syndrome has become a problem for planners such as Stamp. They
issue dire warnings to assure that residents take storm threats seriously. Media
outlets intensify the warnings. But most of the time, the storms pass or change
course.

"Only for one of the 10 will the warning be necessary, but we have no choice. We
have to assume the worst," Stamp said.

And if someone ignores warnings and finds themselves in the midst of a
hurricane?

"Get in a brick building, go to the second floor, avoid windows," he said. "And
keep your fingers crossed."

Getting Ready for Tropical Storms and Hurricanes

Forecasters say this summer will be a busy season for tropical storms and
hurricanes along the Atlantic coast. Here are some recommendations for how to
prepare for them. Beachgoers and Eastern Shore residents should be particularly
wary.

Advance planning:

Supplies: Flashlight, extra batteries, battery-operated radio, first aid kit,
emergency food and water, non-electric can opener, essential medicines, cash and
credit cards and sturdy shoes.

Evacuation routes: Know the quickest way to get to a point at least 20 miles
inland. Call the Maryland Emergency Management Agency to find nearby shelters
(410-486-4422 or 800-636-2872).

Pets: Often pets are not permitted in storm shelters. Make arrangements to have
them placed in kennels or contact the local Humane Society chapter.

If a storm is approaching:

Listen to local news stations for storm progress.

Fuel car.

Bring in outdoor objects such as toys, lawn furniture and garden equipment. Tie
down objects that cannot be brought in.

Secure window shutters or cover windows with nailed-on marine plywood.

Turn refrigerator and freezer to coldest settings. Open only when absolutely
necessary.

Store drinking water in clean bathtubs, jugs, bottles and cooking pots.

Review evacuation plan.

Secure boats or trailers with strong rope or chains.

SOURCE: Maryland Emergency Management Agency.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1999 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 661 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              June 27, 2014 Friday

Study: Hurricanes with female names more deadly than male-named storms

LENGTH: 836  words

DATELINE: Springfield


University of Illinois Springfield has issued the following news release:

In the coming Atlantic hurricane season, watch out for hurricanes with
benign-sounding names like Dolly, Fay or Hanna. According to a new article from
a team of researchers at the University of Illinois, hurricanes with feminine
names are likely to cause significantly more deaths than hurricanes with
masculine names, apparently because storms with feminine names are perceived as
less threatening.

An analysis of more than six decades of death rates from U.S. hurricanes shows
that severe hurricanes with a more feminine name result in a greater death toll,
simply because a storm with a feminine name is seen as less foreboding than one
with a more masculine name. As a result, people in the path of these severe
storms may take fewer protective measures, leaving them more vulnerable to harm.

The finding indicates an unfortunate and unintended consequence of the gendered
naming of hurricanes, which has important implications for policymakers,
meteorologists, the news media and the public regarding hurricane communication
and preparedness, the researchers say.

"The problem is that a hurricane's name has nothing to do with its severity,"
said Kiju Jung, a doctoral student in marketing in the U. of I.'s College of
Business and the lead author on the study.

"Names are assigned arbitrarily, based on a predetermined list of alternating
male and female names," he said. "If people in the path of a severe storm are
judging the risk based on the storm's name, then this is potentially very
dangerous."

The research, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
examined actual hurricane fatalities for all storms that made landfall in the
U.S. from 1950-2012, excluding Hurricane Katrina (2005) and Hurricane Audrey
(1957) because they were much deadlier than the typical storm.

The authors found that for highly damaging storms, the more feminine the storm's
name, the more people it killed. The team's analysis suggests that changing a
severe hurricane's name from the masculine "Charley" to the feminine "Eloise"
could nearly triple its death toll.

"In judging the intensity of a storm, people appear to be applying their beliefs
about how men and women behave," said Sharon Shavitt, a professor of marketing
at Illinois and a co-author of the report. "This makes a female-named hurricane,
especially one with a very feminine name such as Belle or Cindy, seem gentler
and less violent."

In a follow-up set of experiments, Jung and his colleagues examined how the
gender of names directly affected people's judgments about storms. They found
that people who were asked to imagine being in the path of "Hurricane Alexandra"
(or "Christina" or "Victoria") rated the storm as less risky and intense
compared to those asked to imagine being in the path of "Hurricane Alexander"
(or "Christopher" or "Victor").

"This is a tremendously important finding. Proof positive that our culturally
grounded associations steer our steps," said Hazel Rose Markus, a professor in
behavioral sciences at Stanford University, who was not involved in the
research.

Hurricanes in the U.S. formerly were given only female names, a practice that
meteorologists of a different era considered appropriate given the unpredictable
nature of the storms. According to the paper, an alternating male-female naming
system was adopted in the late 1970s because of increased societal awareness of
sexism.

(The names of this year's storms, alternating between male and female names,
will start with Arthur, Bertha, Cristobal and Dolly.)

Even though the "gender" of hurricanes is pre-assigned and arbitrary, the
question remains: Do people judge hurricane risks in the context of gender-based
expectations?

"People imagining a 'female' hurricane were not as willing to seek shelter,"
Shavitt said. "The stereotypes that underlie these judgments are subtle and not
necessarily hostile toward women - they may involve viewing women as warmer and
less aggressive than men."

"Such gender biases are pervasive and implicit," said Madhu Viswanathan, a
professor of marketing at Illinois and a co-author of the study. "We found that
people were affected by the gender of hurricane names regardless of whether they
explicitly endorsed the idea that women and men have different traits. This
appears to be a widespread phenomenon."

Hurricanes kill more than 200 people in the U.S. each year, and severe
hurricanes are capable of producing casualties in the thousands, according to
the paper. Even with climate change increasing the frequency and severity of
storms, hurricane preparedness remains a challenge for officials.

Although the negative effect of gender stereotypes is well-known in hiring
decisions and other evaluations of women and men, this research is the first to
demonstrate that gender stereotypes can have deadly consequences.

Joseph Hilbe, of Arizona State University, also was a co-author of the paper.

For more information please visit: http://illinois.edu

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 662 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                            October 8, 2016 Saturday

Images: Hurricane Matthew Scrapes Florida Coast

BYLINE: Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 178 words


Images: Hurricane Matthew Scrapes Florida Coast

See images of Hurricane Matthew. The storm weakened Friday slightly to a
Category 3 with maximum sustained winds near 120 mph, but the U.S. National
Hurricane Center says it's expected to remain a powerful hurricane as it moves
closer to the coast into the weekend. Hurricane Matthew scraped Florida's
Atlantic coast early Friday, toppling trees onto homes and knocking out power to
more than a half-million people but sparing some of the most heavily populated
stretches of shoreline the catastrophic blow many had feared.

Authorities warned that the danger was far from over, with hundreds of miles of
coastline in Florida, Georgia and South Carolina still under threat of
torrential rain and dangerous storm surge as the most powerful hurricane to
menace the Atlantic Seaboard in over a decade pushed north. They warned, too,
that the storm could still take a turn inland.

"It still has time to do a direct hit," Gov. Rick Scott said in the morning.
"This is not over. ... It could be the worst part of this is yet to come."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS A billboard canvas flaps in the wind after Hurricane
Matthew passed off shore, Friday, Oct. 7, 2016, in North Palm Beach, Fla.
Matthew was downgraded to a Category 3 hurricane overnight with the strongest
winds of 120 mph just offshore as the storm pushed north, threatening hundreds
of miles of coastline in Florida, Georgia and South Carolina.ASSOCIATED PRESS
Waves from Hurricane Matthew crash against a bridge Friday, Oct. 7, 2016, in St.
Augustine, Fla. Matthew was downgraded to a Category 3 hurricane overnight, and
its storm center hung just offshore as it moved up the Florida coastline,
sparing communities its full 120 mph winds.ASSOCIATED PRESS Waves from Hurricane
Matthew batter a boat dock Friday, Oct. 7, 2016, in St. Augustine , Fla. Matthew
was downgraded to a Category 3 hurricane overnight, and its storm center hung
just offshore as it moved up the Florida coastline, sparing communities its full
120 mph winds.ASSOCIATED PRESS A car drives past a downed tree as Hurricane
Matthew moves through Daytona Beach, Fla. Friday, Oct. 7, 2016. Matthew was
downgraded to a Category 3 hurricane overnight, and its storm center hung just
offshore as it moved up the Florida coastline, sparing communities its full 120
mph winds.ASSOCIATED PRESS Trees sway from heavy rain and wind from Hurricane
Matthew in front of Exploration Tower early Friday, Oct. 7, 2016 in Cape
Canaveral, Fla. Matthew weakened slightly to a Category 3 storm with maximum
sustained winds near 120 mph, but the U.S. National Hurricane Center says it's
expected to remain a powerful hurricane as it moves closer to the
coast.ASSOCIATED PRESS Saint Anne church lays totally destroyed by Hurricane
Matthew in Camp Perrin, a district of Les Cayes, Haiti, Thursday, Oct. 6, 2016.
Two days after the storm rampaged across the country's remote southwestern
peninsula, authorities and aid workers still lack a clear picture of what they
fear is the country's biggest disaster in years.ASSOCIATED PRESS Electronic
devices covered in mud stand outside an office destroyed by Hurricane Matthew in
Les Cayes, Haiti, Thursday, Oct. 6, 2016. Two days after the storm rampaged
across the country's remote southwestern peninsula, authorities and aid workers
still lack a clear picture of what they fear is the country's biggest disaster
in years.ASSOCIATED PRESS Brian Johns is hit by a wave as he tries to video the
effects of Hurricane Matthew, Friday, Oct. 7, 2016, in Daytona Beach,
Fla.ASSOCIATED PRESS Wind and water from Hurricane Matthew batter downtown St.
Augustine, Fla., Friday, Oct. 7, 2016.ASSOCIATED PRESS Preston Payne tires to
hold his umbrella as he watches the waves near the Tybee pier as Hurricane
Matthew makes its way up the East Coast, Friday, Oct. 7, 2016, on Tybee Island,
Ga. Authorities warned that the danger was far from over, with hundreds of miles
of coastline in Florida, Georgia and South Carolina still under threat of
torrential rain and dangerous storm surge as the most powerful hurricane to
menace the Atlantic Seaboard in over a decade pushed north.ASSOCIATED PRESS Bull
River Yacht Club Dock Master Robert Logan leaves the dock after finishing up
storm preparations as Hurricane Matthew makes its way up the East Coast, Friday,
Oct. 7, 2016, in Savannah, Ga. Authorities warned that the danger was far from
over, with hundreds of miles of coastline in Florida, Georgia and South Carolina
still under threat of torrential rain and dangerous storm surge as the most
powerful hurricane to menace the Atlantic Seaboard in over a decade pushed
north.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 663 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   September 14, 1992, Monday, FIRST EDITION

'Year to remember': Three direct hits

BYLINE: Mary Smaragdis

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 630 words


Hurricanes have delivered a one-two punch to the USA this year, engraving 1992
into the hurricane record books.

''It will definitely be a year to remember in terms of storms that actually hit
land,'' said meteorologist Jack Beven at the National Hurricane Center in Coral
Gables, Fla.

Hurricane Iniki, which slammed into the Hawaiian island of Kauai Friday, comes
only 18 days after Hurricane Andrew ravaged south Florida and Louisiana.

''It's unusual for a storm with Iniki's intensity to score a direct hit,'' Beven
said.

In the Atlantic, for the past 42 years, an average of six hurricanes have formed
annually. Most - 73% - unleash their fury in the middle of the ocean and die
there.

With this year's hurricane season about half over, Andrew is the only hurricane
to have formed in the Atlantic.

Even Guam - a U.S. territory in the Pacific about 3,800 miles west of Hawaii -
was hit when Typhoon Omar slammed into the island Aug. 29, causing severe
damage.

Says Jim Travers of the National Weather Service: ''Three storms of this type
within essentially a month's time - that's got to be very unusual.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

INIKI POUNDS HAWAII

                      Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 664 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                           September 11, 2017 Monday

Suburban transplants in Irma's path fear the unknown

BYLINE: By Lauren Rohr lrohr@dailyherald.com

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 592 words


Suburban transplants in Irma's path fear the unknown For two suburban natives
living at different points along Hurricane Irma's path, the most terrifying part
of their experiences has been the moments of uncertainty. Hiding for hours in a
room with no windows as the eye of a catastrophic storm passes. Fearing the
destruction they'd find once they emerged from their shelters. And even in the
aftermath, not knowing the full scope of the damage or how long it'll take to
return to normal.

As the storm barreled through Naples, Florida, on Sunday afternoon, Stephanie
Miller and her family hid in the closet of her aunt's house, which was farther
from the mandatory evacuation zone than their own home. When they were finally
able to step outside hours later, she said, streets were flooded with several
inches of water, trees had been uprooted or broken in half, and screens and roof
tiles were torn off homes. "I didn't know it would have this much upheaval or
cause this much damage," Miller said, noting they wouldn't be able to return to
their own home for at least another day. "The single scariest thing is not
knowing the condition of our house." Miller grew up in the Rolling Meadows area
and lived in Gurnee before moving to Florida about 15 years ago. Though she's
been through other significant hurricanes, none were of Irma's size and
magnitude, nor did they ever hit her area directly. For St. Charles native Jake
Thornton, hurricanes never crossed his mind when he moved to St. Thomas a year
ago, especially because it had been decades since the island was last hit with a
destructive storm. So when the threat of Irma loomed, he and his fiancee,
Corinne Schmitt, stocked up on supplies, but they remained hopeful the storm
would veer in a different direction. Days later, Thornton said, they found
themselves hunkering down in a bathroom as gusts of wind rattled the walls
around them. As the hurricane swept through St. Thomas on Wednesday, he said,
power lines were knocked down, trees and shrubbery were ripped from the ground
and roofs were blown off buildings. "The island is devastated," he said.
"Knowing what I know now, I'm completely terrified of hurricanes." Thornton and
Schmitt, a Geneva native, are among the lucky few on the island who are able to
access power using a generator. They went days without cell phone service and
were unable to contact their families. Residents have had to wait in line for
hours to get gas or to get into the grocery store. The damage also shut down the
airport, leaving Thornton and Schmitt searching for a way to get back to the
Chicago area, where they plan to stay until while they figure out their next
steps. Though they'd like to move back, it could be months before any sense of
normalcy is restored in St. Thomas, he said. "As of now, there are a lot of
'ifs,'" Thornton said. "We've learned very quickly that planning life out
doesn't really go too far." As the hurricane continued along the west coast of
Florida on Sunday, a similar uncertainty remains for Naperville native Jill
McGarry, who now lives just south of Tampa in the Sarasota area. She and her
family spent days preparing for the worst, and they planned to camp out
overnight in a walk-in closet -- the only room in their house that doesn't have
any windows. Because they have two young children, McGarry and her husband are
doing their best to hide their fear of the storm's aftermath. "But it's pretty
frightening," she said. "It's scary and sad to think about what could happen to
the absolute paradise where we live."

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Courtesy of Jake Thornton Hurricane Irma passed through St. Thomas last
week, uprooting trees, damaging buildings and causing power lines to fall.
Courtesy of Jake Thornton Hurricane Irma passed through St. Thomas last week,
uprooting trees, damaging buildings and causing power lines to fall. Courtesy of
Jake Thornton Hurricane Irma passed through St. Thomas last week, uprooting
trees, damaging buildings and causing power lines to fall. Courtesy of Jake
Thornton Hurricane Irma passed through St. Thomas last week, uprooting trees,
damaging buildings and causing power lines to fall. Courtesy of Jake Thornton
Hurricane Irma passed through St. Thomas last week, uprooting trees, damaging
buildings and causing power lines to fall. Courtesy of Jake Thornton Hurricane
Irma passed through St. Thomas last week, uprooting trees, damaging buildings
and causing power lines to fall. Courtesy of Jake Thornton Hurricane Irma passed
through St. Thomas last week, uprooting trees, damaging buildings and causing
power lines to fall.Courtesy of Jake Thornton Downed power lines and uprooted
trees were among the damage caused by Hurricane Irma as it passed through St.
Thomas last week. Courtesy of Jake Thornton Downed power lines and uprooted
trees were among the damage caused by Hurricane Irma as it passed through St.
Thomas last week. Courtesy of Jake Thornton Downed power lines and uprooted
trees were among the damage caused by Hurricane Irma as it passed through St.
Thomas last week. Courtesy of Jake Thornton Downed power lines and uprooted
trees were among the damage caused by Hurricane Irma as it passed through St.
Thomas last week. Courtesy of Jake Thornton Downed power lines and uprooted
trees were among the damage caused by Hurricane Irma as it passed through St.
Thomas last week. Courtesy of Jake Thornton Downed power lines and uprooted
trees were among the damage caused by Hurricane Irma as it passed through St.
Thomas last week.Associated Press An American flag is torn as Hurricane Irma
passes through Naples, Fla., on Sunday. Associated Press An American flag is
torn as Hurricane Irma passes through Naples, Fla., on Sunday. Associated Press
An American flag is torn as Hurricane Irma passes through Naples, Fla., on
Sunday. Associated Press An American flag is torn as Hurricane Irma passes
through Naples, Fla., on Sunday. Associated Press An American flag is torn as
Hurricane Irma passes through Naples, Fla., on Sunday. Associated Press An
American flag is torn as Hurricane Irma passes through Naples, Fla., on
Sunday.Associated Press Mary Della Ratta, 94, sits in shelter Sunday as
Hurricane Irma pounds Naples, Fla. "I'm afraid of what's going to happen," said
Della Ratta, a widow. "I have nobody. I'm all alone in this world." Associated
Press Mary Della Ratta, 94, sits in shelter Sunday as Hurricane Irma pounds
Naples, Fla. "I'm afraid of what's going to happen," said Della Ratta, a widow.
"I have nobody. I'm all alone in this world." Associated Press Mary Della Ratta,
94, sits in shelter Sunday as Hurricane Irma pounds Naples, Fla. "I'm afraid of
what's going to happen," said Della Ratta, a widow. "I have nobody. I'm all
alone in this world." Associated Press Mary Della Ratta, 94, sits in shelter
Sunday as Hurricane Irma pounds Naples, Fla. "I'm afraid of what's going to
happen," said Della Ratta, a widow. "I have nobody. I'm all alone in this
world." Associated Press Mary Della Ratta, 94, sits in shelter Sunday as
Hurricane Irma pounds Naples, Fla. "I'm afraid of what's going to happen," said
Della Ratta, a widow. "I have nobody. I'm all alone in this world." Associated
Press Mary Della Ratta, 94, sits in shelter Sunday as Hurricane Irma pounds
Naples, Fla. "I'm afraid of what's going to happen," said Della Ratta, a widow.
"I have nobody. I'm all alone in this world."Associated Press Palm Bay officer
Dustin Terkoski walks over debris from a two-story home at Palm Point
Subdivision in Brevard County, Fla., after a tornado touched down on Sunday.
Associated Press Palm Bay officer Dustin Terkoski walks over debris from a
two-story home at Palm Point Subdivision in Brevard County, Fla., after a
tornado touched down on Sunday. Associated Press Palm Bay officer Dustin
Terkoski walks over debris from a two-story home at Palm Point Subdivision in
Brevard County, Fla., after a tornado touched down on Sunday. Associated Press
Palm Bay officer Dustin Terkoski walks over debris from a two-story home at Palm
Point Subdivision in Brevard County, Fla., after a tornado touched down on
Sunday. Associated Press Palm Bay officer Dustin Terkoski walks over debris from
a two-story home at Palm Point Subdivision in Brevard County, Fla., after a
tornado touched down on Sunday. Associated Press Palm Bay officer Dustin
Terkoski walks over debris from a two-story home at Palm Point Subdivision in
Brevard County, Fla., after a tornado touched down on Sunday.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 665 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                           September 11, 2017 Monday

Images: Hurricane Irma smashes into Florida

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 35 words


Hurricane Irma struck Florida on Sunday hitting the Florida Keys with as a
Category 4 storm and winds of 130 miles per hour. This is the first time that
the U.S. was hit by back-to-back major hurricanes since 1964.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Associated Press Residents float down a flooded street Sunday in Havana
atop a large piece of Styrofoam after the passing of Hurricane Irma in Cuba.
ASSOCIATED PRESS Residents float down a flooded street in Havana atop a large
piece of Styrofoam, after the passing of Hurricane Irma in Cuba, Sunday, Sept.
10, 2017. The powerful storm ripped roofs off houses, collapsed buildings and
flooded hundreds of miles of coastline after cutting a trail of destruction
across the Caribbean. There were no immediate reports of deaths in Cuba, a
country that prides itself on its disaster preparedness, but authorities were
trying to restore power and clear roads.ASSOCIATED PRESS An American flag is
torn as Hurricane Irma passes through Naples, Fla., Sunday, Sept. 10,
2017.ASSOCIATED PRESS Annette Davis kisses her son Darius, 3, while staying at a
shelter in Miami after evacuating from their home in Florida City, Fla., ahead
of Hurricane Irma Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017.ASSOCIATED PRESS People stand next to
palm trees as they look at churning waves and high winds along Hollywood Beach,
Fla., on Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017.ASSOCIATED PRESS Evacuees are moved to another
building with more bathrooms while sheltering at Florida International
University ahead of Hurricane Irma in Miami, Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017.ASSOCIATED
PRESS People walk out onto what is normally four feet of water in Old Tampa Bay,
Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Tampa, Fla. Hurricane Irma and an unusual low tide
pushed water out over 100 yards.ASSOCIATED PRESS Members of a rescue team
navigate a flooded street Havana after the passage of Hurricane Irma in Cuba,
Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017. The powerful storm ripped roofs off houses, collapsed
buildings and flooded hundreds of miles of coastline after cutting a trail of
destruction across the Caribbean. There were no immediate reports of deaths in
Cuba, a country that prides itself on its disaster preparedness, but authorities
were trying to restore power and clear roads.ASSOCIATED PRESS Waves crash over a
sea wall at the mouth of the Miami River from Biscayne Bay, Fla., as Hurricane
Irma passes by, Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Miami.ASSOCIATED PRESS Henry's
Restaurant manager Nhi Brayman, center, cleans a table while customers eat
breakfast behind boarded up windows, Sunday, Sept., 10, 2017, in downtown
Savannah, Ga. Hurricane Irma is expected effect parts of Georgia as early as
Sunday night.ASSOCIATED PRESS A crane atop a building under construction appears
after it collapsed as Hurricane Irma passes by, Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in
downtown Miami. A crane atop a building under construction appears after it
collapsed as Hurricane Irma passes by, Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in downtown
Miami. (AP Photo/Wilfredo Lee)ASSOCIATED PRESS An American flag is torn as
Hurricane Irma passes through Naples, Fla., Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017.Jim
Rassol/South Florida Sun-Sentinel via ASSOCIATED PRESS A rough surf surrounds
Boynton Beach inlet in Boynton Beach, Fla.ASSOCIATED PRESS A car is parked on a
flooded road as Hurricane Irma passes, Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Surfside,
Fla.ASSOCIATED PRESS Heavy rains flood the streets in the Coconut Grove area in
Miami on Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, during Hurricane Irma.ASSOCIATED PRESS Stranded
motorists try to get back in their car after a breakdown as Hurricane Irma bears
down on the Florida Keys, Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Hialeah, Fla. Wind gusts of
82 mph were reported in Miami.ASSOCIATED PRESS Strong waves brought by Hurricane
Irma hit the Malecon sea wall in Havana, Cuba, late Saturday, Sept. 9,
2017.ASSOCIATED PRESS A man walks on a flooded street in Havana, after the
passing of Hurricane Irma in Cuba, Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017. The powerful storm
ripped roofs off houses, collapsed buildings and flooded hundreds of miles of
coastline after cutting a trail of destruction across the Caribbean. There were
no immediate reports of deaths in Cuba, a country that prides itself on its
disaster preparedness, but authorities were trying to restore power and clear
roads.ASSOCIATED PRESS A floundered boat is shown at the Haulover Marine Center
at Haulover Park as Hurricane Irma passes by Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in North
Miami Beach, Fla.ASSOCIATED PRESS Debris fills the tree-lined streets of a
residential area, Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Coral Gables, Fla.ASSOCIATED PRESS
Sailboats moored near Watson Island ride out the winds and waves as Hurricane
Irma passes by, Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Miami Beach, Fla.ASSOCIATED PRESS
Evacuees stand in line to enter the Germain Arena, which is being used as a
fallout shelter, in advance of Hurricane Irma, in Estero, Fla., Saturday, Sept.
9, 2017.Linh Cao, second from right, and Huy Nguyen, right, enter a shelter at
Florida International University with fellow students after being evacuated from
their dorm ahead of Hurricane Irma in Miami, Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (AP
Photo/David Goldman) ASSOCIATED PRESS Linh Cao, second from right, and Huy
Nguyen, right, enter a shelter at Florida International University with fellow
students after being evacuated from their dorm ahead of Hurricane Irma in Miami,
Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017.ASSOCIATED PRESS A billboard is ripped apart by high
winds along Interstate 95 Northbound as Hurricane Irma passes by, Sunday, Sept.
10, 2017, in Miami.ASSOCIATED PRESS This image made available by John Huston
shows the pool underwater at his house as storm surge goes over his dock in Key
Largo, Fla., Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017. Announcing itself with roaring 130 mph
winds, Hurricane Irma plowed into the mostly emptied-out Florida Keys early
Sunday.ASSOCIATED PRESS Waves crash over a sea wall from Biscayne Bay as
Hurricane Irma passes by, Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Miami.ASSOCIATED PRESS Mary
Della Ratta, 94, sits in shelter after evacuating her home with the help of
police last night ahead of Hurricane Irma in Naples, Fla., Sunday, Sept. 10,
2017. "I'm afraid of what's going to happen. I don't know what I'll find when I
go home," said Della Ratta whose husband passed away ten years ago. "I have
nobody. I'm all alone in this world."ASSOCIATED PRESS Recently planted palm
trees lie strewed across the road as Hurricane Irma passes by, Sunday, Sept. 10,
2017, in Miami Beach, Fla.ASSOCIATED PRESS Evacuees stand in line to enter the
Germain Arena, which is being used as a shelter, in advance of Hurricane Irma,
in Estero, Fla., Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017.ASSOCIATED PRESS Iris Belen, left, and
Mouad El jamil watch weather updates on their phone after evacuating from their
home to a shelter as Hurricane Irma approaches in Naples, Fla., Sunday, Sept.
10, 2017.ASSOCIATED PRESS Storm clouds associated with the outer bands of
Hurricane Irma shroud the downtown skyline Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, in Tampa,
Fla. Several parts of the Tampa Bay area are under a mandatory evacuation order
for the approaching storm.ASSOCIATED PRESS A car drives around a tree downed by
winds from Hurricane Irma, Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, in Golden Beach,
Fla.ASSOCIATED PRESS Thousands of people wait in line to get into a Hurricane
Irma shelter at the Germain Arena in Estero, Fla., on Saturday, Sept. 9,
2017.ASSOCIATED PRESS Ed Rappaport, the acting director of the National
Hurricane Center, draws a line to illustrate the projected track of Hurricane
Irma up Florida's west coast Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017 during a television
interview.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 666 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                Richmond County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 24, 2011 Tuesday

Officials urge hurricane awareness

BYLINE: Dawn Kurry, Richmond County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 817 words


May 24--Government officials urge preparation as we approach hurricane season,
which starts on June 1 and lasts until November.

President Barack Obama seemed to be speaking to North Carolinians when he
proclaimed National Hurricane Awareness Week, "During National Hurricane
Preparedness Week, I urge individuals, families, communities, and businesses to
take time to plan for the storm season before it begins. While hurricane
forecasting has improved, storms may still develop with little warning. For
Americans in hurricane threatened areas, knowledge and preparation are pivotal
to ensure emergency readiness and responsiveness."

Gov. Bev Perdue urged North Carolinians to prepare for tropical storms and
hurricanes that can cause damage from mountains to the coast as the state marks
the 10th anniversary of its costliest storm; Hurricane Floyd, which struck North
Carolina on Sept. 16, 1999. The storm killed 52 people and caused more than $6
billion in damage.

Perdue declared May 24-30 as Hurricane Awareness Week ahead of the hurricane
season which begins June 1.

"In North Carolina, we understand from experience the power and destruction of
hurricanes. With hurricane season approaching, I ask us all to be prepared,"
Perdue said.

North Carolina ranks behind only Florida in vulnerability to hurricanes.

Emergency officials urged residents to make emergency supply kits and make plans
for what to do if a hurricane threatens.

"(It is) vital that people prepare themselves and their families for
emergencies, so they can be safe on their own for the first few days after a
storm," said Reuben Young, secretary of the state Department of Crime Control
and Public Safety.

"I call upon all Americans, especially those in hurricane prone areas, to learn
more about protecting themselves against hurricanes and to work together to
respond to them," said Obama.

Team work can save lives. The more prepared everyone is, the most likely you may
be to survive. However, getting others around you on the same page can help save
more lives. Find out who your neighbors are. It could mean the difference
between life and death if you learn your neighbor is a nurse or a paramedic.

During Hurricane Awareness Week, the Daily Journal will feature information on
the various components of hurricanes and tropical storms, such as high winds,
rip currents, inland flooding and safety tips. You can use these resources and
others to put together an emergency plan if your household does not already have
one. This is a good opportunity to educate children about safety and
emergencies.

Understanding the terminology

What is the difference between a cyclone, a tropical storm, a hurricane and a
major hurricane? All these terms can be confusing.

A tropical cyclone is a rotating, organized system of clouds and thunderstorms
that originates over tropical or subtropical waters and has a closed low-level
circulation. Tropical cyclones rotate counterclockwise in the Northern
Hemisphere.

There are four types of tropical cyclones. A tropical depression is a tropical
cyclone with maximum sustained winds of 38 mph or less. A tropical storm is a
tropical cyclone with maximum sustained winds of 39 to 73 mph. A hurricane is a
tropical cyclone with maximum sustained winds of 74 mph or higher. In the
western North Pacific they are called typhoons, and in the Indian and South
Pacific Oceans they are called cyclones.

A major hurricane is a tropical cyclone with maximum sustained winds of 111 mph
or higher, corresponding to Category 3, 4 or 5 on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane
Wind Scale.

The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale for the United States indicates that
sustained winds of 74 -- 95 mph are to be classified as Category 1; sustained
winds of 96-111 mph are a Category 2; sustained winds of 111-130 mph are a
Category 3; sustained winds of 131 -- 155 mph are a Category 4 and 155 mph or
more is Category 5.

Category 1 consists of very dangerous winds that damage structures, snap trees,
and knock out power lines. Category 2 dictates near total power loss with
outages lasting days and sometimes weeks. Category 3 comes with devastating
damage, Category 4 comes with catastrophic damage, and Category 5 indicates
power outages can last for month, and most of the area will be uninhabitable for
weeks or months.

Next the Daily Journal will feature information on storm surges and inland
flooding as part of Hurricane Awareness Week.

Staff Writer Dawn Kurry can be reached at (910) 997-3111 ex. 43, or by e-mail at
dkurry@heartlandpublications.com

To see more of the Richmond County Daily Journal, or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.yourdailyjournal.com. Copyright (c) 2011, Richmond
County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune
Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by
McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110524-RU-Officials-urge-hurricane-awareness-0524-20110524

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RU


                                 Copyright 2011


                          FOCUS - 667 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                           October 23, 2013 Wednesday

Sahara dust could deter hurricanes;
Dry plumes may be one reason for tame weather in Atlantic this year

BYLINE: KEITH MORELLI; Tribune staff

SECTION: NATION & WORLD; Metro; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1800 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



HIGHLIGHT: Anybody notice there were NO hurricanes this year? There were just
two that came nowhere nearus and we're near the end of the season and we're onlu
up to K, as in Karen, which petered out as it limped toward the Panhandle. We'll
talk to weather geeks to figure out why...


Wind shears, water vapor and temperature, El Nino and La Nina all play a role in
the formation of hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean.

This year, the Sahara Desert appears to have played a part as well.

The vast desert that stretches across North Africa spat out a massive plume of
dust in a June wind storm that blew particles over the eastern Atlantic Ocean,
blanketing the cauldron where tropical storms and hurricanes bubble up.

Some scientists and meteorologists credit the dust particles and the drying
effect they create with impeding the formation of tropical cyclones and

creating one of the calmest Atlantic hurricane seasons in decades. The season is
mostly over, but only two hurricanes have formed, both of them minor.

Exactly why forecasters were so dramatically wrong - most of the major hurricane
prognosticators predicted an above-average season - is the subject of much
speculation in the hurricane-predicting community.

Part of the mystery is that sand from the Sahara blowing over the Atlantic is
far from unusual. The pattern traditionally grows stronger in the early summer
and into July, said Jason Dunion, a hurricane research analyst who works for the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Atlantic Oceanographic and
Meteorological Laboratory in Miami.

But this year's June plume was exceptional, he said, and that translated into
unusually dry air in the part of the Atlantic that is the main breeding ground
for hurricanes. Such levels of dryness have not been since the mid 1980s, he
said.

Whether that inhibits the formation of hurricanes, he said, well, that's the
million-dollar question.

Could it be that the amount of dust in the air keeps hurricanes from forming?

Perhaps, Dunion said, but the theory needs more study. The one scientific
certainty, he said, was the amount of Saharan dust in the air over the region
where storms are born during the peak of the season.

One of the essential ingredients to get hurricanes going is moisture in the air,
particularly in the middle areas of the atmosphere.

Moisture, combined with other factors, he said, gets hurricanes bubbling and
brewing. Drying that air out too much stifles development.

Another scientific certainty: The number of hurricanes in the Atlantic so far
this year is way, way below normal.

Hurricane Humberto formed early in September in the Atlantic and petered out in
open water. Hurricane Ingrid formed in the Caribbean and made landfall along the
northeastern coast of Mexico a month ago. The season, which ends on Nov. 30, is
on the downswing, having passed its peak in September. November averages only
about one named storm every two years, forecasters say.

Besides the two hurricanes this year, there were 10 named tropical storms.
Meteorologists say the number of tropical storms is about average, but where
they formed is unusual.

Five of the 10 storms formed in the Caribbean. Typically, particularly early in
the season, most tropical cyclones are born in the eastern Atlantic.

But this year, there's been a dearth of hurricanes swirling along Hurricane
Alley, that stretch of open water between West Africa and the Caribbean.

Forecasters in May predicted a 70 percent chance of an above normal season and
just a 5 percent chance of a below-normal season, said Dennis Feltgen, spokesman
for the National Hurricane Center in Miami. As many as 19 named storms were
predicted, with up to nine becoming hurricanes. Three of those would become
major -- Category 3 or higher -- hurricanes, they said.

So far this year: zero major hurricanes.

If the season ends without a major hurricane, it will mark the first time that
has happened since 1994.

There are several theories cited for the lack of hurricanes, Feltgen said; the
Saharan dust factor is just one.

There is also the Bermuda High, an area of high pressure along the eastern
seaboard that has steered dry air into the tropics and over the hurricane
birthing grounds. That, coupled with the dry air associated with the African
dust, likely contributed to the lack of storms, he said.

Feltgen was reluctant to credit the Sahara as the only reason hurricanes have
failed to form this year.

There was some Saharan dust, he said, but it doesn't cover 100 percent of the
tropical season. If a lot of dust happens to be in an area where hurricanes are
forming, that could be one of several factors.

Someday, he said, Saharan dust may be factored in when meteorologists make
hurricane season predictions.

Scientists are just beginning to study the relationship between Saharan dust
over the Atlantic and the formation of tropical cyclones, said Joseph Prospero,
a professor of marine and atmospheric chemistry at the University of Miami's
Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science.

That is a very active topic of discussion, he said. The outbreaks of African
dust have a clearly detectable impact. Increased dust in the air means reduced
sunlight on the ocean surface, lower temperature and reduced water vapor
emission, all of which play a role in tropical cyclones.

He said the presence of a hot, dry layer of dusty air at an elevated altitude
diminishes atmospheric conditions that lead to tropical cyclone formation.

But, he noted, There are many other factors linked to these dust events that
could suppress tropical cyclone development. In short, this is a very active
area of research today.

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

HURRICANES, Page 6

Wind shears, water vapor and temperature, El Nino and La Nina all play a role in
the formation of hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean.

This year, the Sahara Desert appears to have played a part as well.

The vast desert that stretches across North Africa spat out a massive plume of
dust in a June wind storm that blew particles over the eastern Atlantic Ocean,
blanketing the cauldron where tropical storms and hurricanes bubble up.

Some scientists and meteorologists credit the dust particles and the drying
effect they create with impeding the formation of tropical cyclones and

creating one of the calmest Atlantic hurricane seasons in decades. The season is
mostly over, but only two hurricanes have formed, both of them minor.

Exactly why forecasters were so dramatically wrong - most of the major hurricane
prognosticators predicted an above-average season - is the subject of much
speculation in the hurricane-predicting community.

Part of the mystery is that sand from the Sahara blowing over the Atlantic is
far from unusual. The pattern traditionally grows stronger in the early summer
and into July, said Jason Dunion, a hurricane research analyst who works for the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Atlantic Oceanographic and
Meteorological Laboratory in Miami.

But this year's June plume was exceptional, he said, and that translated into
unusually dry air in the part of the Atlantic that is the main breeding ground
for hurricanes. Such levels of dryness have not been since the mid 1980s, he
said.

Whether that inhibits the formation of hurricanes, he said, well, that's the
million-dollar question.

Could it be that the amount of dust in the air keeps hurricanes from forming?

Perhaps, Dunion said, but the theory needs more study. The one scientific
certainty, he said, was the amount of Saharan dust in the air over the region
where storms are born during the peak of the season.

One of the essential ingredients to get hurricanes going is moisture in the air,
particularly in the middle areas of the atmosphere.

Moisture, combined with other factors, he said, gets hurricanes bubbling and
brewing. Drying that air out too much stifles development.

Another scientific certainty: The number of hurricanes in the Atlantic so far
this year is way, way below normal.

Hurricane Humberto formed early in September in the Atlantic and petered out in
open water. Hurricane Ingrid formed in the Caribbean and made landfall along the
northeastern coast of Mexico a month ago. The season, which ends on Nov. 30, is
on the downswing, having passed its peak in September. November averages only
about one named storm every two years, forecasters say.

Besides the two hurricanes this year, there were 10 named tropical storms.
Meteorologists say the number of tropical storms is about average, but where
they formed is unusual.

Five of the 10 storms formed in the Caribbean. Typically, particularly early in
the season, most tropical cyclones are born in the eastern Atlantic.

But this year, there's been a dearth of hurricanes swirling along Hurricane
Alley, that stretch of open water between West Africa and the Caribbean.

Forecasters in May predicted a 70 percent chance of an above normal season and
just a 5 percent chance of a below-normal season, said Dennis Feltgen, spokesman
for the National Hurricane Center in Miami. As many as 19 named storms were
predicted, with up to nine becoming hurricanes. Three of those would become
major -- Category 3 or higher -- hurricanes, they said.

So far this year: zero major hurricanes.

If the season ends without a major hurricane, it will mark the first time that
has happened since 1994.

There are several theories cited for the lack of hurricanes, Feltgen said; the
Saharan dust factor is just one.

There is also the Bermuda High, an area of high pressure along the eastern
seaboard that has steered dry air into the tropics and over the hurricane
birthing grounds. That, coupled with the dry air associated with the African
dust, likely contributed to the lack of storms, he said.

Feltgen was reluctant to credit the Sahara as the only reason hurricanes have
failed to form this year.

There was some Saharan dust, he said, but it doesn't cover 100 percent of the
tropical season. If a lot of dust happens to be in an area where hurricanes are
forming, that could be one of several factors.

Someday, he said, Saharan dust may be factored in when meteorologists make
hurricane season predictions.

Scientists are just beginning to study the relationship between Saharan dust
over the Atlantic and the formation of tropical cyclones, said Joseph Prospero,
a professor of marine and atmospheric chemistry at the University of Miami's
Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science.

That is a very active topic of discussion, he said. The outbreaks of African
dust have a clearly detectable impact. Increased dust in the air means reduced
sunlight on the ocean surface, lower temperature and reduced water vapor
emission, all of which play a role in tropical cyclones.

He said the presence of a hot, dry layer of dusty air at an elevated altitude
diminishes atmospheric conditions that lead to tropical cyclone formation.

But, he noted, There are many other factors linked to these dust events that
could suppress tropical cyclone development. In short, this is a very active
area of research today.

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

Hurricanes

From Page 1

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 668 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                           October 23, 2013 Wednesday

Sahara dust could deter hurricanes;
Dry plumes may be one reason for tame weather in Atlantic this year

BYLINE: KEITH MORELLI; Tribune staff

SECTION: NATION & WORLD; Metro; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 1800 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



HIGHLIGHT: Anybody notice there were NO hurricanes this year? There were just
two that came nowhere nearus and we're near the end of the season and we're onlu
up to K, as in Karen, which petered out as it limped toward the Panhandle. We'll
talk to weather geeks to figure out why...


Wind shears, water vapor and temperature, El Nino and La Nina all play a role in
the formation of hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean.

This year, the Sahara Desert appears to have played a part as well.

The vast desert that stretches across North Africa spat out a massive plume of
dust in a June wind storm that blew particles over the eastern Atlantic Ocean,
blanketing the cauldron where tropical storms and hurricanes bubble up.

Some scientists and meteorologists credit the dust particles and the drying
effect they create with impeding the formation of tropical cyclones and

creating one of the calmest Atlantic hurricane seasons in decades. The season is
mostly over, but only two hurricanes have formed, both of them minor.

Exactly why forecasters were so dramatically wrong - most of the major hurricane
prognosticators predicted an above-average season - is the subject of much
speculation in the hurricane-predicting community.

Part of the mystery is that sand from the Sahara blowing over the Atlantic is
far from unusual. The pattern traditionally grows stronger in the early summer
and into July, said Jason Dunion, a hurricane research analyst who works for the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Atlantic Oceanographic and
Meteorological Laboratory in Miami.

But this year's June plume was exceptional, he said, and that translated into
unusually dry air in the part of the Atlantic that is the main breeding ground
for hurricanes. Such levels of dryness have not been since the mid 1980s, he
said.

Whether that inhibits the formation of hurricanes, he said, well, that's the
million-dollar question.

Could it be that the amount of dust in the air keeps hurricanes from forming?

Perhaps, Dunion said, but the theory needs more study. The one scientific
certainty, he said, was the amount of Saharan dust in the air over the region
where storms are born during the peak of the season.

One of the essential ingredients to get hurricanes going is moisture in the air,
particularly in the middle areas of the atmosphere.

Moisture, combined with other factors, he said, gets hurricanes bubbling and
brewing. Drying that air out too much stifles development.

Another scientific certainty: The number of hurricanes in the Atlantic so far
this year is way, way below normal.

Hurricane Humberto formed early in September in the Atlantic and petered out in
open water. Hurricane Ingrid formed in the Caribbean and made landfall along the
northeastern coast of Mexico a month ago. The season, which ends on Nov. 30, is
on the downswing, having passed its peak in September. November averages only
about one named storm every two years, forecasters say.

Besides the two hurricanes this year, there were 10 named tropical storms.
Meteorologists say the number of tropical storms is about average, but where
they formed is unusual.

Five of the 10 storms formed in the Caribbean. Typically, particularly early in
the season, most tropical cyclones are born in the eastern Atlantic.

But this year, there's been a dearth of hurricanes swirling along Hurricane
Alley, that stretch of open water between West Africa and the Caribbean.

Forecasters in May predicted a 70 percent chance of an above normal season and
just a 5 percent chance of a below-normal season, said Dennis Feltgen, spokesman
for the National Hurricane Center in Miami. As many as 19 named storms were
predicted, with up to nine becoming hurricanes. Three of those would become
major -- Category 3 or higher -- hurricanes, they said.

So far this year: zero major hurricanes.

If the season ends without a major hurricane, it will mark the first time that
has happened since 1994.

There are several theories cited for the lack of hurricanes, Feltgen said; the
Saharan dust factor is just one.

There is also the Bermuda High, an area of high pressure along the eastern
seaboard that has steered dry air into the tropics and over the hurricane
birthing grounds. That, coupled with the dry air associated with the African
dust, likely contributed to the lack of storms, he said.

Feltgen was reluctant to credit the Sahara as the only reason hurricanes have
failed to form this year.

There was some Saharan dust, he said, but it doesn't cover 100 percent of the
tropical season. If a lot of dust happens to be in an area where hurricanes are
forming, that could be one of several factors.

Someday, he said, Saharan dust may be factored in when meteorologists make
hurricane season predictions.

Scientists are just beginning to study the relationship between Saharan dust
over the Atlantic and the formation of tropical cyclones, said Joseph Prospero,
a professor of marine and atmospheric chemistry at the University of Miami's
Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science.

That is a very active topic of discussion, he said. The outbreaks of African
dust have a clearly detectable impact. Increased dust in the air means reduced
sunlight on the ocean surface, lower temperature and reduced water vapor
emission, all of which play a role in tropical cyclones.

He said the presence of a hot, dry layer of dusty air at an elevated altitude
diminishes atmospheric conditions that lead to tropical cyclone formation.

But, he noted, There are many other factors linked to these dust events that
could suppress tropical cyclone development. In short, this is a very active
area of research today.

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

HURRICANES, Page 6

Wind shears, water vapor and temperature, El Nino and La Nina all play a role in
the formation of hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean.

This year, the Sahara Desert appears to have played a part as well.

The vast desert that stretches across North Africa spat out a massive plume of
dust in a June wind storm that blew particles over the eastern Atlantic Ocean,
blanketing the cauldron where tropical storms and hurricanes bubble up.

Some scientists and meteorologists credit the dust particles and the drying
effect they create with impeding the formation of tropical cyclones and

creating one of the calmest Atlantic hurricane seasons in decades. The season is
mostly over, but only two hurricanes have formed, both of them minor.

Exactly why forecasters were so dramatically wrong - most of the major hurricane
prognosticators predicted an above-average season - is the subject of much
speculation in the hurricane-predicting community.

Part of the mystery is that sand from the Sahara blowing over the Atlantic is
far from unusual. The pattern traditionally grows stronger in the early summer
and into July, said Jason Dunion, a hurricane research analyst who works for the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Atlantic Oceanographic and
Meteorological Laboratory in Miami.

But this year's June plume was exceptional, he said, and that translated into
unusually dry air in the part of the Atlantic that is the main breeding ground
for hurricanes. Such levels of dryness have not been since the mid 1980s, he
said.

Whether that inhibits the formation of hurricanes, he said, well, that's the
million-dollar question.

Could it be that the amount of dust in the air keeps hurricanes from forming?

Perhaps, Dunion said, but the theory needs more study. The one scientific
certainty, he said, was the amount of Saharan dust in the air over the region
where storms are born during the peak of the season.

One of the essential ingredients to get hurricanes going is moisture in the air,
particularly in the middle areas of the atmosphere.

Moisture, combined with other factors, he said, gets hurricanes bubbling and
brewing. Drying that air out too much stifles development.

Another scientific certainty: The number of hurricanes in the Atlantic so far
this year is way, way below normal.

Hurricane Humberto formed early in September in the Atlantic and petered out in
open water. Hurricane Ingrid formed in the Caribbean and made landfall along the
northeastern coast of Mexico a month ago. The season, which ends on Nov. 30, is
on the downswing, having passed its peak in September. November averages only
about one named storm every two years, forecasters say.

Besides the two hurricanes this year, there were 10 named tropical storms.
Meteorologists say the number of tropical storms is about average, but where
they formed is unusual.

Five of the 10 storms formed in the Caribbean. Typically, particularly early in
the season, most tropical cyclones are born in the eastern Atlantic.

But this year, there's been a dearth of hurricanes swirling along Hurricane
Alley, that stretch of open water between West Africa and the Caribbean.

Forecasters in May predicted a 70 percent chance of an above normal season and
just a 5 percent chance of a below-normal season, said Dennis Feltgen, spokesman
for the National Hurricane Center in Miami. As many as 19 named storms were
predicted, with up to nine becoming hurricanes. Three of those would become
major -- Category 3 or higher -- hurricanes, they said.

So far this year: zero major hurricanes.

If the season ends without a major hurricane, it will mark the first time that
has happened since 1994.

There are several theories cited for the lack of hurricanes, Feltgen said; the
Saharan dust factor is just one.

There is also the Bermuda High, an area of high pressure along the eastern
seaboard that has steered dry air into the tropics and over the hurricane
birthing grounds. That, coupled with the dry air associated with the African
dust, likely contributed to the lack of storms, he said.

Feltgen was reluctant to credit the Sahara as the only reason hurricanes have
failed to form this year.

There was some Saharan dust, he said, but it doesn't cover 100 percent of the
tropical season. If a lot of dust happens to be in an area where hurricanes are
forming, that could be one of several factors.

Someday, he said, Saharan dust may be factored in when meteorologists make
hurricane season predictions.

Scientists are just beginning to study the relationship between Saharan dust
over the Atlantic and the formation of tropical cyclones, said Joseph Prospero,
a professor of marine and atmospheric chemistry at the University of Miami's
Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science.

That is a very active topic of discussion, he said. The outbreaks of African
dust have a clearly detectable impact. Increased dust in the air means reduced
sunlight on the ocean surface, lower temperature and reduced water vapor
emission, all of which play a role in tropical cyclones.

He said the presence of a hot, dry layer of dusty air at an elevated altitude
diminishes atmospheric conditions that lead to tropical cyclone formation.

But, he noted, There are many other factors linked to these dust events that
could suppress tropical cyclone development. In short, this is a very active
area of research today.

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

Hurricanes

From Page 1

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 669 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            December 1, 2014 Monday

Florida again escapes hurricane landfall The last to hit the state was Wilma in
2005;
The last to hit the state was Wilma in 2005

BYLINE: KEITH MORELLI Tribune staff

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 852 words



HIGHLIGHT: Sunday is the last day of 2014's hurricane season and it's a bust,
with no major storms hitting the area or state. We'll chat with weather types to
get their take on it


TAMPA - On the home page of the National Hurricane Center this weekend was a map
of the tropical Atlantic Ocean, West Africa on the right side, the United States
and Caribbean on the left. Across the deep blue ocean are these words: Tropical
cyclone activity is not expected during the next 48 hours.

That was the swan song for the 2014 Atlantic hurricane season, which began way
back on June 1 and ended Sunday. Once again, the season came and went without a
whisper of wind along the Tampa Bay region and the state of Florida.

This is the ninth consecutive year Florida has been bypassed when it comes to
hurricanes, though no one's complaining. The last hurricane to breach Florida's
coastline was Hurricane Wilma in October 2005. The last hurricane to directly
hit Tampa was in October 1921.

We have now completed a remarkable streak of nine straight years without a
hurricane of any category striking the state of Florida said Dennis Feltgen
spokesman for the National Hurricane Center in Miami. The old record for longest
streak was five years, from 1980 to 1984 and we broke that record in the 2011
season.

We've been adding to it ever since.

This year, eight storm systems got names, with all but two forming in the
Atlantic and button-hooking north and to the east, far out to sea, threatening
only shipping lanes. Two formed in the Gulf of Mexico and petered out after
making landfall along the Mexican coast. Six of the eight named systems turned
into hurricanes.

Only two, Hurricane Edouard and Hurricane Gonzalo, reached major hurricane
status with sustained winds topping 111 mph. Both where at least 500 miles east
of the U.S. coastline. Edouard was only a major hurricane for a few hours before
being downgraded.

Hurricane Arthur, the first of the season, touched the East Coast during the
first week in July, brushing up against North Carolina before veering to the
northeast and ending in Nova Scotia.

June storms tend to form in much the same area as do those in October, namely
the western Atlantic, but with less frequency.

In July, the development areas shift eastward, and by August, the origin of
hurricanes stretches from the Caribbean to the eastern Atlantic, off the coast
of Africa.

In October and November, the Atlantic waters cool and wind shears increase,
decreasing the possibility of storm formation.

That means tropical storms and hurricanes have a better chance of forming in the
southern Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea, where the water is warmer and
conditions are favorable.

Forecasters said several factors combined to make the 2014 hurricane season a
quiet one.

A combination of atmospheric conditions acted to suppress the Atlantic hurricane
season, including very strong vertical wind shear, combined with increased
atmospheric stability, stronger sinking motion and drier air across the tropical
Atlantic, said Gerry Bell,  lead hurricane forecaster at NOAA's Climate
Prediction Center, in a summary of the 2014 hurricane season. Also, the West
African monsoon was near-to-below average, making it more difficult for African
easterly waves to develop.

Over the past couple of years, hurricane numbers have fallen, and some
meteorologists believe the Atlantic is moving out of a 20-year era of hurricane
high-intensity.

Such eras tend to stretch between 10 and 30 years, they say.

Over the past two decades, hurricane intensity has been intense, with an
above-average number of tropical systems, storms, hurricanes and major
hurricanes each season.

But hurricanes have waned in recent years, with seasons coming and going with
hardly a single threat to Florida.

Noted hurricane predictors with the Department of Atmospheric Science at the
Colorado State University said in April there likely would be nine hurricanes
this season. They were just one off the mark.

They also forecast three hurricanes. Six formed.

Major hurricanes? Colorado State forecasters predicted one. There were two.

The 2014 hurricane season was relatively quiet, Colorado State forecasters
announced on their website. The season was characterized by somewhat
below-average named storm numbers, with near-average numbers of both hurricanes
and major hurricanes.

The upside of having no hurricanes over the past nine years has a downside, said
Feltgen, with the National Hurricane Center.

The streak will end, he said, but people are becoming complacent. There are a
lot of people here in Florida who have moved here over the past nine years, he
said, and they never have experienced a hurricane.

The end of one season means preparations have begun for next year, which begins
in six months.

Fortunately, much of the U.S. coastline was spared this year, said Louis
Uccellini, director of the National Weather Service on the agency's website.

Nevertheless, we know that's not always going to be the case. The 'off season'
between now and the start of next year's hurricane season is the best time for
communities to refine their response plans and for businesses and individuals to
make sure they're prepared for any potential storm.

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 670 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            December 1, 2014 Monday

Florida again escapes hurricane landfall [JUMP]The last to hit the state was
Wilma in 2005;
The last to hit the state was Wilma in 2005

BYLINE: KEITH MORELLI Tribune staff

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 852 words



HIGHLIGHT: Sunday is the last day of 2014's hurricane season and it's a bust,
with no major storms hitting the area or state. We'll chat with weather types to
get their take on it


TAMPA - On the home page of the National Hurricane Center this weekend was a map
of the tropical Atlantic Ocean, West Africa on the right side, the United States
and Caribbean on the left. Across the deep blue ocean are these words: Tropical
cyclone activity is not expected during the next 48 hours.

That was the swan song for the 2014 Atlantic hurricane season, which began way
back on June 1 and ended Sunday. Once again, the season came and went without a
whisper of wind along the Tampa Bay region and the state of Florida.

This is the ninth consecutive year Florida has been bypassed when it comes to
hurricanes, though no one's complaining. The last hurricane to breach Florida's
coastline was Hurricane Wilma in October 2005. The last hurricane to directly
hit Tampa was in October 1921.

We have now completed a remarkable streak of nine straight years without a
hurricane of any category striking the state of Florida said Dennis Feltgen
spokesman for the National Hurricane Center in Miami. The old record for longest
streak was five years, from 1980 to 1984 and we broke that record in the 2011
season.

We've been adding to it ever since.

This year, eight storm systems got names, with all but two forming in the
Atlantic and button-hooking north and to the east, far out to sea, threatening
only shipping lanes. Two formed in the Gulf of Mexico and petered out after
making landfall along the Mexican coast. Six of the eight named systems turned
into hurricanes.

Only two, Hurricane Edouard and Hurricane Gonzalo, reached major hurricane
status with sustained winds topping 111 mph. Both where at least 500 miles east
of the U.S. coastline. Edouard was only a major hurricane for a few hours before
being downgraded.

Hurricane Arthur, the first of the season, touched the East Coast during the
first week in July, brushing up against North Carolina before veering to the
northeast and ending in Nova Scotia.

June storms tend to form in much the same area as do those in October, namely
the western Atlantic, but with less frequency.

In July, the development areas shift eastward, and by August, the origin of
hurricanes stretches from the Caribbean to the eastern Atlantic, off the coast
of Africa.

In October and November, the Atlantic waters cool and wind shears increase,
decreasing the possibility of storm formation.

That means tropical storms and hurricanes have a better chance of forming in the
southern Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea, where the water is warmer and
conditions are favorable.

Forecasters said several factors combined to make the 2014 hurricane season a
quiet one.

A combination of atmospheric conditions acted to suppress the Atlantic hurricane
season, including very strong vertical wind shear, combined with increased
atmospheric stability, stronger sinking motion and drier air across the tropical
Atlantic, said Gerry Bell,  lead hurricane forecaster at NOAA's Climate
Prediction Center, in a summary of the 2014 hurricane season. Also, the West
African monsoon was near-to-below average, making it more difficult for African
easterly waves to develop.

Over the past couple of years, hurricane numbers have fallen, and some
meteorologists believe the Atlantic is moving out of a 20-year era of hurricane
high-intensity.

Such eras tend to stretch between 10 and 30 years, they say.

Over the past two decades, hurricane intensity has been intense, with an
above-average number of tropical systems, storms, hurricanes and major
hurricanes each season.

But hurricanes have waned in recent years, with seasons coming and going with
hardly a single threat to Florida.

Noted hurricane predictors with the Department of Atmospheric Science at the
Colorado State University said in April there likely would be nine hurricanes
this season. They were just one off the mark.

They also forecast three hurricanes. Six formed.

Major hurricanes? Colorado State forecasters predicted one. There were two.

The 2014 hurricane season was relatively quiet, Colorado State forecasters
announced on their website. The season was characterized by somewhat
below-average named storm numbers, with near-average numbers of both hurricanes
and major hurricanes.

The upside of having no hurricanes over the past nine years has a downside, said
Feltgen, with the National Hurricane Center.

The streak will end, he said, but people are becoming complacent. There are a
lot of people here in Florida who have moved here over the past nine years, he
said, and they never have experienced a hurricane.

The end of one season means preparations have begun for next year, which begins
in six months.

Fortunately, much of the U.S. coastline was spared this year, said Louis
Uccellini, director of the National Weather Service on the agency's website.

Nevertheless, we know that's not always going to be the case. The 'off season'
between now and the start of next year's hurricane season is the best time for
communities to refine their response plans and for businesses and individuals to
make sure they're prepared for any potential storm.

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 671 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Victoria Advocate (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 30, 2013 Thursday

Hurricane Celia survivor: 'Nature is powerful'

BYLINE: Sonny Long, Victoria Advocate, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 726 words


May 30--YORKTOWN -- Bea McKinney's life changed on Aug. 3, 1970.

Hunkered down in a closet, McKinney prayed long and hard as she rode out
Hurricane Celia in her neighbor's downstairs apartment in Corpus Christi.

"At that point in my life I was really interested in stuff, collecting nice
things," she said. "I realized how quickly you can lose everything."

McKinney was a 25-year-old middle school art teacher getting geared up for the
next school year and taking classes toward her master's degree at what was then
Texas A&I University when Celia struck.

"I had been in Corpus since 1966," McKinney said. "I grew up in Yorktown and it
was the first time I had ever lived on the coast.

"I didn't really worry about it too much to be honest. I was in the apartment,
busy working on something when I realized the building was wobbling and
shaking."

Downstairs neighbors invited McKinney to come to their apartment -- she was on
the top floor of the two-story structure -- where a small group had gathered for
a hurricane party.

"As I walked by the other apartments, I noticed a lot of debris blowing,"
McKinney said. "I decided to get into a protected area, so I went in a closet.

"I remember praying a long time because it was really violent."

After the storm passed, McKinney returned to her apartment.

"We were on the second floor at the end of the building," she said. "A lot of
the roofs had blown off the apartment complex, but fortunately for whatever
reason our roof was still there. It had gotten a lot of water damage and for the
next few weeks we didn't have power."

McKinney, 68, knows she was lucky.

"No matter where you are, something can happen," she said. "Nature is powerful.
No matter how much you might enjoy where you are it can be gone in a heartbeat."

Next Big One?

Hurricane Celia was the last major hurricane -- Category 3 or stronger -- to hit
the mid-coast of Texas.

Is 2013 the year that changes?

That's the question raised during the 2013 Hurricane & Disaster Conference by
John Metz, warning coordination meteorologist with the National Weather Service
in Corpus Christi.

"You never know when that next major hurricane is going to come rolling through.
We must be prepared," Metz said. "It could be this year.

"How often should a major hurricane come around to this area? A study by the
National Hurricane Center shows the return for a major hurricane here is 25 to
40 years," Metz continued. "We must be ready. It could come this year."

Metz noted that the Crossroads has a rich history of hurricanes, with seven
major hurricanes coming on shore at the mid-coast of Texas.

A total of 22 hurricanes have hit Texas since 1851.

Be Prepared

The length of time between major hurricanes could present problems from the
public perspective, Metz explained.

"Apathy, forgetfulness. Maybe you are new to the area and don't realize what a
storm can do," he said. "They can be life changing events. You must take
hurricanes and preparedness seriously."

The category of a storm does not tell the full story, he said. "There are many
other hazards and parameters of a hurricane that we must understand. It's not
just the wind speed. It's storm surge. It's the size of the storm," Metz said.

When a hurricane watch is issued, you have 48 hours until the wind starts to
blow. When a warning is issued, you're down to 36 hours, Metz said.

Metz said that although hurricane forecasting has improved, it continues to be
an inexact science.

He added one of the most difficult things to forecast is intensity -- how strong
is that storm going to be?

"Improvements are being made, but we've got a long way to go before a perfect
forecast. I doubt we ever will."

Metz said 2012 was one of the busiest hurricane seasons on record with 19
storms, and 2013 looks to be much the same with 13 to 20 named storms.

Of those storms, seven to 11 could become hurricanes including three to six
major hurricanes, well above the seasonal average of 12 named storms, six
hurricanes and three major hurricanes.

"We're in a busy cycle," he said. "For more than 15 years water temperature in
the Atlantic has been above normal, generating a lot of storms.

"It only takes one big storm rolling through the Crossroads to make a major
season for us."

___ (c)2013 Victoria Advocate (Victoria, Texas) Visit Victoria Advocate
(Victoria, Texas) at www.victoriaadvocate.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130530-VI-Hurricane-Celia-survivor-Nature-is-powerful-0530-20130530

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VI


                        Copyright 2013 Victoria Advocate


                          FOCUS - 672 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                      Bladen Journal, Elizabethtown, N.C.

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             April 13, 2015 Monday

Reltively quiet hurricane season expected

BYLINE: Bladen Journal, Elizabethtown, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 337 words


April 13--RALEIGH -- The 2015 Atlantic hurricane season will be significantly
less active than the overall averages from 1950 to the present, according to
researchers at North Carolina State University.

The 2015 season should see four to six named storms forming in the Atlantic
basin, which includes the entire Atlantic Ocean, the Gulf of Mexico and the
Caribbean Sea, according to Lian Xie, professor of marine, earth and atmospheric
sciences at N.C. State. This number is lower than the 1950 to 2014 average of
approximately 11 named storms.

Of those named storms, one to three may grow strong enough to become hurricanes,
and only one may become a major hurricane.

This year's numbers for the Gulf are also below historic averages: Xie's data
indicate the likelihood of one to two named storms forming, and one becoming a
hurricane.

In the Caribbean, one to two tropical cyclones may form, with one becoming a
hurricane. In this scenario, the Caribbean may not see a major hurricane this
season.

The group states that although a quiet hurricane season is expected this year,
it should not be a cause for complacency in hurricane disaster preparation. It
only takes one landfalling storm to create devastating loss and damage, as
Hurricane Andrew did in the quiet 1992 hurricane season.

Xie's methodology evaluates more than 100 years of historical data on Atlantic
Ocean hurricane positions and intensity, as well as other variables including
weather patterns and sea-surface temperatures, to predict how many storms will
form in each ocean basin.

N.C. State collaborators on the research include Dr. Montserrat Fuentes,
professor of statistics, Marcela Alfaro-Cordoba, graduate research assistant in
statistics, and Bin Liu, research assistant professor in marine, earth and
atmospheric sciences.

The Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 through Nov. 30.

___ (c)2015 the Bladen Journal (Elizabethtown, N.C.) Visit the Bladen Journal
(Elizabethtown, N.C.) at www.bladenjournal.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150413-1BL-Reltively-quiet-hurricane-season-expected-0413-20150413

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1BL


               Copyright 2015 Bladen Journal, Elizabethtown, N.C.


                          FOCUS - 673 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                             National Underwriter,
             Property & Casualty/Risk & Benefits Management Edition

                                January 18, 1999

Cats Damaged 1998 Earnings

BYLINE: BY AMANDA LEVIN

SECTION: Pg. 12

LENGTH: 930 words


The 1998 Atlantic hurricane season will be remembered as one of the deadliest in
history, with the strongest October hurricane activity on record, scientists at
the U.S. Commerce Department's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
reported.

The hurricane season this year produced 14 tropical storms, and ten of those
storms became hurricanes, according to NOAA.

The average number of storms is 10 with an average of six becoming hurricanes.
The four-year period of 1995 to 1998 hit an all-time record high with a total of
33 hurricanes, according to NOAA.

With hurricanes damaging not just property, but insurer financial results as
well, predictions for 1999 are not very comforting for the property-casualty
insurance industry.

"Evidence strongly suggests that we have entered a new era of enhanced major
hurricane activity," said William Gray, a researcher at Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, Colo., who predicts hurricane activity each year.

Mr. Gray forecast that in 1999, the hurricane season would be comparable to the
one just past.  He said this year would be slightly weaker than the 1995 and
1996 seasons, both of which were very active.

This year, Mr. Gray predicted 10 storms and six hurricanes -- falling short of
the actual numbers in both cases.  For next year, he predicted that the Atlantic
basin will experience 14 tropical storms, nine of which will develop into
hurricanes.

Hurricane Georges, the most destructive hurricane of the season, is the first
billion-dollar catastrophe since Hurricane Fran in 1996, which caused $ 1.6
billion in insured losses, according to Chris Guidette, a representative at the
New York-based Property Claims Service unit of the Insurance Services Office.

Hurricane Georges' insured losses now stand at $ 2.9 billion, said Mr. Guidette.
The insurance industry here has received about 700,000 claims and this figure
continues to rise, he said.

Mississippi, the state hit worst by Hurricane Georges, suffered a total insured
loss of $ 665 million, said Mr. Guidette.  Four states, including Alabama,
Florida, Louisiana and Mississippi, had insured losses of $ 1.15 billion.

Hurricane Georges racked up more than two-thirds of this quarter's $ 3.66
billion catastrophe losses, said PCS.

The PCS unit of the ISO defines a catastrophe as an event that causes $ 25
million or more in insured property losses and affects a significant number of
property and casualty policyholders and insurers.

Hurricane Bonnie was also classified as a catastrophe this year.  The hurricane
caused an estimated $ 360 million in damages to insured property in three
states, North Carolina, Virginia and South Carolina, according to ISO.

Tropical storms Frances and Charlie were also classified as catastrophes this
year, ISO said.

"Based on catastrophe losses from the first nine months of the year, this season
has already qualified as the fifth worst year since 1950," said ISO vice
president of actuarial services and research John Kollar.

The increase in catastrophe losses by itself accounts for almost three-quarters
of the decline in insurers' operating income, said Mr. Kollar.

In spite of the damage to insurer and reinsurer earnings, the insurance industry
this year experienced another dramatic decrease in the pricing of catastrophe
reinsurance in the United States, according to an analysis of the U.S.
reinsurance market by New York-based Guy Carpenter & Company, a reinsurance
broker.

The Guy Carpenter analysis revealed that for comparable levels of cover, the
price level in 1998 is still higher than in 1992, but since 1992, prices have
fallen.

Guy Carpenter predicts that short of a large catastrophe loss, the price level
will continue to go down 10 percent to 15 percent in 1999, getting close to the
1992 price level.

Nathan Sambul, managing director at Guy Carpenter, said a catastrophe loss would
have to be above $ 25 billion to firm up the market.

The Guy Carpenter analysis also revealed that although catastrophe losses hit a
ten-year low of $ 2.6 billion for U.S. reinsurers in 1997, there was a reversal
in 1998.

Second-quarter losses in the U.S. reinsurance market totaled $ 3.4 billion this
year, according to the analysis.

According to Guy Carpenter, the most significant second-quarter disaster was a
string of windstorms and tornadoes that swept through 13 Mid-western and Eastern
states between May 30, 1998 and June 1, 1998 and totaled $ 650 million in losses
to U.S. reinsurers.

The first half of 1998 resulted in 26 catastrophes, driving the six-month figure
to $ 4.4 billion, said the analysis.

A Cincinnati-based insurance holding company, Cincinnati Financial Corp.,
experienced significant insured losses in 1998 stemming from catastrophes.

For the first nine months of 1998 the company incurred $ 81.8 million in
catastrophe losses for the first nine months.  Meanwhile, for all of 1997 the
company only paid out $ 25.5 million, according to Ted Elchynski, the company's
chief financial officer.

"There was a tremendous increase [in 1998] in both the frequency and the
severity of the storms," said Mr. Elchynski referring generally the Atlantic
storm season.  "It was just one of those years where we had a lot of weather
-related losses," he said.

He said a wind and hailstorm in Kentucky was the most significant catastrophe
loss this year.  It occurred in the second quarter of 1998 and totaled $ 25.4
million.

Mr. Elchynski said the company stands by its basic underwriting principles and
has no plans to make any changes for the 1999 storm season.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 1999 The National Underwriter Company


                          FOCUS - 674 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                   October 12, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

YOU ASKED US Hurricane names scarce

BYLINE: BY WALTER STEFANIUK TORONTO STAR

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 677 words


Q Regarding Hurricane Opal, has there been any year we've exceeded the letter O
in hurricane names?

A Only in 1995. It's up to Roxanne now, the 10th hurricane of the season. "We've
never gotten up to O before," said Frank Lepore, public information officer at
the National Hurricane Centre in Miami, which monitors storms that brew in in
the Atlantic basin and Gulf of Mexico.

Between 1886 and 1992, the average was 4.9 hurricanes per season for that vast
area. In 1993, four tropical storms blew into hurricanes. In 1994, it was three.
This year, they're running out of names. Only four are left on the 1995 list:
Sebastian, Tanya, Van and Wendy.

Names of this season's hurricanes were Allison, Erin, Felix, Humberto, Iris,
Luis, Marilyn, Noel, Opal and Roxanne. Other names on the list were for tropical
storms that never worsened into hurricanes.

A list of 21 names, alternating between male and female, is repeated every six
years. Names of the most destructive hurricanes are retired. A separate list for
the Pacific is maintained at the Central Pacific Hurricane Centre in Honolulu.
The letters Q, U, X, Y and Z aren't used because of the scarcity of names,
Lepore said.

Prior to World War II, hurricanes were identified by position - longitude and
latitude - which confused the public, particularly when more than one was
raging.

During the war, American forecasters in the Pacific nicknamed them after women,
usually wives or girlfriends, as an Australian meteorologist, Clement Ragge, had
done in the late 19th century.

In 1950, the U.S. Weather Service began using the phonetic alphabet (Able,
Baker, Charlie). It switched to women's names from 1954. It began the current
practice of alternating male and female names in 1979.

Victims' families

Q Now that the O.J. Simpson trial is over, I'd like to write the families of
murder victims Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald Goldman. What are their mailing
addresses?

A Mail to the Brown family should be sent to the Nicole Denise Brown Charitable
Foundation, 15 Monarch Bay Plaza, Box 380, Monarch Beach, Calif. 92629.

Write the Goldman family c/o Robert Tourtelout, 11835 West Olympic Blvd., Suite
1090, Los Angeles, Calif. 90064.

YES OF NO

Though he had no plans to visit, Toronto's executive committee said China's
Premier Li Peng was not welcome here because of "human rights violations."
Should cities take official stands on international issues?

Dial (416) 868-3900 with your yes or no by 10 a.m. tomorrow. Results on Tuesday.

Clickety-click

Tuesday's question was: Do you feel uncomfortable motoring on highways since
photo radar was scrapped?

YES 64%

NO 36%

(482 calls)

The Thanksgiving weekend carnage should give you an idea as to what my answer
is.

No. What I would like to see is police officers going after motorists driving in
the passing lane below the speed limit.

Yes. Photo radar was like a second seat belt.

No. I don't have to worry about drivers ahead of me slamming on their brakes
when they see a van parked along the highway.

Yes. Dangerous, reckless driving has once again become the norm. Where is the
extra police presence that was supposed to replace photo radar?

No, but I still think it was a dumb idea to scrap it.

Yes. You should have been on the highways last night. They were going in and out
like a bunch of yoyos and speeds were just unbelievable.

No. It's much safer on the QEW now. When there was photo radar, trucks were
constantly hooting and flashing their lights at you to go faster. Now you can go
the same speed as they are.

CALENDAR

Canadian statesman Lester Pearson awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for efforts to
create a United Nations peacekeeping force to defuse Suez crisis, 1957; public
schools in Toronto open after a six-week shutdown caused by polio epidemic which
claimed 150 lives, 1937; Rene Levesque founds Parti Quebecois, 1968.

Birthdates of poet Dorothy Livesay, at Winnipeg, 1909; Italian opera singer
Luciano Pavarotti, 1935. You Asked Us appears on Tuesday and Thursday


LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hurricane

                  Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                          FOCUS - 675 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The Ottawa Citizen

                   August 26, 1998, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Bonnie follows in some ferocious footsteps

BYLINE: PAT BELL; THE OTTAWA CITIZEN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12


Hurricane Bonnie has had some feisty, destructive ancestors.

When Hurricane Andrew hit South Florida and Louisiana in August 1992, it went on
a rampage that resulted in losses of $ 25 billion, hitting insurance companies,
government and personal bank accounts harder than the three previous most costly
United States storms combined.

With winds of 235 kilometres an hour when it hit shore at south Florida, it
remains today the worst hurricane in terms of economic destruction.

Andrew destroyed 85,000 homes, leaving almost 300,000 homeless and almost
totally flattened 430 square kilometres of Dade County, Florida.

On the Indian subcontinent, in May 1991, a cyclone with winds of 270 kilometres
an hour hit Bangladesh. It flooded huge areas of the coastal plain.

As the Washington-based Worldwatch Institute described it "an estimated 139,000
people were killed, more than a million homes were damaged or destroyed and
financial losses were put at $ 3 billion, more than 10 per cent of Bangladesh's
annual economic output."

Hurricane Hazel is the most-remembered storm in Canadian history, as Environment
Canada's senior climatologist David Phillips notes in his 1993 book on Canadian
weather facts and trivia The Day Niagara Falls Ran Dry!

Hazel struck southern Ontario on Oct. 15, 1954, pouring an estimated 300 million
tonnes of rain on Toronto and leaving in its wake 80 dead and $ 100 million
damage.

But Hurricane Beth on Aug. 16, 1971, "produced more rain than Hazel dumping 296
millimetres on Nova Scotia," Mr. Phillips said.

An unnamed hurricane struck southwestern Ontario on Sept. 25, 1941; in London,
130--kilometre an hour winds were recorded, stronger than those of Hazel.

The deadliest hurricanes to strike Canada, he recorded, were the unnamed storms
that hit the Maritimes on Aug. 25, 1873, sinking 1,200 vessels and the
"Independence Hurricane" that struck Newfoundland on Sept. 9,1775, drowning
several thousand British seamen.

In the United States, the Federal Emergency Management Agency lists the Top 10
hurricanes in the country according to the costs to the agency for assistance
programs and other services.

Hurricane Andrew of 1992 tops the list. Hurricane Hugo, which hit North and
South Carolina and Virginia in 1989 is a close second.

Hurricane Marilyn, which tore through Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands in 1995
is third.

In 1996, Hurricane Fran hit Maryland, North and South Carolina, Pennsylvania,
Virginia and West Virginia causing 37 deaths.

Fifth was Hurricane Hortense in Puerto Rico in 1996.

Sixth was Hurricane Iniki that hit Hawaii in 1992. Hurricane Frederic in 1979
caused damage to Alabama, Florida and Mississippi. Eighth was Hurricane Opal in
Alabama, Florida and Georgia in 1995.

Hurricane Camille in 1969 affected Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, Virginia and
West Virginia and Hurricane David hit Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands.

Although not on the top 10 list for federal aid, Hurricane Bob in 1991 left $
1.5 billion in damages and caused 18 deaths when it travelled north along the
coast of North Carolina, Long Island and New England

It wasn't graded as a hurricane but Tropical Storm Alberto that struck Alabama,
Florida and Georgia in 1994 resulted in federal emergency disaster relief
expenditures of $ 324.3 million. Torrential rains brought widespread flooding
resulting in 32 deaths.

"While it is hurricanes that historically cause the most damage to the eastern
and southeastern United States between June and November, the power of the
tropical storm cannot be ignored," the agency says.

Of the top 30 Atlantic cyclones that have truck the U.S. since 1938, four of
them were tropical storms.



LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1998

LENGTH: 619 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright 1998 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 676 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                     August 21, 2001 Tuesday, Home Edition

Expect a swarm of hurricanes

BYLINE: MARLON MANUEL

SOURCE: AJC

SECTION: News; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 553 words


Coastal residents from Texas to Virginia, take note. Tropical Storm Barry was
only a warm-up for hurricane season. Tropical Storm Chantal is just a tease.

By next week, all the ingredients needed to brew hurricanes by the batch may
fall into place. Researchers predict satellite images will be filled with
multiple storms the next six weeks, the peak of hurricane season.

The favorable elements include warm ocean water, conducive atmospheric winds and
plentiful moisture in the air.

And a potent element soon will add kick to the recipe. The hurricane-friendly
side of a global atmospheric wave that sweeps the planet every 30 to 60 days may
affect the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea by next week.

"We could certainly see storm after storm form within the next couple of weeks,"
said Stan Goldenberg, a meteorologist with the Hurricane Research Division of
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Miami.

The tropics have been calm so far, but they usually are until this time of year.

The changing conditions coincide with what historically is the busiest hurricane
time of the year: Aug. 20 to Oct. 10. More than 80 percent of the 583 hurricanes
since 1886 have formed from late August to early October.

In fact, Atlantic hurricane seasons in the next 10 to 40 years will be more
active and destructive overall, predicted hurricane forecasting guru William
Gray of Colorado State University.

Gray's short-term forecast calls for 12 named storms this season, including
seven hurricanes --- three of them intense. Gray said there's a 50 percent
chance that a major hurricane could strike the Florida Peninsula or somewhere
along the Eastern Seaboard this year. The average annual risk the last century
was 31 percent.

More than 70 million people live on the coast from North Carolina to Georgia to
Texas, and many never have experienced a hurricane.

"I suspect that most coastal residents do not realize the full magnitude of the
hurricane threat to our country now and in coming years," Gray said.

The message to beach residents is to get your emergency supplies now: shutters,
batteries, water, food, candles.

In Panama City Beach, Fla., where Tropical Storm Barry delivered a fairly minor
blow two weeks ago, motel manager Patsy Swanner said she's ready. Swanner, who
moved from inland Texas this summer and never has been through a hurricane,
bought candles and groceries for the seven rooms and cottage of the Gulf Edge
Inn, which has stood for 50 years.

As the near-hurricane landed just to the west, Swanner slept through sustained
winds of 70 mph --- near the hurricane threshold of 74 mph. Shingles blew off.
Sand swept into a few rooms.

Goldenberg said just a small increase in wind speed dramatically increases
damage potential. If Barry's winds had risen from 70 mph to 90 mph, the force
would have doubled, the hurricane researcher said.

"We'll probably leave if there's a hurricane" approaching the area in the
future, Swanner said.

ON THE WEB: Hurricane outlook by the Climate Prediction
Center:www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/outlooks/hurricane_update.html Hurricane
forecast by Colorado State professor William Gray:
http://typhoon.atmos.colostate.edu/forecasts/ A look at tropical weather by the
National Hurricane Center: www.nhc.noaa.gov/

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphic:
THE STORMIEST TIME
August and September historically are the busiest part of the hurricane season,
accounting for nearly two-thirds of all hurricanes reported during the past 115
years. Here is the number of hurricanes by month since 1886:
Line graph shows that the months with the highest numbers of hurricanes are
September (213) and August (168).
Source: National Hurricane Center / Cox News Service

                    Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution


                          FOCUS - 677 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                          December 27, 2017 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Weather Eye

BYLINE: Paul Simons

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 54

LENGTH: 320 words


The Atlantic hurricane season this year was brutal and the statistics
astounding. Ten consecutive storms reached hurricane status - for the first time
since 1893 - including two category 5 hurricanes, Irma and Maria, the first time
that has happened in ten years.

Hurricane Irma's highest winds of 185mph broke the record for wind-speed
intensity for an Atlantic hurricane outside the Gulf of Mexico and the
Caribbean. Irma also maintained its peak intensity for 37 hours, a record for a
cyclone anywhere in the world; the previous record was 24 hours, set by Typoon
Haiyan in the Philippines in 2013.

It wasn't only the wind that set records. Hurricane Harvey rained heavier than
any hurricane in US history. About 1,640mm (64.6in) fell in one location in
Texas and an estimated 127 billion tonnes of rain fell in total in the state -
so much that it compressed the Earth's crust by roughly 2cm.

Three of the largest hurricanes hit land at their peak intensity, causing huge
devastation. Much of the Caribbean lies in ruins in the aftermath of Hurricane
Irma and Hurricane Maria; the island of Barbuda was so devastated that it is
uninhabited for the first time 300 years.

The number of deaths caused by Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico is being reviewed
by the island's governor; unofficial estimates put the number killed at more
than 1,000. The hurricane also caused the largest and longest power cut recorded
in the US, which affected all of Puerto Rico's 3.4 million inhabitants, as well
as the 103,000 people in the US Virgin Islands. About 1.5 million customers in
Puerto Rico are still without power and 6 per cent have no water. In the US,
thousands of people in Texas are still without running water after Hurricane
Harvey.

The entire hurricane season in the US is reckoned to be the most destructive in
history, taking historical inflation into account, with damage totalling an
estimated $206 billion (£154 billion).

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2017 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 678 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hurricane Andrew Is Termed Third Worst in This Century

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: CORAL GABLES, Fla., Sept. 17


In its first official report on Hurricane Andrew, the National Hurricane Center
said today that it was the third most intense storm to hit land in the United
States in this century.

"I have looked at damage from every major hurricane since 1965, and I've never
seen anything like this in terms of the magnitude of destruction," said the
director of the center, Bob Sheets. "It was like a 25- to 30-mile-wide tornado."

The two worst hurricanes in the 20th century were Camille, which hit the coast
of Mississippi in 1969 and killed 256 people, and the 1935 Labor Day hurricane
that struck the Florida Keys and killed 600 people.

The center's damage surveys confirmed early estimates that Hurricane Andrew's
top sustained winds were 145 miles an hour.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 679 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 6, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

No Killer Hurricanes Seen in 1991

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS

SECTION: Section C; Page 5; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 868 words


THE East Coast of the United States and the Caribbean area are in little or no
danger of being struck by a major hurricane this year, according to a new
forecast. But the next two decades should see the return of a pattern of more
frequent killer storms that prevailed from the late 1940's through the 1960's,
the forecasters warned.

The forecast, based on a number of climactic and meteorological factors
identified by Dr. William M. Gray of Colorado State University, an expert in
tropical cyclones, says that in 1991 there will be no Atlantic hurricanes in
categories 3 through 5 of the Saffir-Simpson scale of hurricane intensity. The
vast majority of damage caused by hurricanes results from a relatively few
highly destructive storms in those categories.

Category 3 storms have top winds of 111 to 130 miles an hour; category 4 of 131
to 155 miles an hour, and category 5 of more than 155 miles an hour.  The
Atlantic hurricane season runs from June through November.

'Substantially Less Active'

"The 1991 Atlantic hurricane season will likely be substantially less active
than have the hurricane seasons of the last three years, " Dr. Gray said in the
forecast issued last Friday.

The Gray forecast has been issued since 1984, but it has yet to establish a
track record in its improved form, which employs a wide array of predictive
factors

Last year, when the forecast made its debut in its present form, Dr. Gray
predicted that there would be six hurricanes in the Atlantic Basin. There were
actually eight. He predicted that there would be 25 days in which hurricanes
existed. There were 27.5 such days. And he predicted two hurricanes in category
3 or of greater intensity. There was one, and it did not make landfall.

Dr. Gray did not begin predicting numbers of storms in categories 3 through 5
until last year.

This year, in addition to predicting no killer storms, the Gray forecast says
there will be about three Atlantic hurricanes weaker than category 3 and about
10 days in which hurricanes exist.

The forecast is based on a number of factors, including sea-surface
temperatures, atmospheric pressures over the ocean and shifts in major wind
currents.

What Rain in Africa Does

But the most important factor, Dr. Gray says, and the strongest single
predictor, is rainfall in the western Sahel region of West Africa, just east of
the area in the Atlantic where hurricanes are spawned.

When rain is plentiful in the western Sahel, Dr. Gray concluded in a study
published last fall in the journal Science, more strong hurricanes develop in
the Atlantic and strike the United States. Such a period existed from the years
1947 through 1969. In that stretch, the study found, 13 hurricanes in categories
3 through 5 struck the East Coast and Florida.

When there is drought in the western Sahel, according to the study, fewer strong
Atlantic hurricanes develop -- as in the period from 1970 through 1987, when
only one storm stronger than category 2 hit either the East Coast or Florida.
That was Hurricane Gloria in 1987.

An analysis of conditions through last month indicates that 1991 will be one of
the driest years in the western Sahel in the last 43 years, Dr. Gray said in his
latest report. "This should cause a significant reduction in this year's intense
hurricane activity," the report said. "For this reason we are forecasting no
intense hurricane activity for this season."

The association between hurricane activity and Sahel rainfall is physical as
well as statistical, Dr. Gray says.  The patterns of wind, atmospheric pressure
and sea temperature that promote rain or drought in western Africa are the same
ones that give birth to hurricanes in the nearby Atlantic.

This is only the second year in which Dr. Gray has tried to include the African
rainfall along with other predictive factors.

While some scientists say that the association has not yet been firmly
established, others, including those at the National Weather Service, have said
the connection between African precipitation and hurricane frequency could
ultimately help improve forecasts.

All factors point in the direction of a mild hurricane season this year, Dr.
Gray said. That assessment applies also to the Gulf Coast of the United States,
he said, but predictive skill is less certain for the Gulf because it is farther
downstream from the major centers of Atlantic hurricane activity and more
independent of the rest of the Atlantic Basin.

In 1988 and 1989, when Hurricane Gilbert devastated the Caribbean and Mexico and
Hurricane Hugo slammed into Charleston, S.C.,, rainfall in the western Sahel was
plentiful. It was made so, Dr. Gray believes, by the effects of a cooling of
sea-surface temperatures in the eastern Pacific, a periodic phenomenon called a
La Nina event. This event touched off a global atmospheric chain reaction that
resulted in a relatively wet Sahel.

In the longer term, Dr. Gray says, the western Sahel has experienced alternate
wet and dry periods roughly two decades long. If that pattern holds, he said, a
long-term wet period should begin soon, bringing with it an extended stretch of
more frequent storms like that of 1947 through 1969.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 680 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

6,000 KILLED IN l900 TEXAS HURRICANE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 37, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 529 words


The most deadly hurricane ever to strike the Gulf Coast, or the United States as
a whole, occurred on Sept. 9, 1900, when stormdriven waters swept over
Galveston, Tex., taking about 6,000 lives.

In September 1928 the so-called Lake Okeechobee hurricane killed 1,836 persons
and left a like number injured in Southern Florida when 160-mile-an-hour winds
caused that lake to overflow into populated areas. Before that, the storm had
already killed about 5,000 people in the Caribbean.

The strongest hurricane ever recorded, known as the Labor Day storm, struck in
1935 and killed 408 people in the Florida Keys. Its fiercest winds were clocked
at about 200 miles an hour. Like Hurricane Allen, it was listed as a Category 5
hurricane, the worst level on the United States National Weather Center's scale
of force.

The following is a list of other hurricanes that have struck the Gulf Coast
states in the last 25 years: Sept. 12, 1979: Hurricane Frederic caused
widespread destruction along a 100-mile front in Florida, Alabama and
Mississippi. Only eight deaths were attributed to the storm, which then moved
well inland to become the nation's worst insurance catastrophe. Total insured
losses were given as $753 million, exceeding the $715 million wreckage left by
Hurricane Betsy in 1965.  Sept. 5, 1977: Hurricane Babe expired in interior
Louisiana after drenching the coast.  Sept. 2, 1977: Hurricane Anita struck the
Mexican coast, causing minor damage in Brownsville, Tex.  Oct. 1, 1976:
Hurricane Liza struck Mexico's Lower California peninsula, leaving 600 dead.
July 23-Aug. 5, 1970: Hurricane Celia lashed at the Texas coast and Corpus
Christi, causing 11 deaths and $453.8 million in damages, the worst toll in
Texas history.  Aug. 14-22, 1969: Hurricane Camille, a full Force 5 hurricane,
one of the worst killer storms ever to hit the United States, left 256 dead as
it flailed across Mississippi, Louisiana, Alabama, Virginia and West Virginia.
Officials estimated damages at $1.4 billion.  Sept. 5-22, 1967: Hurricane Beulah
left 15 dead and caused $200 million in damages in Southern Texas, chiefly with
torrential rains.  Aug. 27-Sept. 12, 1965: Hurricane Betsy struck Southern
Florida and Louisiana, killing 75, leaving 17,500 injured or ill and destroying
27,000 homes. There were 300,000 evacuees.  Sept. 3-15, 1961: Hurricane Carla,
packing 15-inch rains and 15-foot waves, devastated Gulf Coast towns in Texas.
Forty-six persons were killed and damages were estimated at $400 million.
June-July 1957: Three-hundred ninety people were killed as hurricanes Audrey and
Bertha rampaged over the same areas from Texas to Alabama within two weeks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 681 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE THREATENED AREA, 5 MAJOR HURRICANES IN 20 YEARS

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 40, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 430 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Aug. 31


Over the last 20 years five major hurricanes have struck the area threatened by
Hurricane Elena, from Florida to Texas.

Hurricane Camille, in 1969, killed 256 people; Hurricane Betsy, in 1965, killed
75, and Hurricane Frederic, in 1979, killed 13.

Hurricane Frederic also left $2.3 billion in property damage, making it the
costliest storm in the National Weather Service's records.

Hurricane Alicia did $2.1 billion damage; Hurricane, Agnes $2.1 billion;
Hurricane Camille, $1.4 billion, and Hurricane Betsy, $1.4 billion. #1965
Astronauts' Mission Cut On Aug. 27, 1965, the astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and
Charles Conrad Jr. were orbiting the earth in the Gemini 5 spacecraft,
conducting tests of equipment for future rendezvous missions.

At the same time, Hurricane Betsy was formed off northeast South America.

The storm forced the astronauts to end their mission a day early. The hurricane
started and stopped, backtracked and stalled, heavily damaging the Florida Keys
and the hotels of Miami Beach before turning west into the Gulf of Mexico and
striking Mississippi and Louisiana Sept. 9.

For six hours Hurricane Betsy lashed New Orleans with winds up to 165 miles per
hour in velocity, and moved north into Louisiana. Broken glass drifted into
heaps like snow in Baton Rouge.

In Plaquemines Parish, opposite New Orleans, the storm tossed towboats onto
20-foot levies. Grand Isle, an old resort on the Gulf Coast, was obliterated.

Camille, 'the Greatest Storm'

Four years later Hurricane Camille formed off Africa.

It gained strength over Cuba and struck the Southern coast of the United States.
Winds ranged from 175 m.p.h. to 200. Officials put the death toll at 256, but 68
people remained unaccounted for.

''By any yardstick you want to measure, Hurricane Camille was the greatest storm
of any kind ever to affect this nation,'' said Dr. Robert H. Simpson, who was
the chief of the National Hurricane Center at the time.

The storm ravaged Pascagoula, Gulfport, and continued past Bay St. Louis, Miss.,
and into Louisiana.

From Deep South to Virginia

There it veered inland, bending pine trees 100 miles from the coast, and, then
turned east toward Virginia.

Rainfall of 10 inches sent 25-foot flood waters spilling out of the Blue Ridge
Mountains.

Hurricane Camille prompted the Federal Government to computerize and expand its
hurricane tracking efforts.

Hurricane Frederic hit Mississippi, Alabama and Florida with 145 m.p.h. winds
and heavy rains in September 1979, causing vast property damage, but only 13
people lost their lives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 682 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 28, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EARTH'S SPIN FUELS POWERFUL 'ENGINE' THAT DRIVES HURRICANES

BYLINE: By JOHN NOBLE WILFORD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 859 words


As surely as the earth turns, and for that very reason, nature likes to assert
itself in spirals. Currents of air and sea, whirlpools, dust devils skipping
across the desert floor and water gurgling down the drain - all are, in a
fundamental sense, spiral responses to the earth's rotation. So, too, are the
awesome power and harsh beauty of a hurricane.

A hurricane, when seen from above, as in the satellite photographs, is a classic
expression of what Gaspard Gustave de Coriolis had in mind. In 1835, the French
engineer observed that because the earth rotates, the motion of fluids on its
surface will be distorted, a principle now known as the Coriolis force.

Although meteorologists lack a complete knowledge of hurricane dynamics, these
menacing storms like Hurricane Gloria usually begin in the tropical latitudes of
the North Atlantic where the trade winds blow westward below a semipermanent
zone of high pressure known as the Bermuda High. Moisture from the warm sea
evaporates into the lower levels of the trade winds and, under certain
conditions, supplies sufficient heat energy to create convective forces that
cause a powerful updraft of warm, moist air.

The ascending moist air is condensed and swept by the Coriolis force into a
counterclockwise spiral. Hurricanes rarely originate at the Equator because
there the effect of the earth's rotation is slight. Nor are they likely to be
spawned much north of 20 degrees latitude because cooler ocean waters do not
supply enough energy to drive the hurricane's ''heat engine.''

Growing Intensity of Storm

For the storm to gather strength and become a hurricane, this swirling updraft
must have an outlet somewhere at high altitude. It must become a chimney in the
dense clouds in which converging air surges upward and then spills out and is
carried away by strong high-altitude winds. This spreads the storm over a wide
expanse and the heat released by the ascending air sustains and intensifies the
storm.

In a publication describing the current knowledge of hurricanes, the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientists wrote: ''The view of
hurricanes as atmospheric engines is necessarily a general one. The engine seems
to be both inefficient and unreliable; a myriad of delicate conditions must be
satisfied for the atmosphere to produce a hurricane. Their relative infrequency
indicates that many a potentially healthy hurricane ends early as a misfiring
dud of a disturbance, somewhere over the sea.''

Air in the chimney of the disturbance gains velocity as it whirls upward by
convection. This spiral is marked by the thick cloud walls curling inward toward
the storm center, releasing heavy rain and even greater amounts of heat energy.
At the center is a relatively tranquil core, the eye of the storm, which is a
phenomenon unique to hurricanes. Most such cores average a width of only 14
miles. Winds there are less than 15 miles an hour, as against velocities of more
than 74 miles an hour (which is how meteorologists define a hurricane)
elsewhere.

Drawing energy from the warm sea and concentrating it in convective air
currents, a hurricane becomes a natural dynamo of awesome power. According to
the atmospheric agency's calculations, the heat energy released by a hurricane
in one day is often the equivalent of that released by 400 20-megaton hydrogen
bombs. Put another way, one day's hurricane energy, if converted to electricity,
would supply the electrical needs of the United States for more than six months.

The longer a hurricane remains over warm waters, the longer it will survive and,
in usual cases, the greater its impact will be when it finally reaches land. It
keeps drawing and concentrating energy.

Uncertainty on Steering Process

One of the least-understood aspects of hurricanes, as far as weather forecasters
are concerned, is the steering mechanism that dictates a storm's course.
Government scientists said it was not known, for example, what fraction of the
storm's forward motion comes from its own internal energy and what portion is
applied by the prevailing air currents, which is ordinarily the dominant force.

Once a hurricane reaches land, its winds soon dissipate because there are no
more warm sea waters to supply sufficient energy.

As if the winds and flooding of a hurricane were not enough, the storms often
punctuate their arrival on land with devastating tornadoes. Hurricanes tend to
spawn tornadoes out of the thunderstorms in the cloud walls surrounding the
storm's eye.

According to Robert Davies Jones, a meteorologist at the National Severe Storm
Center in Norman, Okla., tornado conditions arise because, once over land,
lower-level winds in the hurricane diminish and the friction between them and
the stronger high-altitude winds cause a wind shear, which imparts the spin that
generates the funnel cloud of a tornado.

As powerful as Hurricane Gloria was, scientists believe the Great Red Spot on
Jupiter to be the mightiest hurricane-like storm known in the solar system. Its
swirling clouds, spirals shaped by Jupiter's rotation, cover an area greater in
size than the whole Earth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Diagram of Hurricane Gloria's movement (NYT/Sept.28,1985)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 683 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RESIDENTS OF GULF COAST BRACE FOR HURRICANE KATE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 551 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Nov. 20


Hurricane Kate turned its 115-mile-an-hour winds northward tonight on a
collision course with a 300-mile stretch of the central Gulf Coast that has
suffered more than $3 billion in hurricane damage since August.

Hurricane warnings were posted from Bay St. Louis, Miss., to St. Marks, Fla.,
but forecasters said Florida's panhandle was the most likely to get a direct hit
from the hurricane.

''The center could cross the coast as early as noon Thursday,'' Miles Lawrence,
a hurricane forecaster, said, ''but we're thinking it is more likely it will be
around 2 P.M.'' He said hurricane-force winds would be felt two to three hours
before the eye of the storm crossed onto land.

The hurricane was expected to generate tides up to 12 feet. Forecasters in
Florida's panhandle called it ''a major hurricane capable of inflicting heavy
damage.''

Evacuations Along Coast

Residents of coastal areas from Florida to Louisiana began leaving their homes.
Aircraft at Eglin Air Force Base and Pensacola Naval Air Station were moved to
bases further inland.

Mayor Tommy Marullo of Grand Isle, La., ordered the resort's 2,200 residents to
evacuate today because the town's seawall had been smashed by hurricane
Hurricane Juan last month. ''If we get another hurricane, we're at the mercy of
the elements,'' he said.

Civil defense officials in Florida's Escambia, Okaloosa and Bay counties went on
alert as the hurricane approached. Escambia County officials called for the
voluntary evacuation of two barrier islands, Perdido Key and Santa Rosa Island,
and of low-lying areas of Pensacola.

Path of Storm

At 11 P.M. the hurricane was moving northward at 10 to 15 miles an hour and was
centered about 175 miles south-southwest of Apalachicola in the Florida
panhandle, near latitude 27.6 north and longitude 86.4 west.

The storm would be the first November hurricane to hit the United States
mainland in half a century and the fourth hurricane this season to crash into
the central Gulf Coast.

Hurricane Danny caused $50 million damage and left three people dead in August;
Hurricane Elena caused $1.5 billion damage and killed three people in September,
and Hurricane Juan left eight people dead and caused $1.5 billion in damage last
month.

Oil companies with offshore rigs in the Gulf began evacuating workers to the
mainland Tuesday evening and the storm chased 10,000 people out of the Florida
Keys. But it skirted Key West and plunged into the Gulf after pounding 250 miles
of Cuba's north coast with winds of 110 miles an hour.

Deaths in Cuba

At least three people died in Havana and the storm caused heavy damage to Cuba's
sugar crop. The Cuban news agency, Prensa Latina, said much of Havana was
without power overnight. Brigades of government workers and volunteers were
dispatched through out the city to clear streets of fallen trees, the agency
said.

As forecasters tried to calculate the storm's likely landfall, officials at the
zoo in Gulf Breeze, Fla., said animals there seemed to believe the storm would
hit them.

''I think the animals are confirming the forecast,'' said Eric Vissar, a
spokesman for the zoo. ''The ostriches are almost schizoid. They're running
around. And we have a muntjak jungle deer acting erratically and all the cats
are pacing very nervously.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Gulf Coast

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 684 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        The Patriot Ledger (Quincy, MA)

                            August 20, 2009 Thursday
                                  ROP Edition

Keep eye on storm, residents told;
Slight chance that Hurricane Bill could strike area on Sunday

BYLINE: TONY CATINELLA, The Patriot Ledger

SECTION: News; pg. 2

LENGTH: 630 words


MARSHFIELD -     With Hurricane Bill classified as a Category 3 storm as it
heads toward the vicinity of Bermuda, the Massachusetts Emergency Management
Agency is advising residents to pay close attention to weather forecasts.

MEMA spokesman Peter Judge said people who live near the water should take
precautions if the forecast worsens.

As of Wednesday, there was only a 5 percent chance of Bill hitting New England,
Patriot Ledger meteorologist Rob Gilman said. If it does hit, it will happen
Sunday night, he said.

Forecasters said Bill could become a Category 4 storm again later Thursday or
Friday, meaning winds of 131 to 155 miles per hour.

Local harbormasters are preparing for the possibility of Bill hitting the area.

Marshfield Harbormaster Michael DiMeo has doubled his staff for this weekend and
expects a lot of riptides.

"We have extra lines and extra anchors," DiMeo said.

If necessary, the Marshfield Yacht Club will open its parking lot to enable boat
owners to get their vesse;s out of the water, he said.

Duxbury Harbormaster Donald Beers said that as of Wednesday night, the hurricane
did not pose a threat to Massachusetts residents.

"Right now, it's a watching game," he said. "We are very progressive when it
comes to storm control, and we are watching it very carefully."

Forecasters do not expect Hurricane Bill to be the only storm to threaten to New
England this season.

In December, hurricane forecasters at Colorado State University predicted
above-average hurricane activity in the Atlantic in the 2009 season. The
university predicted 14 named storms, including seven hurricanes - three major.

"It's only a matter of time that Massachusetts gets hit with a major hurricane,"
Gilman said.

Hurricane Bob, in 1991, was the last hurricane to hit the area.

Judge said many residents may not remember the impact past hurricanes have had
on the state.

Norwell Fire Chief Andrew Reardon remembers dealing with the power outages and
destruction caused by Bob and Hurricane Gloria, in 1985.

"We need to recognize that we are along the East Coast and hurricanes do come
in," Reardon said.

Reardon and his department have reviewed emergency plans and will be prepared if
evacuations are necessary.

MEMA advises state residents to assemble and maintain a hurricane kit that
includes a portable radio, a flashlight and extra batteries, a supply of
non-perishable foods, bottled water and a first-aid kit.

Hurricane Bob in 1991 was the last hurricane to hit the area.

New England hurricanes of note

Hurricane Bob

Aug. 19, 1991- Peak winds of 125 mph were recorded in Brewster and Truro on Cape
Cod. More than 60 percent of the residents of southeastern Massachusetts and
southeastern Rhode Island lost power.

Hurricane Gloria

Sept. 27, 1985 - The storm left more than 2,000,000 people without power. It
dropped up to 6 inches of rain in the state, causing flooding throughout the
region.

Hurricane Donna

Sept. 12, 1960 - Produced hurricane-force winds in Florida, the Mid-Atlantic
states and New England.

Hurricane Diane

Aug. 17-19, 1955 - Maximum winds were recorded at 120 mph. Although it weakened
to a tropical storm as it reached the southern New England coast, Diane dropped
10 to 20 inches of rain.

Hurricane Edna

Sept. 11, 1954 - Edna arrived right on the heels of Hurricane Carol. It formed
off Barbados, reaching Category 3 strength at the Outer Banks of North Carolina,
with its highest winds of 120 mph. Before striking New England, its eye split in
two, up to 60 miles apart at times.

Hurricane Carol

Aug. 31, 1954 - This compact, but powerful Category 2 battered New England,
killing 68. With winds that gusted to 135 mph, Carol caused more than $461
million in damage, destroying 4,000 homes, 3,500 cars and more than 3,000 boats.

SOURCE: Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Hurricane Bill is seen over the Atlantic Ocean in this satellite image.
Bill weakened slightly to a Category 3 storm early Thursday over the open
Atlantic, with top sustained winds of 125 mph., Associated Press

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 The Patriot Ledger


                          FOCUS - 685 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

'95 Hurricane Season Seen as One of Fiercest In the Last 20 Years

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS

SECTION: Section C;   Page 1;   Column 1;   Science Desk

LENGTH: 1541 words


INHABITANTS of the Atlantic Coast, the Gulf Coast and the Caribbean, beware:
this hurricane season is shaping up as one of the most active in the last two
decades, experts say.

The reason is a conjunction of atmospheric and oceanic forces that are expected
to make this year's crop of tropical storms and hurricanes 40 percent more
frequent and intense than they have averaged over the last 45 years, according
to a combined index of frequency and intensity calculated by researchers at
Colorado State University in Fort Collins.

The Colorado forecasting group's predictions have been close to the mark in most
years and its methods are given high grades for scientific validity by other
experts. The group is now calling for eight Atlantic or Gulf hurricanes (defined
as rotating storm systems with winds of 74 miles an hour or higher) and four
lesser tropical storms with winds of at least 39 miles an hour, strong enough to
be given names. Three of the eight hurricanes, according to the forecast, will
be severe ones, meaning that they will reach Category 3, 4 or 5 on the
Saffir-Simpson scale of hurricane intensity.

Category 3 hurricanes have peak winds of 111 to 130 miles an hour, Category 4 of
131 to 155 miles an hour and Category 5 of more than 155 miles an hour. The vast
majority of damage done by hurricanes comes from a relatively few storms in
these three groups.

This year's forecast "is for a very active season," said Dr. Christopher W.
Landsea, a researcher in the Colorado group, which is headed by Dr. William M.
Gray, a professor of atmospheric science. It is, in fact, expected to be one of
the two or three busiest seasons since Dr. Gray began making the forecasts in
1984.  The hurricane season extends from June 1 through the end of November,
with the peak of activity usually coming in August, September and October.

The Colorado forecasters are unable to predict when the storms will develop,
their movements, or whether and where any might strike land.  "But if you do
have that many storms out there, it means there is more of a chance for the
Caribbean islands or the United States to experience a couple of storms," said
Dr. Landsea.

The message sent by the forecast is simple, said Jerry Jarrell, the acting
director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami: this year, take the center's
annual admonition to prepare for hurricanes more seriously. That means, for
instance, planning in advance for a possible evacuation and stockpiling
provisions and batteries before any hurricane warning is issued and demand
outruns supply. "We've been telling people to do it," said Mr. Jarrell, "but
many don't. This would be a good time."

The insurance industry, which has watched with growing alarm as development has
exploded in vulnerable places and property losses have ballooned in recent
years, is likewise urging that structures be made as hurricane resistant as
possible. "We know the storms are going to come, whether they come this year or
next year or whenever," said Richard Griebel, a spokesman for the Insurance
Institute for Property Loss Reduction, an industry group. "A lot can be done to
prevent the damage, but people have to have the will."

Once a hurricane does appear, the National Hurricane Center will be equipped to
predict its path about 20 percent more accurately than in the past, making for
better warnings, officials said last week. The reason is an improved computer
model, which has proved its worth over the last three years.

There has already been one hurricane this year -- Allison, a minimal hurricane
that struck the Gulf Coast unusually early in the season, on June 5, before
quickly fizzling.

But the mere fact of an early hurricane does not necessarily portend a heavy
season. The Colorado group bases its forecast on analyses of a number of more
telling factors. One is conditions in the critical western Sahel region of
Africa, where embryonic hurricanes are created and sent on their journeys across
the Atlantic. A long-running Sahel drought beginning in 1970 suppressed
hurricane formation in all but three years, according to the Colorado analysis.
Two of these years were 1988 and 1989, when a wetter Sahelian climate spurred a
substantial increase in hurricane activity, including five hurricanes in
Categories 4 and 5. The third exceptional year was last year, when the Sahelian
rainy season was the wettest since 1964. The 1994 hurricane season was quiet,
however, and Dr. Gray and his colleagues say El Nino, another important
determinant of hurricanes, was the reason.

Beginning in 1991, El Nino, the vast pool of warm water that develops from time
to time in the equatorial Pacific, generated especially strong, lower-level
westerly winds in the tropics which inhibited hurricane formation by shearing
developing storms apart in the Atlantic. Now, says the Colorado forecast, "the
long-running four-year El Nino event of 1991-94 has finally dissipated." The
event has been declared dead before, only to bounce back as it did with a
vengeance last winter. But the Coloradans, noting that the equatorial Pacific
cooled off substantially more this spring than in other recent springs, have
judged that El Nino will not be in the hurricane picture this year.

A third factor in the hurricane equation is the behavior of stratospheric winds
that circle the globe at the equator. These winds reverse direction every 12 to
16 months, blowing from the east and then from the west. On average, there is
twice as much intense hurricane activity in the Atlantic basin when the winds
blow from the west, as they are doing this year.

A fourth factor leading the forecasters to expect increased hurricane activity
is warmer sea-surface temperatures in the Atlantic between West Africa and the
Caribbean. Warmer seas there increase the likelihood of hurricane growth.

A similar set of conditions came together in four other years: 1966, 1971, 1975
and 1980. Applying their methods to the conditions that prevailed in those
years, the Colorado forecasters have come up with "predictions" that closely
matched what actually happened. For those four years, there were an average of
10.8 named storms, 7 hurricanes and 2.2 severe hurricanes.

In the 11 years that he has been issuing forecasts, Dr. Gray has had, by his
reckoning, only two outright failures: in 1989, when he underestimated the
actual frequency and intensity of hurricane activity, and in 1993, when he
overestimated it. He attributes the inaccurate 1989 forecast to a failure to
take Sahelian rainfall into account, a shortcoming that was remedied the
following year. He blames the 1993 inaccuracy on a failure to anticipate the
unusual persistence of El Nino.

Even in years when the forecasts were generally on target, there have been some
surprises. In 1991, for example, Hurricane Bob, which caused nearly $800 million
in damages on Long Island and in New England, developed unexpectedly in waters
close to the United States, largely independent of some of thebroad-scale
influences that go into the Colorado analysis. And even in an off year for
hurricane activity generally, disasters can happen: Hurricane Andrew, which
destroyed much of South Florida in 1992, came in an off year and was, as the
Coloradans had forecast, the only big storm of that year. It was also the most
destructive one in American history.

The chances of disaster are likely to rise in the decades ahead, the Gray team
believes, because hurricane activity has long shown itself to be cyclic: Over
all, the last quarter-century has been quieter than the previous one. A more
active cycle is to be expected within the next decade or two, says the Colorado
report. "When this happens," the authors of this year's forecast wrote, "the U.
S. will see hurricane destruction as never before experienced" because of the
explosive coastal development that has taken place in a time of relative quiet.

The relatively infrequent hurricanes that have hit the United States coast in
the last few years may have offered a foretaste. The $7 billion in damages
wreaked in South Carolina by Hurricane Hugo in 1989 were more than triple the
next-highest figure of $2.3 billion associated with Hurricane Frederic, which
hit the Gulf Coast 10 years earlier. And Andrew far eclipsed all previous
storms, racking up an estimated $30 billion in damages.

The insurance industry has become alarmed in recent years by what appears to be
a general rise in the cost of natural disasters worldwide. It is particularly
concerned about the prospect of human-induced climatic change, which some
researchers have said will increase the number and intensity of violent storms,
including hurricanes. Such a connection has not yet been demonstrated.

Even so, "with the concentration of values along the coastline, we've got to do
something to protect those properties," said Mr. Griebel. Building codes need to
be strengthened and enforced, he said, and even simple things like fastening the
roof to the building more securely and putting shutters over windows, can help.
In the case of Hurricane Andrew, he said, "it's pretty disheartening to see that
some simple mitigation factors well known to builders and to code people weren't
taken."

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Four conditions that breed hurricanes are all present this year,
leading to predictions of a bumper crop.

1. Reduced El Nino effect -- Pool of warm water has dissipated, cutting winds
that inhibit hurricanes.

2. Westerly stratospheric winds -- When these high reversing winds blow from the
west, hurricanes increase.

3. Wet rainy season in western Sahel -- The end of a long drought is expected to
produce a substantial increase in hurricanes.

4. Warmer Atlantic sea-surface temperatures -- Warmer seas there increase the
likelihood of hurricane growth.

(Source: Colorado State University) (pg. C7)
Map/Diagram: "Recipe for a Bad Hurricane Season"

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 686 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Property and Casualty 360

                                August 27, 2010

Atlantic Storm Season Heats Up; Danielle A Cat 4

BYLINE: CHAD HEMENWAY

SECTION: NEWS No. 8

LENGTH: 428  words


NU Online News Service, Aug. 27, 12:06 p.m. EDT

Predictions of an active hurricane season are looking accurate as the peak of
the season begins with three storm systems in the Atlantic and Hurricane
Danielle reaches Category 4 strength.

It remains too early to tell whether Tropical Storm Earl will threaten land in
the Caribbean or the U.S. East Coast, said catastrophe modeler Risk Management
Solutions (RMS). Since becoming a named storm on Aug. 25, Earl has not
intensified but is expected to reach hurricane status over the weekend, RMS
added.

Earl, the fifth named storm of the hurricane season, remains in the open waters
of the Atlantic Ocean, about 1,300 miles behind, to the southeast, of Hurricane
Danielle, according to the National Hurricane Center.

At 11 a.m. this morning, the National Hurricane Center reported Danielle reached
Category 4 status with maximum sustained winds at 135 mph.

Forecasters are saying that Danielle will weaken as it moves north and hits
cooler water and wind sheer, but the same may not be true for Earl. Since its
predicted track is more to the south, Earl may not be affected by the cooler
water temperatures, which are not conducive to storm strengthening.

The National Hurricane Center's five-day track calls for Earl to reach hurricane
status sometime Sunday morning, and it could affect Puerto Rico by Tuesday.

At the same time, the National Hurricane Center is keeping an eye on what it
calls

"

a vigorous tropical wave

"

off the coast of Africa, about 210 miles to the south of Cape Verde Islands.
Because environmental conditions remain favorable, the National Hurricane Center
said there is a 70 percent chance this system will develop into a tropical
depression during the next two days.

If this system reaches tropical storm status, it would be the sixth named storm
of the year. The next name on the list is Fiona.

The peak of the hurricane season is considered to be late August through
October, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA). Each of the 15 costliest hurricanes in U.S. history has occurred during
this time frame with the exception of Hurricane Charley, which struck Florida on
Aug. 13-14, 2004. Hurricane Katrina, which caused more than $41 billion in
insured losses when it occurred, affected the Gulf States from Aug. 25-29, 2005.

Early in August NOAA said conditions were ripe for an active season and
predicted 14 to 20 named storms, eight to 12 hurricanes, and four to six major
hurricanes with at least Category 3 status. A Category 3 storm has sustained
winds of 111 mph.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2010 The National Underwriter Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 687 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Property and Casualty 360

                                October 8, 2010

Hurricane Otto Takes Aim At Azores

BYLINE: CHAD HEMENWAY

SECTION: NEWS No. 10

LENGTH: 299  words


NU Online News Service, Oct. 8, 1:47 p.m. EDT

The fifteenth named storm of the Atlantic hurricane season remains on course
away from the United States and is headed toward Portugal's Azores Islands as it
became a hurricane today.

Hurricane Otto is located more than 700 miles south of Bermuda as of Friday,
according to modeler Risk Management Solutions (RMS).

The National Hurricane Center (NHC) upgraded the storm to Category 1 hurricane
status late this morning, with sustained winds near 75 mph and higher gusts.

Because wind shear that breaks up storm formations is low, Otto is expected to
increase in strength during the day, possibly reaching Category 2 (sustained
winds of 96 mph to 110 mph) before beginning to weaken late Saturday.

According to catastrophe modeling firm AIR Worldwide, the storm is expected to
continue to curve to the Northeast, away from Bermuda and the U.S. coast. Otto
is the seventh hurricane of the active 2010 season, which is not over yet. On
average, about six hurricanes are expected in an Atlantic hurricane season.

Models predict the storm is headed toward the Azores Islands, about 930 miles
west of Portugal, but it could be downgraded to tropical storm status by that
point on Monday, according to the NHC.

Though the 2010 hurricane season has been active, the United States has dodged a
major landfall. There have been 15 named storms this year, of which seven became
hurricanes. Five were classified as major hurricanes (at least Category 3 with
sustain winds of at least 111 mph and higher).

RMS said that, based on past experience, one or two named storms form in
October, of which one becomes a hurricane. The modeler said sea surface
temperatures remain high and wind shear is low. These factors could point to a
more active October, the modeler noted.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2010 The National Underwriter Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 688 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Property and Casualty 360

                                December 8, 2010

2011 Expected To Be Another Busy Hurricane Season

BYLINE: MARK E. RUQUET

SECTION: NEWS No. 12

LENGTH: 558  words


NU Online News Service, Dec. 8, 12:16 p.m. EST

Forecasters are predicting another busy hurricane season next year after coming
off a very busy 2010 season that Colorado State University forecasters
accurately predicted.

The team of Philip Klotzbach and William Gray at Colorado State University's
(CSU)

Tropical Meteorology Project

are projecting 17 named storms, including nine hurricanes and five major
hurricanes of Category 3 or higher on the Saffir-Simpson scale (sustained winds
of 111 mph or higher) for next year.

The team said the numbers are close to what was experienced during the 2010
season in the Atlantic basin. The hurricane season runs from June 1 through Nov.
30.

This past season the team predicted a well above-average hurricane season. In
June, at the start of the season, the team called for 18 named storms, 10
hurricanes and five major hurricanes. There were 19 named storms, 12 hurricanes
and five major hurricanes.

"The U.S. was extremely lucky in 2010 in that none of the 12 Atlantic basin
hurricanes that formed crossed the U.S. coastline," Mr. Klotzbach said in a
statement. "On average, about one in four Atlantic basin hurricanes makes U.S.
landfall, and therefore, we would expect to see more land falling hurricanes in
2011."

While noting the uncertainty in the forecast six months ahead of the season, Mr.
Klotzbach said that current upper ocean heat anomalies in the tropical Pacific
mean an El Nino is unlikely, leading to a more active hurricane season in 2011.

An El Nino produces wind and atmospheric conditions that are not conducive to
the development of hurricanes.

"This forecast is based on an extended-range early December statistical
prediction scheme we've developed based on 58 years of data," Mr. Gray said. "At
this point, we are uncertain whether La Nina conditions or neutral conditions
are more likely for the 2011 hurricane season. Sea surface temperatures in the
far North Atlantic remain at record warm levels, which is an indication that we
are in an active multidecadal period for Atlantic hurricane activity."

For the 2011 Atlantic basin hurricane season, the CSU hurricane forecast team
predicts:

· A 73 percent chance that at least one major hurricane will make landfall on
the U.S. coastline in 2011. The long-term average probability is 52 percent.

· For the U.S. East Coast, including the Florida Peninsula, the probability of a
major hurricane making landfall is 49 percent (the long-term average is 31
percent).

· For the Gulf Coast from the Florida Panhandle west to Brownsville, the
probability is 48 percent (the long-term average is 30 percent).

· The team predicts the probability of a major hurricane making landfall in the
Caribbean as 62 percent (average for the last century is 42 percent).

The team has also updated the Landfall Probability

website

that provides probabilities of tropical storm-force, hurricane-force and major
hurricane-force winds making landfall at specific locations along the U.S. East
and Gulf coasts within a variety of time periods.

The team said it will issue seasonal updates of its 2011 Atlantic basin
hurricane activity forecast on April 6, June 1 and Aug. 3.

The lack of hurricanes making U.S. landfall this year was seen as a

benefit for insurers

, but catastrophes in other parts of the world in 2010 were in line with average
natural losses for the year.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2010 The National Underwriter Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 689 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 28, 2014 Sunday

Washington: Embarrassing Facts Haunt Global Warming March

LENGTH: 577  words

DATELINE: Washington


The Heartland Institute has issued the following news release:
Just two days after a summer freeze cut growing seasons prematurely short in New
York and New England, global warming activists marched in New York City against
global warming.

Temperatures dropped below freezing Friday in many parts of New York and other
Northeastern states, with the freezing summertime temperatures setting many
records throughout the Northeast. Global warming activists responded on Sunday
by marching in New York City and claiming global warming is baking the planet.

With global temperatures remaining flat for the past 17 years and record
summertime cold sending people shivering throughout the Northeast, protest
organizer Bill McKibben deemphasized the "warming" part of global warming in a
New York Daily News article on the eve of the march. Instead, his article,
titled "New York, it's time to sound the climate change alarm," claimed "climate
change" is responsible for Hurricane Sandy and California wildfires ("a planet
that's now literally on fire"!).

In choosing to make Hurricane Sandy his hurricane poster child for global
warming, McKibben didn't really have much of a choice. Sandy came ashore in New
Jersey with winds registering 80 mph - barely hurricane strength. McKibben
couldn't choose a major hurricane strike (defined by meteorologists at Category
3 or higher) to pin on global warming because there hasn't been one since 2005.
It has been an unheard of 8 years, 11 months since the last major hurricane hit
the United States. We are currently benefiting from the longest stretch in
recorded history without a major hurricane strike. The prior record was merely 6
years, 2 months between major hurricanes.

Nor can McKibben and his fellow alarmists claim global warming makes hurricanes
more likely to hit heavily populated Northeastern states. While Northeastern
hurricane strikes are rare in recent decades, they were much more frequent in
past decades before our recent global warming. No major hurricane has struck the
Northeast since Hurricane Gloria came ashore on Long Island and then pushed up
the Connecticut River Valley in 1985, and Gloria is the only major hurricane to
strike the Northeast in the past 50 years. Compare that to the pre-global
warming era when hurricanes in the U.S. Northeast were much more frequent. Four
major hurricanes - Carol, Edna, Connie, and Donna - made their way up the East
Coast and subsequently barreled into the Northeast between 1953 and 1960, during
a period of global cooling. Major hurricanes struck the Northeast in the 1930s
and 1940s, also.

We are now benefiting from the longest period in recorded history without a
major hurricane strike anywhere in the nation. We are also benefiting from an
unprecedented scarcity of major hurricane strikes in the U.S. Northeast. With so
little to work with, McKibben takes the sole minor hurricane of any significance
during the past nine years and claims it was created by global warming. Well, if
you can pin the formation of any minor hurricane - no matter how small or
infrequent - on global warming, then you also have to pin the remarkable recent
lack of hurricanes on global warming. And by McKibben's logic, global warming
has prevented seven major hurricane strikes that would otherwise have clobbered
the United States during the past nine years.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 690 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 8, 2017 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Hurricane Jose Is Next on Radar, With Fresh Alert for Antigua and Barbuda

BYLINE: By LIAM STACK

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Express; Pg.

LENGTH: 430 words


A hurricane watch was issued for Antigua and Barbuda on Thursday as a
potentially powerful new storm, Jose, brewed in the Atlantic Ocean just one day
after part of the dual-island Caribbean nation was devastated by Hurricane Irma.

Hurricane Irma slammed into Barbuda, the less populated sister island of
Antigua, leaving an estimated half of its population homeless and killing at
least one person, according to the country's prime minister, Gaston Browne.

The National Hurricane Center, part of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration in the United States, said Hurricane Jose now threatened to make
the island nation's problems worse, kicking the surf into menacing swells and
dumping as much as 10 inches of rain that ''will maintain any ongoing flooding
and may cause additional life-threatening flooding.''

The hurricane watch was issued by both the National Hurricane Center and the
National Office of Disaster Services in Antigua.

The National Hurricane Center said Hurricane Jose was now a Category 2 hurricane
with maximum sustained winds of 105 miles per hour. As of 2 p.m. on Thursday,
the center said the storm was roughly 660 miles east of the Lesser Antilles, the
island chain that contains Antigua and Barbuda.

The National Office of Disaster Services in Antigua said the storm was moving
west-northwest at 18 miles per hour on Thursday, but was expected to slow down
slightly in the coming days.

''Based upon the latest observation and analysis, Hurricane Jose could come very
close to the Leeward Islands by early Saturday,'' the center said in a
statement. It urged island residents to closely monitor the news ''as even a
slight shift in the current track to the west could bring it dangerously close
to the islands.''

The National Hurricane Center also said a tropical storm watch was in effect for
the island nation of St. Kitts and Nevis, the British territories of Anguilla
and Montserrat, and the islands of Saba and St. Eustatius, which are part of the
Netherlands.

Hurricane Jose was not the only storm looming over the Caribbean Sea or the Gulf
of Mexico on Thursday. Hurricane Katia churned 215 miles east of Tampico,
Mexico, with maximum sustained winds of 80 miles per hour, according to the
National Hurricane Center.

It said a hurricane warning was in effect for parts of the Mexican state of
Veracruz between Cabo Rojo and Laguna Verde, where it could dump 10 to 15 inches
of rain. A tropical storm watch was in effect for the area between Cabo Rojo and
the Panuco River and for the area between Laguna Verde and Puerto Veracruz.




URL:
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/07/world/americas/hurricane-jose-antigua-barbuda
.html

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 691 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                 Cayman Net News, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 31, 2009 Sunday

Hurricane season starts Monday

BYLINE: Cayman Net News, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 324 words


May 31--The 2009 North Atlantic Hurricane Season officially starts on Monday, 1
June. The hurricane season continues through 30 November.

Names for 2009 storms are as follows: Ana, Bill, Claudette, Danny, Erika, Fred,
Grace, Henri, Ida, Joaquin, Kate, Larry, Mindy, Nicholas, Odette, Peter, Rose,
Sam, Teresa, Victor and Wanda.

North Atlantic storms are named by the US National Hurricane Center. Names are
in alphabetical order and are recycled after six years.

The World Meteorological Office retires the names of notable hurricanes on
request.

Hurricane Paloma, which devastated Cayman Brac and severely affected Little
Cayman on 8 November of last year, has been retired. Paloma was a Category Four
hurricane when it ploughed through the Sister Islands.

There are five categories on the Saffir Simpson Hurricane Scale. Category 1,
with winds of 74-95 mph; Category 2, with winds of 96-110 mph; Category 3, with
winds of 111-130 mph; Category 4, with winds of 131-155 mph; and Category 5,
with winds greater than 155 mph.

There are four phases of awareness for tropical storms and hurricanes:

1 -- A storm alert means that a hurricane or tropical storm is likely to strike
with 48 hours.

2 -- A storm watch is notification that a hurricane or tropical storm is likely
to strike within 36 hours.

3 -- A storm warning is notification that a hurricane or tropical storm is
likely to strike within 24 hours.

4 -- The "All Clear" is notification that a hurricane or tropical storm has
passed or is no longer a threat.

To see more of the Cayman Net News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.caymannetnews.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, Cayman Net News, Grand
Cayman, Cayman Islands Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services.
For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090531-1CY-Hurricane-season-starts-Monday-0531

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CY


                                 Copyright 2009


                          FOCUS - 692 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                 Cayman Net News, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 20, 2009 Thursday

Hurricane Bill not a threat

BYLINE: Kevin Shereves, Cayman Net News, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 357 words


Aug. 20--The National Hurricane Centre has issued an advisory on the first
hurricane in the Atlantic this year.

Experts say that Hurricane Bill is expected to pass northeast of the Caribbean
but will have no impact on the Cayman Islands. Instead the remnants of Tropical
Storm Ana are expected to produce light rains and winds over Cayman. Residents
are being cautioned that hurricane preparedness is essential and should be done
prior to any storm threats.

"Hurricane Bill is the only hurricane that is out there right now. It is
classified as a tropical hurricane that developed in the mid-Atlantic Tropics.
The forecast calls for the storm to pass northeast of the Caribbean and I do not
see that it will have any impact on the Cayman Islands," said John Tibbetts,
Chief Meteorologist Cayman Islands Meteorological Centre.

"The system that we are looking at right now is what is left of Tropical Storm
Ana which dissipated on Monday, 17 August.

"An average season is predicted for the 2009 Hurricane season. Professor William
Gray is the foremost expert in the United States and works out of Colorado State
University. He is forecasting 10 main storms, four hurricanes and two major
hurricanes. An average season has 9.6 main storms, 5.9 hurricanes and 2.3 major
hurricanes. A category three hurricane means that sustained winds must be more
than 130 miles per hour."

McCleary Frederick, Director Hazard Management Cayman Islands, said: "We want
all three Islands to be prepared. Everyone must know in advance of a hurricane
where the shelters are and where they will shelter during the storm. Pets are
not permitted in any government shelter and therefore alternate arrangements
must be made for your pets."

To see more of the Cayman Net News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.caymannetnews.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, Cayman Net News, Grand
Cayman, Cayman Islands Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services.
For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090820-1CY-Hurricane-Bill-not-a-threat-0820

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CY


                                 Copyright 2009


                          FOCUS - 693 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Monitor (McAllen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 1, 2010 Thursday

The Monitor, McAllen, Texas, Andy Comer column: ANDY COMER: Random hurricane
thoughts

BYLINE: Andy Comer, The Monitor, McAllen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 458 words


July 01--If you haven't noticed by now, Hurricane Alex has come and gone.

The time spent waiting out the storm is a perfect opportunity for an imagination
like mine to wander more so than it usually does. Here's what I was thinking as
Alex drenched my surroundings:

>> Hurricane Andrew, one of the most powerful in U.S. history, walloped the east
coast in 1992. The National Hurricane Center says storms as destructive as
Andrew have their names retired from the hurricane name list, but I'm wondering
if it's still possible for there to be a hurricane Andy or even a hurricane
Andres. For the record, Rita and Katrina have been retired; Dolly has not.

>> What happens if we run out of hurricane names? The NHC says storms aren't
named with the letters Q, U, X, Y or Z because of the lack of names beginning
with those letters. That leaves us with 21 letters to use for naming storms.
Should we run out of letters, Renee Chapple, a Miami, Fla.-based guide with
www.about.com, says the naming system will use letters from the Greek alphabet
(Alpha, Beta, etc.).

>> During Ohio blizzards in the late 1970s, residents were forced to stay
inside, much like how Valley residents are stuck indoors during a hurricane.
About 9 months after the blizzards, an unusually large number of babies were
born. I wonder if that was the case in the aftermath of Hurricane Dolly two
years ago, or if there will be a surge in the Valley birth rate in March?

>> I've never been to a "hurricane party" -- I've been working during the last
two hurricanes that hit the area. In my native Ohio, we don't have hurricanes,
but we do have tornadoes, which, if you ask me, are much more terrifying.
They're less predictable, and multiple tornadoes can occur at once. Needless to
say, I've never heard of anyone having a "tornado party."

>> Typhoons are the same as a hurricane, except for the fact that they occur in
the Pacific Ocean (hurricanes form in the Atlantic Ocean). Typhoons aren't
usually labeled with common first names, according to www.usatoday.com. Instead,
they are named after animals, astrological signs or even flowers. A typhoon
named Tulip or Daisy doesn't sound too intimidating to me.

Andy Comer is the slot editor and a columnist for The Monitor. Contact him with
feedback or future column ideas at acomer@themonitor.com

To see more of The Monitor, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.themonitor.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Monitor, McAllen, Texas
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or
call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100701-MC-The-Monitor-McAllen-Texas-Andy-Comer-column-20100701

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MC


                           Copyright 2010 The Monitor


                          FOCUS - 694 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 6, 2010 Friday

NOAA?forecasters update hurricane predictions

BYLINE: Joy Blackburn, The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 761 words


Aug. 06--ST. CROIX -- Warmer than average waters in the tropical Atlantic and La
Nina conditions in the tropical Pacific have combined to keep the Atlantic Basin
on track for an active hurricane season this year, according to an updated
hurricane season outlook issued Thursday by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.

With the update, NOAA's Climate Prediction Center is projecting -- with a 70
percent probability -- that the season will bring 14 to 20 named storms,
including eight to 12 hurricanes, with four to six of those becoming major
hurricanes having wind speeds of at least 111 mph.

Those numbers include the three named storms that have already occurred this
season: Hurricane Alex and Tropical Storms Bonnie and Colin.

Colin formed and dissipated in rapid succession this week, then pulled itself
together to become a tropical storm again late Thursday afternoon.

The revised outlook -- an update from the center's initial May outlook --
predicts an active and above-average season, but forecasters also have lowered
the upper limits of the ranges from their May projections, which anticipated 14
to 23 named storms, including eight to 14 hurricanes, with three to seven of
those becoming major hurricanes.

Those upper limits were revised slightly downward, because the May outlook had
reflected the possibility of even more activity in the early part of the season,
according to the report.

Hurricane season reaches its peak from late August through October.

NOAA does not make seasonal hurricane landfall predictions, but the outlook
notes that, during hyperactive hurricane seasons, the historical probability for
multiple hurricane strikes in the United States and Caribbean "increases
sharply."

The revised outlook calls for a 90 percent chance of an above average 2010
hurricane season, a 10 percent chance of a near-normal season and no chance for
a below-normal season.

NOAA defines an average season as one with 11 named storms, including six
hurricanes, with two of them being major hurricanes.

"All indications are for considerable activity during the next several months,"
Gerry Bell, lead seasonal hurricane forecaster at the Climate Prediction Center,
said in a prepared statement about the revised outlook. "As we've seen in past
years, storms can come on quickly during the peak months of the season. There
remains a high likelihood that the season could be very active, with the
potential of being one of the more active on record."

The oceanic and atmospheric conditions over the Caribbean Sea and the tropical
Atlantic are "very conducive" to hurricane formation and are expected to remain
in place through the peak of the season, according to the statement.

The key climate factors at play include La Nina conditions in the tropical
Pacific, warm water temperatures in the tropical Atlantic and continuation of
conditions associated with an ongoing era of high Atlantic hurricane activity.

La Nina brings cooling of sea surface temperatures in the central and eastern
equatorial Pacific Ocean, affecting rainfall patterns across the tropical
Pacific, which then change wind patterns in a way that reduces vertical wind
shear in the Caribbean Sea and tropical Atlantic Ocean. Less wind shear makes
for conditions more favorable for hurricane formation and intensification.

The report also notes that, since March, sea surface temperatures throughout the
tropical Atlantic and Caribbean have been at near-record levels of warmth,
another factor that favors cyclone formation and intensification.

The Atlantic basin also is in the midst of a high hurricane activity era that
has been ongoing since 1995.

Ten of the 15 seasons since 1995 meet NOAA's criteria for an above-average
season.

On Wednesday, Colorado State University hurricane forecasting team William Gray
and Philip Klozbach released their updated hurricane predictions, maintaining
that it would be an active season and leaving their August count of 18 named
storms identical to their June prediction.

-- Contact reporter Joy Blackburn at 774-8772 ext. 455 or e-mail
jblackburn@dailynews.vi

To see more of The Virgin Islands Daily News, or to subscribe to the newspaper,
go to http://www.virginislandsdailynews.com/. Copyright (c) 2010, The Virgin
Islands Daily News, St. Thomas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services. For more information about the content services offered by
McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com,
e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or call 866-280-5210 (outside the United
States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100806-1VI-NOAA-forecasters-update-hurricane-predictions-20100806

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2010 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 695 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Anniston Star (Alabama)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            September 2, 2012 Sunday

The Anniston Star, Ala., Lisa Davis column

BYLINE: Lisa Davis, The Anniston Star, Ala.

SECTION: LIFESTYLE

LENGTH: 513 words


Sept. 02--The kids and I were playing recently with a website that finds
anagrams for your name. For instance, enter "Lisa Davis" and it rearranges the
letters to spell "Livid As As" (which sounds pretty much like the way I stutter
when I'm livid).

If I add my middle name to the mix, I become "As An Invalids."

Use my maiden name, I'm "Skill As Advertise."

With my middle name and my maiden name, I'm "Skinless, Valiant Dear."

Maybe I should stop there.

In the same vein, the arrival this week of Hurricane Isaac inspired us to look
up hurricane names.

There have been many Hurricane Lisas, as well as a couple of cyclones and some
tropical storms.

There was a Hurricane Lisa in 1998, which stayed out in the Atlantic and never
came close to land.

There was another one in 2004, which did much the same thing.

There was another one in 2010, which only briefly got strong enough to be
considered a hurricane, before blowing itself out.

My namesake storms behaved rather eerily like I do: unpredictable, blustery,
brief outbursts of hurricane strength, before losing interest, calming down, and
wandering off aimlessly and harmlessly over the north Atlantic.

Names were first given to hurricanes in the mid-1900s, according to the World
Meterological Organization, which is now in charge of keeping the lists of
hurricane names.

In the beginning, only female names were used. Whether this had anything to do
with the women's suffrage movement is unclear.

Since 1953, storms in the Atlantic have been named from designated lists. There
are six lists, which are used in rotation. Lisa will come up again in 2016.

Each list contains 21 names, one for each letter of the alphabet, except for Q,
U, X, Y and Z. So no Hurricane Ulysses. Or Xavier. Or Zero.

But there could be a Hurricane Chantal, or Erma, Lorenzo, Nestor, Ophelia,
Sally, Teddy, Vicky or Wilfred.

"Hurricane Teddy" doesn't sound like much of a threat. It reminds of Monty
Python's Spanish Inquisition, threatening to torture prisoners by strapping them
into the comfy chair.

My favorite name on the list is (wait for it) Hurricane Wendy.

Those are just the names for storms in the Atlantic. There are whole different
lists of names for storms in the Pacific (Norbert, Raymond, Tina, Zelda --
they're not biased against Z's in the Pacific). There are different lists for
Australia (Kofi, Mal, Olo, Zazu) and the Indian Ocean (Fanoos, Giri, Nisha,
Phet, Rashmi).

There are no hurricanes named for my children, although Hurricane Hugo comes
close.

There is a hurricane named for my husband, Hurricane Bob. Despite its friendly
and unassuming moniker, Hurricane Bob stormed its way up the New England coast
in 1991, leaving more than $1 billion of damage in its wake.

This is where I should stop drawing analogies.

Both Hurricane Hugo and Hurricane Bob were so destructive that their names were
retired from the official lists.

"Hugo" was replaced with "Humberto."

"Bob" was replaced with "Bill."

___ (c)2012 The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.) Visit The Anniston Star
(Anniston, Ala.) at www.annistonstar.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120902-AO-The-Anniston-Star-Ala-Lisa-Davis-column-0902-20120902

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AO


                        Copyright 2012 The Anniston Star


                          FOCUS - 696 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Capital (Annapolis, MD)

                           January 30, 2008 Wednesday

Why hurricanes have been stronger

SECTION: INSIDE; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 520  words


WASHINGTON, D.C. (AP) - When the water in the hurricane breeding grounds of the
Atlantic warms one degree in the dead of summer, overall hurricane activity
jumps by half, according to a new study.

Scientists have long known that hurricanes get their enormous energy from warm
waters, so the warmer the water, the more fuel a storm has to either start up or
get stronger. The study calculates how much storm frequency and strength is due
to warmer sea water, said author Mark Saunders, professor of climate prediction
at the University College London.

Mr. Saunders found a distinct numerical connection between the ups and downs of
water temperatures and how nasty hurricane season gets. That helps explain why
hurricanes have been so much worse in the past dozen years, and even why 2007 -
with waters slightly cooler than normal - was an exception and not that bad a
hurricane year, Mr. Saunders said.

"It's very surprisingly sensitive to small changes in sea surface temperature,"
he said.

His study, being published tomorrow in the journal Nature, found that changes in
wind patterns caused a bigger shift in hurricane activity, but he concentrated
his analysis on what sea temperature did to storms. Mr. Saunders didn't look at
what caused the temperature fluctuations, although he believes that climate
change is a contributing factor.

Scientists have clashed in recent years about whether man-made global warming
has already increased hurricane activity in the Atlantic by warming the sea and
shifting wind patterns, and what global warming may mean in the future.

Mr. Saunders focused on the water temperature in a band of tropical sea that
stretches from around Puerto Rico and the northern coast of South America east
to near the coast of Africa since 1950. He looked at hurricane activity since
1965.

The average August-September water temperature in the region is about 81
degrees. Saunders calculated that for every one degree Fahrenheit increase:

Overall hurricane activity - a combination of frequency and hurricane strength -
increases 49 percent.

The number of intense hurricanes, with winds over 110 mph, increases 45 percent.

- The number of hurricanes of any size increases 36 percent.

The number of tropical storms increase 31 percent.

For example, 2005 was the most active hurricane season on record, and Atlantic
water temperatures were the warmest, about 1.4 degrees above normal. That
hurricane season set a new high with 28 storms and 13 hurricanes. Seven of the
hurricanes were major storms.

In 1971, when the water temperatures were the coolest, there were 13 storms and
six hurricanes, including one major one.

The index of overall hurricane activity was more than twice as high in 2005 as
it was in 1971.

The scientists who have linked global warming to stronger storms said the study
makes sense, and is, if anything, just repeating and refining what they have
already said. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientist Chris
Landsea, whose studies have dismissed such links, said Saunders' study doesn't
go back far enough to exclude natural cyclical causes for the hurricane activity
changes.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2008 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 697 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 25, 2012 Friday

NOAA makes prediction of 4 to 8 hurricanes this year

BYLINE: Laura B. Martinez, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 514 words


May 25--The forecast for the 2012 Atlantic hurricane season is out, with
officials predicting a near-normal season.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration released its prediction
Thursday, which states there is a 70 percent chance for nine to 15 named
tropical storms, four to eight hurricanes, and of those one to three to become
major hurricanes.

A tropical storm has top winds of 39 mph or higher, a hurricane has top winds of
74 mph or higher, and a major hurricane has top winds of 111 mph or higher.

NOAA's forecast is similar to one released last month by Accuweather that
predicted 12 named storms, five hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

According to NOAA, an average or normal season has 12 named storms, six
hurricanes and three major hurricanes.

The Atlantic hurricane season begins June 1, although there already has been one
named storm and a second possibly on the way.

New to this year's hurricane forecasting will be the use of drones and robotic
boats, said Robert Detrick, director of NOAA's Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric
Research. The drones, or unmanned aircraft, will collect data high above the
center of a storm. The robotic boats will gather data at the ocean surface from
the eye of the storm.

Detrick said the new data combined with other hurricane models will help
forecasters significantly improve the ability to predict "the rapidly
strengthening or weakening of storms and to extend track forecast to seven
days."

Detrick said although this year's forecast is for a near-normal season, exactly
what happens depends on whether El Nino will form in late summer or early fall.

El Nino can increase wind shears which can suppress or "kill off the storm,"
Detrick said.

The forecast aside, officials stressed that residents along the coast should
begin making preparations now.

"It takes one storm to come ashore, regardless of the intensity of the season,
to create a disaster," said Timothy Manning, deputy administrator for protection
and national preparedness for the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

"The most important thing is to heed evacuation warnings," Manning added.

His mention of "one storm" referred to the 1992 Atlantic Hurricane season where
there were only six named storms. The first one didn't come until August, but
its name was Andrew. It came ashore in Florida, killed 26 people and caused $25
billion in damage.

"It made international headlines and national history," Detrick said.

Officials stressed that when it comes to preparedness, there should be no such
thing as "just a tropical storm" or a "weak" hurricane.

Hurricanes categorized as "weak" can cause just as much damage to electrical
grids as strong storms, and they can affect people who rely on ventilators and
other electrical equipment in their daily lives.

The seasonal forecast does not predict how many storms will actually make
landfall. It refers only to the probability of storms forming.

___ (c)2012 The Brownsville Herald (Brownsville, Texas) Visit The Brownsville
Herald (Brownsville, Texas) at www.brownsvilleherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20120525-BV-NOAA-makes-prediction-of-4-to-8-hurricanes-this-year-20120525

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2012 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 698 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               Lawyers Weekly USA

                                August 28, 2006

Hurricane law: Four lawyers carve out niche in wake of devastation

BYLINE: Dick Dahl

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1207  words


New Orleans attorney Jeffrey Berniard was a refugee from the ravages of
Hurricane Katrina last year when he realized that the monstrous storm could
contain a silver lining for his practice.

"I had an inkling there were going to be a lot of insurance problems out there,"
he recalled. "So I created a strategy, and when I came back I focused on that. "

Berniard was a title attorney in a small New Orleans firm when Katrina forced
him to evacuate and head for his family's home in Lake Charles, La. But when he
went back five weeks later, he didn't return to the firm. Instead, he set up
shop on his own as "Jeff Berniard, Louisiana Hurricane Lawyer," and created a
website to bring in Katrina-related insurance business.

The strategy was successful. His new website brought in a flood of insurance
cases, and by May he was so swamped with work that his wife, Melissa Elaine
Wilson, left her job as a lawyer in Jefferson Juvenile Court to join him.
Although the number of hits on the site has receded in recent months, Berniard
said the work remains constant - and with most insurers extending the deadline
for filing Katrina and Rita claims to August 2007, it promises to continue.

Adding value

Type the phrase "hurricane lawyer" into any search engine and dozens of websites
will appear - mostly for law firms and lawyer-referral services in Louisiana,
Texas, Mississippi and Florida that are marketing their services in handling
hurricane-related insurance matters.

For some, hurricane law is a new practice area. For others, like Berniard, it is
an entirely new professional identity.

Florida attorney Gary A. Poliakoff has taken another approach to hurricane law -
he has been marketing hurricane-related "add on" services to his primary client
base of homeowners associations and housing cooperatives.

Poliakoff is a founding partner and managing principal of Becker & Poliakoff, a
125-lawyer firm in Fort Lauderdale and 11 other Florida cities. The firm has
long focused its practice on representing "common-ownership housing" entities,
and in 1992 was "literally blown into [hurricane work] by Hurricane Andrew. "

Andrew was a Category 5 hurricane that held the distinction of being the most
destructive hurricane in U.S. history until Katrina. For Poliakoff and his
colleagues, the task of sorting out "who pays for what" following Andrew was
many-faceted. In common-ownership housing, not all property is covered by
insurance - landscaped common areas are not, for instance - so sometimes
Poliakoff had to work with groups to develop money-raising ventures or arrange
loans. He also settled disputes between individual owners and associations and
handled bidding procedures.

In the process, Poliakoff said, he saw that many clients could have avoided some
of the post-hurricane headaches if they had they done a better job of planning
and preparation. And there he saw a marketing opportunity.

Poliakoff estimates that he now gives 20 to 25 speeches on disaster preparedness
and recovery to homeowners and associations each year, offering advice on how to
perform risk analyses and develop good disaster plans.

In addition, his firm has been working on the creation of a "mobile office" - an
RV outfitted with satellite phones and connections to the firm's computers -
that could be called into service if a hurricane or other catastrophe causes a
sustained power outage.

The hurricane law blog

The firm of McGlinchey Stafford has taken a different approach - it has created
"The Hurricane Law Blog,"

Partner Bennett S. Koren acknowledges that the blog creates "an indirect
business benefit [with] our existing clients" - making them appreciate the firm
more - but that its primary purpose is public service.

Whatever the strategy behind the blog, it's drawing significant attention. A
firm spokesman said that each day about 300 individuals visit the site, which
features the latest news on hurricane-related litigation and regulatory efforts
that a team of lawyers culls from media and court documents. In addition, the
site contains a variety of links to government agencies, laws and proposed
legislation, among other things.

Koren said the idea for the blog was born last September, when 60 of the 100
lawyers in the eight-city firm's New Orleans office had to be taken in by the
Baton Rouge office. He said lawyers in the crammed temporary space began
discussing how to cope with the new and difficult post-Katrina landscape.

"A number of us were sitting around a table talking about how someone needed to
aggregate the relevant legal information that would be coming out of this
storm," recalled Koren. "Someone suggested that we do it ourselves. "

Koren and nine other McGlinchey Stafford lawyers became the blog's co-editors,
and he said they're as busy keeping it up-to-date now as they were in the weeks
and months following the hurricane.

"I spend a couple of hours a week and each of the other editors probably spends
the same," he said. "However, it is not uniform. There might be nothing for a
month, and then a [big] decision comes down which takes a lot of time. "

One such decision was Leonard v. Nationwide. On Aug. 15, U.S. District Court
Judge L.T. Senter Jr. issued a big post-Katrina defense victory for the
insurance industry. Senter ruled that Nationwide Mutual Insurance Co. 's
policies do not cover damage from water or storm surge, a ruling that could
affect hundreds of other pending insurance cases. (No. 1:05CV475 LTS (S.D.
Miss.).)

The CLE route

Pensacola sole practitioner Samuel W. Bearman has launched a marketing campaign
proclaiming himself "The Hurricane Lawyer. " His activity as a speaker at CLE
and bar functions indicates that he may be living up to his chosen moniker.

Bearman had his first taste of hurricane litigation in 1995 after Hurricane Opal
slammed into Florida. The storm caused $3 billion in damage and brought Bearman
more than 50 insurance cases, one of which he tried before a jury that awarded
his client the full policy limits of $100,000.

Nearly ten years elapsed before another big storm, Hurricane Charley, hit
Florida in August 2004. But by the end of the 2005 hurricane season four more
Category 3 storms had struck and Bearman was overwhelmed by insurance cases -
particularly in the wake of Hurricane Ivan, which caused extensive damage in
southern Florida and killed 14 people, including a friend of Bearman.

The volume of work allowed Bearman to establish himself as an authority on
hurricane-related insurance claims. He's written articles for law journals and
lectured to a variety of bar groups and CLE programs on the subject. He's also
created a website, "Florida Hurricane Law," which provides information to
consumers about how to go about filing a hurricane insurance claim.

Bearman contends that people need his services because hurricane claims are
different from other catastrophic events.

"The client typically has both wind and flood damage to his house," he said.
"More times than not, the wind insurance company is blaming flood and the flood
insurance company is blaming wind. "

And in May, Bearman took another marketing step and launched the "Florida
Hurricane Hotline" - 1-800-760-6065 - as a service for people seeking
information about hurricane insurance and filing claims.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Legal activity (lawsuits etc.)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 699 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                            The Independent (London)

                           September 12, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Second Edition

THE GATHERING STORMS;
How man is making the wind blow As tourists flee the path of Hurricane Florence,
scientists are warning that climate change will unleash regular and worsening
devastation on the world.

BYLINE: By Michael McCarthy and Abigail Townsend

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 1251 words


It's hard at first to get your head around the idea, indeed it seems outlandish:
that by switching on the light, or stamping on the car accelerator, you're
helping to pulverise a great city such as New Orleans.

But that's the inescapable implication of a piece of research published
yesterday by a group of the world's most distinguished climate scientists. Freak
storms such as Hurricane Katrina, which devastated the Big Easy a year ago, are
not just freaks, they suggest. They are down to us.

Warmer seas causing more violent hurricanes and typhoons are almost certainly
the result of greenhouse gas emissions, they conclude' they are caused,
ultimately, by the carbon dioxide from the power station that provides your
electricity, from the exhaust of the car you drove to work this morning.

Ironically, the study was published just as holiday makers in Bermuda were
battening down the hatches in their luxury hotels to escape the effects of
Hurricane Florence, the second storm of the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season,
which was pounding the island with winds topping lOOmph, although the worst of
the storm passed Bermuda by.

The 19 scientists, from America, Britain and Germany, include James Hansen of
Nasa, the doyen of American climate change researchers, and Professor Phil Jones
from the Climatic Research Unit of the University of East Angliaat Norwich.

They said that, in a comprehensive investigation, they had found an 84 per cent
probability that human triggers accounted for most of the observed increases in
sea surface temperatures (SSTs), during the past century, in the breeding
grounds for hurricanes (as they are called in the Atlantic) and cyclones (as
they are known in the Pacific).

Warm temperatures at the surface are known to be a primary force behind the
formation of violent tropical storms, in which moist air is sucked up by
powerful convection currents and spun to form a cyclone.

Research published in the past year has shown a link between rising ocean
temperatures and increases in hurricane intensity, a fact that seems intuitively
true: more heat means more energy.

The thrust of the new study is this: the extra heat in the ocean is
human-induced.

The American-based team, whose work is reported in the US journal Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, used 22 different computer climate models to
look at the warming of oceans during the 20th century, which in the hurricane
breeding grounds of the tropics range from 0.32C to 0.67C. Unlike previous
investigations, the new research has focused on small cyclone-forming regions
rather than entire ocean basins.

"The important conclusion is that the observed SST increases in these hurricane
breeding grounds cannot be explained by natural processes alone," said one of
the scientists involved, Dr Tom Wigley, from the National Centre for Atmospheric
Research in Boulder, Colorado. "The best explanation for these changes has to
include a large human influence."

He added: "It is important to note we expect global temperatures and SSTs to
increase even more rapidly in the next century.

Dr Benjamin Santer, another member of the research team, from the Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory in California, said: "In a post-Katrina world, we
need to do the best job we possibly can to understand the complex influences on
hurricane intensity and how our actions are changing those influences."

Hurricane Katrina, which broke the Mississippi levees in August last year,
allowing New Orleans to flood, killed 1,500 people along the US Gulf Coast and
caused $80bn (pounds 42bn) in damage in Louisiana and elsewhere.

It was the peak of the 2005 hurricane season, which broke records with 28
tropical storms, of which 15 became hurricanes. (By contrast, the six-month
hurricane season that began on 1 June this year has produced only two hurricanes
so far. Tropical Storm Ernesto briefly reached hurricane strength near Haiti
last month but weakened before drenching the US east coast.)

In the wake of Katrina and the other storms of last year, there has been a
fierce debate among researchers in the US as to whether hurricanes have indeed
increased in frequency and power over recent decades.

Professor Kerry Emmanuel of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology caused a
stir with a paper published in Nature just three weeks before Katrina hit, in
which he said that hurricanes had doubled in power since 1950, with most of the
increase in force occurring in the past 30 years.

Another paper published in September 2005 reported that the number of category 4
and 5 hurricanes - the strongest - had almost doubled in number over the same
period.

But not all researchers accept those conclusions (which, incidentally, are very
unwelcome to the Bush administration with its continuing stance of
de-emphasising the potential effects of global warming). Some doubt has been
cast on the accuracy of earlier hurricane data, which might make comparisons
invalid. One observer who is following the debate closely is the authoritative
British science writer Fred Pearce, who has just published a study of the latest
climate change research entitled The Last Generation. "Not every hurricane
researcher is convinced," he said. "Some think we may be seeing no more than
natural fluctuations in hurricane activity. And they say that we can't be sure
how many hurricanes there were, and how strong they were, 30 or 40 years ago.

"But the evidence is growing ever stronger that hurricanes are becoming more
intense, and maybe more frequent too, as a result of global warming.

"The science is simple. A warmer atmosphere makes for warmer seas. Hurricanes
form only when temperatures at the ocean surface rise above 26C. The heat in the
water drives the strong winds and updrafts. So the more often that critical
temperature is exceeded, the more hurricanes will form. And the warmer the water
gets, the more intense the hurricanes will become."

Mr Pearce added: "The theory seems to be backed up in the real world. As oceans
warm, the statistical evidence is growing there have been more hurricanes in the
past decade or so - not just in the Atlantic but also the Pacific.

"And the most recent study, published in the prestigious Geophysical Research
Letters in June, found global warming accounted for about half of the extra
warmth in the oceans last year. A year that saw a record 28 tropical storms and
hurricanes in the Atlantic, including Katrina. That makes climate change the
likely cause of the destruction of New Orleans."

Meanwhile, back in Bermuda yesterday, all 122 guests at Cambridge Beaches, a
luxury resort on the island's western tip (bungalows up to $1,695 per night) had
to fight gale-force winds in the dark as they were moved from cottages to the
main reception and dining area at 6.30am. As the winds thrashed outside,
whipping palm trees back and forth and churning up the normally placid Mango
Bay, food and entertainments from bingo to cookery demonstrations were laid on
to keep the mainly English and American guests occupied.

Only one row flared up as the morning progressed, momentarily drowning out the
sounds of the wind battering the shutters and boarded-up windows.

A British couple, Colin and Elizabeth Sanderson from Fare-ham in Hampshire, got
married on the island four days ago but had to spend their honeymoon with
friends and family as none of them could get off the island.

Hurricane Katrina it was not. But do not doubt it, Katrina, or her like, will be
back. And thinking about why, is a sobering thought indeed.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Left, Hurricane Katrina seen from space. Above, a computer image
showing the devastating force of a hurricane. Right, Tropical Storm Florence,
which is making its way across Bermuda. Far right, boats litter the shores of
Florida after Hurricane Frances in 2004 ALAMY/AP' St Bernard Parish is submerged
under floodwaters from Hurricane Katrina last September. The hurricane killed
about 1,500 people and caused pounds 42bn of damage DAVID PHILLIP/EPA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 700 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                            The Independent (London)

                           September 12, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

THE GATHERING STORMS;
How man is making the wind blow As tourists flee the path of Hurricane Florence,
scientists are warning that climate change will unleash regular and worsening
devastation on the world.

BYLINE: By Michael McCarthy and Abigail Townsend

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 1512 words


It's hard at first to get your head around the idea, indeed it seems outlandish:
that by switching on the light, or stamping on the car accelerator, you're
helping to pulverise a great city such as New Orleans.

But that's the inescapable implication of a piece of research published
yesterday by a group of the world's most distinguished climate scientists. Freak
storms such as Hurricane Katrina, which devastated the Big Easy a year ago, are
not just freaks, they suggest. They are down to us.

Warmer seas causing more violent hurricanes and typhoons are almost certainly
the result of greenhouse gas emissions, they conclude' they are caused,
ultimately, by the carbon dioxide from the power station that provides your
electricity, from the exhaust of the car you drove to work this morning.

Ironically, the study was published just as holidaymakers in Bermuda were
battening down the hatches in their luxury hotels to escape the effects of
Hurricane Florence, the second storm of the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season,
which was pounding the island with winds topping lOOmph, although the worst of
the storm passed Bermuda by.

The 19 scientists, from America, Britain and Germany, include James Hansen of
Nasa, the doyen of American climate change researchers, and Professor Phil Jones
from the Climatic Research Unit of the University of East Anglia at Norwich.

They said that, in a comprehensive investigation, they had found an 84 per cent
probability that human triggers accounted for most of the observed increases in
sea surface temperatures (SSTs), during the past century, in the breeding
grounds for hurricanes (as they are called in the Atlantic) and cyclones (as
they are known in the Pacific).

Warm temperatures at the surface are known to be a primary force behind the
formation of violent tropical storms, in which moist air is sucked up by
powerful convection currents and spun to form a cyclone. Research published in
the past year has shown a link between rising ocean temperatures and increases
in hurricane intensity.

The thrust of the new study is this: the extra heat in the ocean is
human-induced. The American-based team, whose work is reported in the US
journal-Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, used 22 different
computer climate models to look at the warming of oceans during the 20th
century, which in the hurricane breeding grounds of the tropics range from 0.32C
to 0.67C. Unlike previous investigations, the new research has focused on small
cyclone-forming regions rather than entire ocean basins.

"The important conclusion is that the observed SST increases in these hurricane
breeding grounds cannot be explained by natural processes alone," said one of
the scientists involved, Dr Tom Wigley, from the National Centre for Atmospheric
Research in Boulder, Colorado. "The best explanation for these changes has to
include... human influence." He added: "It is important to note we expect global
temperatures and SSTs to increase even more rapidly in the next century. Dr
Benjamin Santer, from the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California,
said: "In a post-Katrina world, we need to do the best job we possibly can to
understand the complex influences on hurricane intensity and how our actions are
changing those influences." Hurricane Katrina, which broke the Mississippi
levees in August last year, allowing New Orleans to flood, killed 1,500 people
along the US Gulf Coast and caused $80bn (pounds 42bn) in damage in Louisiana
and elsewhere. It was the peak of the 2005 hurricane season, which broke records
with 28 tropical storms, of which 15 became hurricanes. (By contrast, the
six-month hurricane season that began on 1 June this year has produced only two
hurricanes so far. Tropical Storm Ernesto briefly reached hurricane strength
near Haiti last month but weakened before drenching the US east coast.)

In the wake of Katrina and the other storms of last year, there has been a
fierce debate among researchers in the US as to whether hurricanes have indeed
increased in frequency and power over recent decades.

The research published yesterday reflects the conclusion of a study by Kerry
Emanuel of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge. Last year, in
a letter published in the journal Nature, he linked an increase in hurricane
activity with rises in ocean temperature caused by global warming and climate
change.

"My results suggest that future warming may lead to an upward trend in tropical
cyclone destructive potential, and - taking into account an increasing coastal
population - a substantial increase in hurricane-related losses in the 21st
century," he said.

The study concluded that tropical storms are lasting 60 per cent longer and
their wind speeds are up to 15 per cent higher. "This work implies that global
tropical cyclone activity is responding in a rather large way to global
warming," Professor Emanuel said.

The debate heightened last September when meteorologist Peter Webster of the
Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta and his colleagues published data
showing that the frequency of category four and five cyclones - the two
strongest types of hurricanes - had increased significantly over the past 35
years. His study concluded: "This trend is not inconsistent with recent climate
model simulations that a doubling of carbon dioxide may increase the frequency
of the most intense cyclones."

But not all researchers accept those conclusions (which, incidentally, are very
unwelcome to the Bush administration with its continuing stance of deem
phasising the potential effects of global warming). Some doubt has been cast on
the accuracy of earlier hurricane data, which might make comparisons invalid.
One observer who is following the debate closely is the British science writer
Fred Pearce, who has just published a study of the latest climate change
research entitled The Last Generation. "Not every hurricane researcher is
convinced," he said. "Some think we may be seeing no more than natural
fluctuations in hurricane activity. And they say that we can't be sure how many
hurricanes there were, and how strong they were, 30 or 40 years ago.

"But the evidence is growing ever stronger that hurricanes are becoming more
intense, and maybe more frequent too, as a result of global warming.

"The science is simple. A warmer atmosphere makes for warmer seas. Hurricanes
form only when temperatures at the ocean surface rise above 26C. The heat in the
water drives the strong winds and updrafts. So the more often that critical
temperature is exceeded, the more hurricanes will form. And the warmer the water
gets, the more intense the hurricanes will become." Mr Pearce added: "The theory
seems to be backed up in the real world. As oceans warm, the statistical
evidence is growing there have been more hurricanes in the past decade or so -
not just in the Atlantic but also the Pacific.

"And the most recent study, published in the prestigious Geo-physica lResearch
Letters in June, found global warming accounted for about half of the extra
warmth in the oceans last year. A year that saw a record 28 tropical storms and
hurricanes in the Atlantic, including Katrina. That makes climate change the
likely cause of the destruction of New Orleans."

William M Gray of Colorado State University, a hurricane expert who issues
forecasts each year on the expected number of storms, called the report "a
desperate attempt to keep the bandwagon going".

"They've kept it going with global warming and now they want to keep it going
with hurricanes," Professor Gray, who was not part of the research team, said.
"I am very sure over the test of time it will not hold up."

Philip Klotzbach, also of Colorado State, said: "Sea-surface temperatures have
certainly warmed over the past century, and that there is probably a
human-induced component.

"To me, the big challenge is still determining what percentage is natural and
what percentage is caused by humans. This paper sheds some light on that
question' however, there is still a considerable amount of uncertainty."

Meanwhile, back in Bermuda yesterday, all 122 guests at Cambridge Beaches, a
luxury resort on the island's western tip (bungalows up to $1,695 per night) had
to fight gale-force winds in the dark as they were moved from cottages to the
main reception and dining area at 6.30am. As the winds thrashed outside,
whipping palm trees back and forth and churning up the normally placid Mango
Bay, food and entertainments from bingo to cookery demonstrations were laid on
to keep the mainly English and American guests occupied.

Only one row flared up as the morning progressed, momentarily drowning out the
sounds of the wind battering the shutters and boarded-up windows.

A British couple, Colin and Elizabeth Sanderson from Fare-ham, Hampshire, got
married on the island four days ago but had to spend their honeymoon with
friends and family as none of them could get off the island.

Hurricane Katrina it was not. But do not doubt it, Katrina, or her like, will be
back. And thinking about why, is a sobering thought indeed.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Left, Hurricane Katrina seen from space. Above, a computer image
showing the devastating force of a hurricane. Right, Tropical Storm Florence,
which is making its way across Bermuda. Far right, boats litter the shores of
Florida after Hurricane Frances in 2004 ALAMY/AP' St Bernard Parish is submerged
under floodwaters from Hurricane Katrina last September. The hurricane killed
about 1,500 people and caused pounds 42bn of damage DAVID PHILLIP/EPA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 701 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                             May 19, 2011 Thursday

Conditions in Atlantic ripe for big 2011 hurricane season, US says;
2011 will be another above-average year for Atlantic hurricanes, says the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Plan your evacuation
strategy now, warns FEMA.

BYLINE: Pete Spotts Staff writer

LENGTH: 785 words


The 2011 Atlantic hurricane season, which begins June 1, looks to be another
above-average year, federal forecasters say, adding that residents along the
Gulf and East Coast should make sure now that they know what to do if ordered to
evacuate.

In an outlook released May 19, forecasters at the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration's Climate Prediction Center are calling for a 70
percent chance of 12 to 18 storms with tropical-storm-force winds or higher.

Of these storms, which would receive names ranging from Arlene to Sean, six to
10 are expected to grow into hurricanes. Three to six of these are likely to
become major hurricanes, with winds in excess of 111 miles an hour.

The outlook brackets a similar forecast from Colorado State University's
Tropical Meteorology Project.

In April, the most recent outlook, Philip Klotzbach and William Gray, who
pioneered seasonal hurricane forecasts for the Atlantic, called for 16 named
storms, of which nine are expected to become hurricanes. Of those nine, five are
expected to become major hurricanes.

In a typical season, the Atlantic basin might see 11 named storms, six
hurricanes, and two major hurricanes.

Last year, conditions in the Atlantic and Caribbean spawned 19 named storms, the
third-highest number on record, according to Jane Lubchenco, who heads NOAA.
Twelve of those storms became hurricanes, the second-highest number of hurricane
ever recorded in one season.

"The US was lucky last year," she said during a May 19 press briefing.
Considering the number and severity of the storms, the US emerged with
remarkably little damage.

Hurricane Earl, which for a time strengthened to a category 4 storm, the
second-highest category, flirted with the US East Coast from North Carolina up
to Maine. Hurricane Bonnie spun close to the ongoing efforts to control the
Deepwater Horizon blowout, in the Gulf of Mexico near Louisiana.

But in the end, the US Gulf and East Coasts were spared significant damage from
a named storm - unlike countries in the Caribbean and along the East Coast of
Mexico and Central America.

"We cannot count on having the same luck this year," Dr. Lubchenco added.

Several broad factors are contributing to the amped-up outlooks, researchers and
forecasters say.

Surface waters in the tropical Atlantic, where many storms form, remain warmer
than normal for this time of year - about 2 degrees Fahrenheit above normal now,
compared with 4 degrees F. above normal last year. Storms grow and feed on those
warm waters.

In addition, the 2011 season falls within an active phase of a broader,
multi-decade cycle of heavier and lighter hurricane activity.

And the Atlantic is still under the influence of the long arm of a waning La
Niña, part of a cycle that includes El Niño.

This "El Niño/Southern Oscillation" is manifest in seesaw patterns in
atmospheric pressure and ocean temperatures across the tropical Pacific. These
changes affect broader atmospheric circulation patterns, in ways that favor
hurricane formation during La Niña episodes.

NOAA's seasonal outlook says nothing about whether or how many hurricanes will
make landfall - an aspect of hurricane forecasting that, for the most part, is
still a gleam in the eye of researchers.

Hence the importance of everyone living in low-lying areas along the Atlantic or
Gulf Coasts being ready to leave, to avoid the flooding a hurricane's storm
surge can bring.

"It takes only one hurricane to wreak devastation," Lubchenco said.

Individual preparedness is critical, emergency managers say. For people who
physically and financially can prepare, following through on those preparations
when needed frees up limited resources to focus on people who can't help
themselves. And those preparations - which include keeping important financial
documents in a family's "go kit" - can smooth the recovery process.

Unfortunately, people can experience "hurricane amnesia," adds Craig Fugate, who
heads the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in Washington. He is
referring to the long time spans that can elapse between landfalling hurricanes
in any one location, and the tendency of people to forget how serious the storms
can be.

The amnesia problem is especially acute along the Northeast coast, he suggests,
because relatively few hurricanes have made landfall there over the past few
decades.

In other cases, he continues, people will say they've experienced a hurricane
and say that the experience wasn't too bad, when they actually have experienced
only a hurricane's outer, tropical-storm-force winds.

"If you live along the Gulf Coast, if you live along the Atlantic Coast, you
have your notice - it's going to be an above average season," he says.

And it starts June 1.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2011 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 702 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                             August 26, 2011 Friday

Hurricane names: Why is it named Hurricane Irene?;
Hurricane names say more about that hurricane and hurricane season than you
might think.

BYLINE: Chris Richardson Staff

LENGTH: 301 words


With hundreds of storm-tracking stations trying to relay information as quickly
as possible, scientists need a short, easy to understand naming convention for
hurricanes.

Before 1950, hurricanes didn't have names. The more memorable ones were simply
described, such as the "1935 Labor Day hurricane" and the "1821 Norfolk and Long
Island hurricane."

Starting in 1950, hurricanes began getting names but for the first three years
the same names repeated each year, which became confusing.

From 1953 until 1979, it was customary to use only female names, supposedly
after girlfriends and wives of Army and Navy meteorologists.

The system we have today began in 1979, and runs alphabetically through male and
female names starting with a name beginning with the letter A, such as Arlene.

Each year the names are different from the last until the six-year cycle
restarts. In 2011, the following names have been allocated:

Arlene, Bret, Cindy, Don, Emily, Franklin, Gert, Harvey, Irene, Jose, Katia,
Lee, Maria, Nate, Ophelia, Philippe, Rina, Sean, Tammy, Vince, Whitney

Next year the names will begin with Alberto, Beryl, Chris, and so on.

The last time Irene was used was in 2005 - the same year Hurricane Katrina hit
the Gulf Coast.

Like 74 other Atlantic hurricanes, Katrina's name has been permanently retired
to reduce confusion and show respect for those who lost their lives in the
hurricane. All hurricanes that result in extraordinary loss of life have their
names retired, and are replaced by another name beginning with the same letter.
The name Katrina was replaced with Katia, which will be the name assigned to the
eleventh hurricane in the 2011 season.

Irene 2005 never came ashore and only reached Category 2. This year, Hurricane
Irene is expected to reach Category 4 by the time it comes ashore.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2011 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 703 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                             May 22, 2014 Thursday

Hurricane forecast was way off last year. What does it say this year?;
NOAA released its hurricane forecast for the 2014 season, suggesting activity
might be less than usual. Part of the challenge was figuring out what went wrong
with last year's forecasts.

BYLINE: Pete Spotts Staff writer

SECTION: Energy/Environment

LENGTH: 1030 words


The 2014 Atlantic hurricane season is shaping up to be a mild one, according to
forecasters with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Climate
Prediction Center (CPC).

It's one of several seasonal hurricane forecasts anticipating a relatively quiet
year.

The CPC's outlook calls for eight to 13 tropical storms during the upcoming
season, which begins June 1 and ends Nov. 30. Out of those storms, three to six
are expected to form hurricanes. Of the hurricanes that form, one or two are
expected to become major hurricanes - storms whose highest sustained winds
exceed 111 miles an hour.

Overall, the CPC gives the season's activity a 50 percent chance of falling
below the 1981-2010 average and a 40 percent chance of reaching that average of
12 named storms, 6.5 hurricanes, and two major hurricanes.

A below-average season, however, doesn't mean the US Gulf and East Coasts can
breathe easy. The 1992 hurricane season produced only seven named storms. But
one of them was hurricane Andrew, which struck south Florida as a Category 5
storm - the most powerful category - and later the Louisiana coast near Morgan
City as a Category 3. Andrew inflicted more the $26 billion in damage and
claimed 74 lives along its path.

"No percentage number, no probability number high or low, erases the fact that
the real message is: We're starting into hurricane season; any section of our
coastline can be hit with a severe tropical storm; and whatever the
probabilities are, one storm can wreak tremendous havoc," said Kathryn Sullivan,
NOAA's administrator, during a briefing Thursday unveiling the forecast.

Last year's troublesome forecast

Indeed, seasonal forecasting is a dicey activity. Last year, the consensus among
among prominent forecasting teams held that the Atlantic hurricane season would
be more active than normal. From the standpoint of hurricanes, it wasn't.

The forecasts that looked the worst at season's end supplied a single number for
named storms, hurricanes, and major hurricanes. Others, such as the CPC, a
forecasting group at North Carolina State University, and another at Florida
State University provided ranges, better reflecting the uncertainties inherent
in the forecasts. Thirteen storms grew strong enough to earn a name, a total
that fell at the bottom of the ranges these three offered.

Several forecasts anticipated eight or nine hurricanes. No forecast, however,
foresaw fewer than five. Two formed. And the season saw no major hurricanes,
where several seasonal forecasts envisioned three or more.

The gap between forecast and what nature delivered triggered some intense
forensics work to figure out what happened, according to Jerry Bell, a research
meteorologist at the CPC and the lead forecaster for seasonal hurricane
outlooks.

"I spent many months looking back at last season, trying to figure out why the
forecasts overpredicted" and trying identify the conditions that kept a lid on
the number of hurricanes.

Typically, a season's activity is dominated by a handful of seasonal climate
patterns "that are so strong, they typically win out" over other,
harder-to-predict factors that can affect hurricane formation, Dr. Bell says.

The broad factors range from sea-surface temperatures in the tropical Atlantic
to the long climatological reach of changes in the east-west distribution of
warm surface waters in the tropical Pacific. These factors pointed to an active
season.

What went wrong

Last year, however, the climate system through forecasters a curve. "A very
rare, persistent jet stream pattern of record strength locked in," Bell
explains. The pattern in this planet-circling, meandering high-altitude river of
air, which steers storm systems as it travels from west to east, produced the
bane of hurricanes: wind shear.

Wind shear is a change in wind speed or direction with altitude. It stunts the
organization and growth needed to turn a ragged collection of thunderstorms into
a single tropical cyclone or to turn a tropical storm into a hurricane. In
addition, conditions led large parcels of air to sink over the tropical
Atlantic, counteracting the tendency of warm, moist air at the surface to rise
sufficiently to build or maintain a storm.

Such conditions have occurred only twice since 1970, with last year the second
instance, Bell says.

Others scientists, such as Colorado State University's Philip Klotzbach and
William Gray, who pioneered seasonal hurricane forecasts, have proposed that the
dearth of hurricanes in 2013 occurred because a large-scale ocean current in the
North Atlantic known as the Atlantic Ocean Thermohaline Circulation weakened
during the prior winter and spring. The weakening allowed cooler northern waters
to migrate farther south than they otherwise would have.

What's driving this year's forecast

This year's forecasts for below-average activity are driven by several
observations.

Warmer-than-normal surface water is extending its reach from the western
tropical Pacific to the west coast of South America - a feature known as El
Niño, the warm half of one of the most influential natural cycles in Earth's
climate system.

El Niños tend to appear every three to seven years, on average, bringing with
them an increase in the intensity of wind shear over the tropical Atlantic.
During its opposite, La Niña, shear weakens, which favors tropical-cyclone
formation. Forecasters are predicting the onset of El Niño this summer and fall,
although it remains unclear how strong it will be.

In addition, sea-surface temperatures in the main storm-forming region have
cooled n recent months. This could lead to a lower-octane fuel for the storms,
which draw energy from warm surface waters.

In their April forecast, Drs. Klotzbach and Gray anticipate nine named storms,
three hurricanes, and one major hurricane. They anticipate releasing an updated
forecast June 2.

A forecasting team at North Carolina State University, which also published its
forecast in April, expects the season to deliver eight to 11 named storms, four
to six hurricanes, and one to three major hurricanes.

Florida State's group is expected to release its seasonal forecast May 30.

Starting June 1, nature will again be the arbiter.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 704 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                             May 24, 2014 Saturday

Tropical storm Amanda forecast to become hurricane today;
Tropical storm Amanda is located southwest of Mexico and strengthening into a
hurricane. But the hurricane is not expected to reach Mexico.

BYLINE: Staff

SECTION: World

LENGTH: 309 words


The National Hurricane Center is issuing advisories on Tropical Storm Amanda,
located several hundred miles southwest of the southwestern coast of Mexico.

Amanda is forecast to strengthen into a hurricane this afternoon and then
continue to strengthen to an weak hurricane during the day on Sunday.  By late
Sunday evening, the National Hurricane Center is forecasting sustained winds of
to 60 mph.

Amanda is then forecast to weaken back to a minimal hurricane late on Monday.

The forecast track of Hurricane Amanda is expected to keep the storm - as a
hurricane - away from Mexico. Tropical storm Amanda is currently moving toward
the west-northwest at a speed of about 5 mph.  A decrease in forward speed and a
turn toward the northwest are expected on Sunday.

Currently, tropical storm force winds extend outward up to 60 miles from the
storm's center. As Amanda weakens it may turn back toward Mexico next week.

Amanda is the first tropical storm of the Pacific Basin season.

As The Christian Science Monitor reported, the 2014 Atlantic hurricane season is
shaping up to be a mild one, according to forecasters with the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration's Climate Prediction Center (CPC).

It's one of several seasonal hurricane forecasts anticipating a relatively quiet
year.The CPC's outlook calls for eight to 13 tropical storms during the upcoming
season, which begins June 1 and ends Nov. 30. Out of those storms, three to six
are expected to form hurricanes. Of the hurricanes that form, one or two are
expected to become major hurricanes - storms whose highest sustained winds
exceed 111 miles an hour.A below-average season, however, doesn't mean the US
Gulf and East Coasts can breathe easy. The 1992 hurricane season produced only
seven named storms. But one of them was hurricane Andrew, which struck south
Florida as a Category 5 storm.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 705 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           November 1, 2007 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricane season goes easy on USA

BYLINE: Patrick O'Driscoll

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 338 words


The 2007 hurricane season, with a month to go, is on track to leave the coastal
USA relatively unscathed for a second straight year.

As a result, parts of the Gulf Coast and Florida still recovering from the
deadly batterings of a dozen hurricanes in 2004 and 2005 have had more time to
rebuild and prepare for next time. The severe drought in the Southeast, made
worse by 2006's mild tropical season, was prolonged this year by similar
conditions.

Just one hurricane and three tropical storms hit land this year in the USA:
Hurricane Humberto and Tropical Storms Barry, Erin and Gabrielle. Last year, no
hurricanes and two tropical storms touched shore.

This season actually is above the long-term average for the number of named
storms. The National Hurricane Center has tracked 14 storms -- four of them
hurricanes, two of them major with winds 111 mph or more. In an average year, 10
storms are named, six of them hurricanes and two of them major.

"I hate to say 'lucky' yet, but I'm certain most people along the Gulf Coast are
breathing a sigh of relief," says scientist David Levinson of the National
Climatic Data Center. "And Humberto was minimal." That hurricane blew up
suddenly in the Gulf of Mexico in September but weakened quickly once it went
ashore in Texas.

Hurricane season runs June 1 to Nov. 30. Since 1900, only four November
hurricanes have reached the USA. This year's two major hurricanes, Dean and
Felix, blasted the Caribbean, Mexico and Central America.

Tropical Storm Noel this week also ravaged the Caribbean and triggered a storm
watch Wednesday in southeastern Florida. The hurricane center says Noel is not
expected to touch Florida, but the storm indirectly affected its Atlantic coast.

Forecasters had predicted an above-average year in 2007, with up to 10
hurricanes, five of them major.

"That's how nature works. These things happen," says hurricane expert William
Gray, whose prediction of 17 named storms and nine hurricanes was off.

Contributing: Doyle Rice

*Tropical Storm Noel lashes Caribbean, 6A

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 706 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            April 10, 2008 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

'Very active' hurricane season forecast for Atlantic

BYLINE: Rick Neale

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 349 words


A team of leading hurricane forecasters added two storms Wednesday to an earlier
prediction and warned that the 2008 Atlantic hurricane season will be "very
active."

The latest forecast from the Colorado State University Tropical Meteorology
Project calls for 15 named tropical storms and hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean,
the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico. The Atlantic hurricane season lasts from
June 1 until Nov. 30.

"To put it in perspective, a typical season has 10 named storms, six hurricanes
and two major hurricanes," said Phil Klotzbach, who heads up the Colorado State
team with William Gray. Gray's team has been issuing forecasts since 1984.

Colorado State's forecast is watched closely each year by emergency managers,
insurance providers and coastal residents. The other top hurricane forecast,
from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, will be released
in May.

Of the 15 potential storms, eight are expected to be hurricanes, of which four
are likely to be major hurricanes with wind speeds of 111 mph or greater,
according to the forecast. Hurricane Katrina had winds of about 127 mph when it
made landfall  Aug. 29, 2005.

A storm receives a name when its wind speed reaches 39 mph.

In both 2006 and 2007, the Colorado State researchers predicted 17 named storms,
nine hurricanes and five major hurricanes would form. The actual 2006 tallies
were nine named storms, five hurricanes and two major hurricanes. The 2007
counts: 14 named storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

In December, the CSU team had predicted a "somewhat above-average" season. The
forecasters now believe above-normal sea-surface temperatures in the  Atlantic
will seed more hurricanes. "Warmer water provides more fuel for developing
storms," Klotzbach said.

The researchers will release an updated forecast on June 3.

Gray said the Atlantic is in the midst of a natural active hurricane cycle that
will likely last 15 to 20 more years. "So we don't attribute this to anything
humans are doing,"  he said.

Neale reports for Florida Today in Melbourne, Fla. Contributing: Doyle Rice.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 707 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            April 8, 2009 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Fewer hurricanes forecast for '09;
Atlantic could get 12 storms

BYLINE: Doyle Rice and Oren Dorell

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 344 words


There will be fewer Atlantic hurricanes this season than in 2008, and fewer even
than predicted only last December, according to a forecast released Tuesday.

Colorado State University's hurricane forecast team's latest prediction calls
for 12 named storms, including six hurricanes. Of those six, two are expected to
be major hurricanes with maximum wind speeds of 111 mph or greater. The first of
the storms in the Atlantic, which are named in alphabetical order, will be Ana.

In 2008, there were 16 named storms including eight hurricanes, five of them
major.

Colorado State's December forecast predicted 14 named storms for this year. Yet
even the revised forecast indicates a slightly-above-average season. Since 1950,
a typical Atlantic hurricane season has had 10 named storms, six of them
hurricanes and two of those major hurricanes.

The team will issue another update on June 2. Others will be released as the
hurricane season, which runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, progresses.

"Based on our latest forecast, the probability of a major hurricane making
landfall along the U.S. coastline is 54%, compared with the last-century average
of 52%," said lead forecaster Phil Klotzbach of the Colorado State team.

The prediction was good news to Mary Jo Naschke, spokeswoman for Galveston,
Texas, a city of 57,000 that was devastated by Hurricane Ike on Sept. 13.

"Optimism is epidemic here because we don't have any other choice," Naschke
said.

The recovery work and rebuilding that is underway, however, won't slow
downbecause of the more optimistic prediction.

"We are feverishly working to get all our repairs done before hurricane season,"
she said.

The team began its seasonal forecasts in 1984. They are used by insurance
companies, emergency managers and the news media to prepare Americans for the
season's likely hurricane threat.

In a USA TODAY analysis of the team's April forecasts since 2000, CSU has
under-forecast the number of named tropical storms and hurricanes four times,
over-forecast the number twice, and been almost right (within two storms) three
times.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Julie Snider, USA TODAY, Source: Colorado State
University's Tropical Meterology Project (Line graph)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 708 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             April 8, 2010 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

This hurricane season predicted to be busy;
Atlantic may see 15 storms

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 367 words


The Atlantic basin is facing a busier-than-usual hurricane season, in part
because of record-warm water in the ocean, according to the latest hurricane
forecast.

Colorado State University's forecast, released Wednesday, calls for 15 named
tropical storms this year in the Atlantic basin, which includes the Caribbean
Sea and the Gulf of Mexico. The team says eight will become hurricanes, with
sustained winds reaching at least 74 mph. Four are predicted to be major
hurricanes -- Categories 3, 4 or 5 -- with maximum wind speeds of 111 mph or
greater.

The average Atlantic hurricane season, going back to 1950, has 10 named storms
-- six of them hurricanes, and two of those major.

"The probability of a major hurricane making landfall along the U.S. coastline
is 69%, compared with the last-century average of 52%," says William Gray, a
member of Colorado State's Tropical Meteorology Project.

At the end of March, the part of the Atlantic Ocean where hurricanes form was
the warmest it has ever been for this time of year, says Phil Klotzbach, the
team's lead forecaster. "The average water temperature is about 78 degrees," he
says. Hurricanes need water temperatures of about 80 degrees to form.

Forecasters say the unusually warm water, coupled with the diminishing El Nioo
in the Pacific, will lead to an active season. El Nioo produces strong winds at
upper levels of the atmosphere that tear developing hurricanes apart, which is
what caused the quiet season last year.

Insurance companies, emergency managers and the news media use the forecasts
from Colorado State to prepare Americans for the season's likely hurricane
threat.

Since 2000, the team has underforecast the number of named tropical storms and
hurricanes four times, overforecast three times, and been almost right -- within
two storms -- three times, a USA TODAY analysis shows. In 2009, the team
predicted 12 named storms and six hurricanes. Nine named storms actually formed,
including three hurricanes.

Last month, the private forecasting firm AccuWeather predicted 16 to 18 tropical
storms and hurricanes would form, and seven would hit U.S. shores.

Hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30. The first named storm will be
Alex.

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Julie Snider, USA TODAY, Source: Colorado State Univ.
(Bar graph)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 709 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             June 2, 2010 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Undersea oil pipelines vulnerable to hurricanes

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 532 words


As the 2010 hurricane season got underway Tuesday, a new report said underwater
oil pipelines in the Gulf of Mexico are extremely vulnerable to strong currents
and waves from the hurricanes that roar by above.

The findings, based on data obtained during Hurricane Ivan's savage tear across
the Gulf in 2004, will appear in an upcoming edition of Geophysical Research
Letters, a journal of the American Geophysical Union.

The study found that the 31,000 miles of pipelines along the seafloor of the
Gulf could crack or rupture unless they are buried or their supporting
foundations are built to withstand hurricane-induced currents. "Major oil leaks
from damaged pipelines could have irreversible impacts on the ocean
environment," the authors wrote.

Researchers got a unique look at what a hurricane can do underwater during Ivan,
a Category 4 hurricane with wind speeds of more than 130 mph in the Gulf. Ivan
passed over a network of sensors on the ocean floor.

"This is the first time that anyone measured hurricane-induced stresses on the
Gulf bottom," says a study author, Bill Teague of the Naval Research Laboratory
in Mississippi.

The study's calculations are the first to show that hurricanes propel underwater
currents with enough force to dig up the seabed as far as almost 300 feet below
the surface, potentially creating underwater mudslides and damaging pipes and
other equipment that rest on the bottom.

The research suggests hurricanes considerably weaker than Ivan could tear up the
seafloor.

Ivan resulted in approximately 168 pipeline damage reports, but a minimal amount
of oil was spilled, says a recent report commissioned by the Minerals Management
Service (MMS).

The study is not directly related to the BP oil spill fouling the Gulf of
Mexico. "Our paper was submitted prior to the oil spill and coincidentally was
accepted at about the time of the platform collapse," Teague says.

The 2010 hurricane season is expected to be freakishly active, according to the
federal National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. As many as 14
hurricanes are possible in the Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea or Gulf of Mexico.
A typical season sees about six hurricanes.

Hurricane damage to pipelines is not an unusual event.

There have been more than 1,000 reports of damage to Gulf oil pipelines over the
past two decades, according to the MMS report.

Damage was reported from Hurricane Andrew in 1992, Hurricane Lili in 2002, Ivan
in 2004 and from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005.

The most oil was spilled into the Gulf after Katrina and Rita. "As a result of
both storms, 124 spills were reported with a total volume of roughly 17,700
barrels of total petroleum products," the report says.

"Localized failures at pipeline crossings and excessive movements in shallow
water depths suggest that more hurricane-resistant design considerations might
be needed," according to the MMS report.

The researchers were surprised by how long the destructive currents persisted
after Hurricane Ivan passed by.

"The stress on the seafloor lasted nearly a week," says Hemantha Wijesekera,
lead author of the study, from the Naval Research Laboratory. "It doesn't go
away, even after the hurricane passes."

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, USA TODAY, Source: NOAA, BP, Coast Guard and Transocean
(Map)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 710 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              May 24, 2013 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricane season could be hopping;
Government's forecasters expect as many as 11

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, @USATODAYWeather, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 422 words


Get ready for another busy year for hurricanes: The federal government predicts
an above-average  season in the Atlantic this year, with seven to 11 hurricanes
expected.

A typical season, based on the years 1981-2010, brings  six hurricanes.

The Atlantic season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30. This forecast, out Thursday
from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), covers any
storms that form in the Atlantic Ocean, the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of
Mexico.

Overall, NOAA predicts that 13-20 named tropical storms are likely. Tropical
storms have top wind speeds of 39 mph or higher. Once a storm's winds reach 74
mph, it becomes a hurricane.

Of those seven to 11 hurricanes, three to six should be "major" hurricanes,
meaning  wind speeds of 111 mph or higher and ratings of  Category 3, 4 or 5 on
the Saffir-Simpson Scale of Hurricane Intensity.

NOAA chief Kathryn Sullivan says three climate factors that strongly control
Atlantic hurricane activity are expected to come together to produce an active
or extremely active 2013 hurricane season. These are:

A continuation of the long-term atmospheric climate pattern, which includes a
strong West African monsoon that is responsible for an  era of high activity for
Atlantic hurricanes that began in 1995.  Such an era tends to last 25 to 40
years, so there could be many more years of high activity ahead.

Warmer-than-average water temperatures in the tropical Atlantic Ocean and
Caribbean Sea.

El Niño -- unusually warm water in the tropical Pacific Ocean -- is not expected
to develop and suppress hurricane formation.

"This year, oceanic and atmospheric conditions in the Atlantic basin are
expected to produce more and stronger hurricanes," says Gerry Bell, lead
seasonal hurricane forecaster at NOAA's Climate Prediction Center.

Last month, Colorado State University meteorologists forecast  18 tropical
storms, of which nine would be hurricanes. Colorado State University
meteorologist William Gray was the first  to make seasonal hurricane forecasts
in the 1980s.

Since 2000, NOAA's tropical storm and hurricane forecasts have been more right
than wrong, but not by much: NOAA's prediction has been accurate in seven of the
past 13 years, according to a USA TODAY analysis.

NOAA's prediction was too low in five years and too high in one year: 2006. Ten
of the 13 years have seen above-average activity for tropical storms and
hurricanes.

The first Atlantic storm will be Andrea, followed by Barry, Chantal, Dorian and
Erin, according to the National Hurricane Center.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, Julie Snider, USA TODAY (Bar graph)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 711 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             May 15, 2014 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Happy to do without hurricanes

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 348 words


This could be the year that Florida's luck runs out. Or not.

As the June 1 start of the Atlantic hurricane season looms, the state is
enjoying a record streak for a lack of hurricanes: It's been nine years since a
hurricane hit Florida, historically the most hurricane-prone state in the
nation.

The streak began Oct. 24, 2005, after Category 3 Hurricane Wilma slammed into
southwest Florida with 120 mph winds. That year is the last time a major
hurricane -- winds of at least 111 mph -- hit the USA. (Sandy in 2012 was a huge
storm but had fallen from hurricane strength by the time it hit shore.)

Florida's nine-year hurricane-free streak is notable for a state that sticks out
into the hurricane zone like a sore thumb: Since 1851, 114 hurricanes have hit
Florida, according to data from the Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological
Laboratory. This is 39% of the total number of U.S. hurricane strikes.

Colorado State University meteorologist and hurricane expert Phil Klotzbach and
his team at Colorado State University, which includes William Gray, the dean of
hurricane forecasting, predict a below-average season: Only three hurricanes are
forecast to form in the Atlantic.

AccuWeather's forecast, released Wednesday, also predicts a below-average
season: five hurricanes. Forecasters from the Climate Prediction Center will
issue their forecast May 22.

A season with few hurricanes doesn't mean that the ones that do form will be
weak.

In 1992, only four hurricanes formed, but one of them was monstrous Hurricane
Andrew, which killed dozens and caused $27 billion in damage as it battered
south Florida.

"This is the longest period on record with no major hurricane landfalls since
1878, when reliable landfall records began," said Klotzbach.

One explanation for the hiatus in major hurricanes: "Luck, and it will run out,"
says Dennis Feltgen, a spokesman for the National Hurricane Center in Miami.
"Luck has certainly played a role," Klotzbach says.

"These remarkable streaks must end sometime," says Roger Pielke Jr., a professor
of environmental studies at the University of Colorado.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo J. PAT CARTER, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2014 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 712 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              April 6, 2018 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

It's going to be another busy, above average hurricane season;
Get ready. Colorado State predicts 7 biggies in 2018

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 563 words


After a nightmarish 2017 hurricane season featuring monsters such as Harvey,
Irma and Maria, many in the U.S. are hoping for a quieter year. A top
forecasting group says that won't be the case.

Meteorologist Phil Klotzbach and other experts from Colorado State University --
regarded as the nation's top seasonal hurricane forecasters -- predict 14 named
tropical storms, of which seven will become hurricanes. Both numbers are above
the average of 12 and six, respectively.

A tropical storm becomes a hurricane when its wind speed reaches 74 mph.

Of the seven predicted hurricanes, three are expected to spin into major
hurricanes -- category 3, 4 or 5 -- with sustained wind speeds of 111 mph or
greater. The group said there's a slightly above-average chance for major
hurricanes to make landfall along the U.S. coastline. Klotzbach put the chance
of a major hurricane strike at 63%.

The Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, though storms
sometimes form outside those dates.

Colorado State's 2017 prediction as low: The team predicted 11 tropical storms
would form, of which 4 would become hurricanes. In all, 17 tropical storms
developed;  10 strengthened to hurricanes.

One of the major determining factors in hurricane forecasting is whether the
U.S. is in an El Niño or La Niña climate pattern,  Klotzbach said.

El Niño is a natural warming of tropical Pacific Ocean water, which tends to
suppress the development of Atlantic hurricanes. Its opposite, La Niña, marked
by cooler ocean water, tends to increase hurricanes in the Atlantic.

Klotzbach said we're now in a weak La Niña event, which appears likely to
diminish over the next several months. A significant El Niño is not anticipated
for the summer or fall, he added.

The other big question mark in this season's predictions are how warm
sea-surface temperatures will be in the tropical and far North Atlantic Ocean
during the peak of the Atlantic hurricane season, according to the forecast.

Hurricanes need the fuel of warm ocean water to develop and strengthen.

Insurance companies, emergency managers and the media use the forecasts to
prepare Americans for the year's hurricane threat. The team's annual predictions
provide a best estimate of activity during the upcoming season, not an exact
measure.

The university, under the direction of meteorologist William Gray, was the first
group to predict seasonal hurricane activity in the mid-'80s. Gray died in 2016.

This is the team's 35th forecast. It covers the Atlantic basin, which includes
the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico.

AccuWeather released its hurricane forecast for the upcoming season earlier this
week, predicting 12-15 named storms would form, of which six to eight will be
hurricanes. The firm said three to four are likely to hit the U.S.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will issue its forecast in
May.

The first named storm of the Atlantic hurricane season will be Alberto, followed
by Beryl, Chris, Debby and Ernesto, the National Hurricane Center said.

FOR FULL TEXT OF GRAPHIC/MAP, PLEASE SEE ONLINE OR PRINT VERSIONS OF THIS STORY

Hurricane season predicted to be above normal

The 2018 Atlantic hurricane season is expected to have 14 named storms,

of which seven will be hurricanes. Of those hurricanes, three will be major

(category 3,4 or 5). A typical season sees six hurricanes.

SOURCE Colorado State University

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphic, Doyle Rice and Frank Pompa/USA TODAY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2018 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 713 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Greeley Tribune (Colorado)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           September 2, 2006 Saturday

CSU experts downgrade fall hurricane forecast

BYLINE: Bill Jackson, Greeley Tribune, Colo.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 391 words


Sep. 2--FORT COLLINS -- The hurricane forecast team at Colorado State University
continues to downgrade its 2006 forecast for the Atlantic basin based on
changing climate signals and below-average activity in the first third of the
season.

The forecasting team of Philip Klotzbach and William Gray released a new report
that forecasts a total of 13 named storms to form in the Atlantic basin this
season. Of these, five are predicted to become hurricanes and two are
anticipated to evolve into intense hurricanes -- category 3, 4 or 5 -- with
sustained winds of 111 mph or greater.

The new forecast is down from the team's August prediction of 15 named storms,
seven hurricanes and three intense hurricanes.

The long-term average is 9.6 named storms, 5.9 hurricanes and 2.3 intense
hurricanes per year.

"Current conditions in the Atlantic indicate that we will now see a slightly
below-average hurricane season with far less activity than was experienced in
each of the last two years," Klotzbach said.

These changes include drier tropical Atlantic mid-level moisture fields, high
levels of West African dust over the Atlantic and a warmer eastern equatorial
Pacific indicating a potential El Nino event this fall.

June and July experienced average amounts of tropical cyclone activity with two
named storms forming -- Alberto and Beryl. Unlike 2005 when two major
hurricanes, Dennis and Emily, developed and intensified in the tropical Atlantic
and Caribbean, no hurricane activity occurred in the deep tropics during June
and July 2006.

August 2006 had about average named-storm activity, but the amount of intense
activity was well below average. Only one hurricane, Ernesto, formed during
August, and it lasted less than one day due to interaction with land.

On average, about six hurricane days occur during August.

The Colorado State hurricane team's monthly predictions through October predict
five named storms in September with two of them becoming major hurricanes, while
October is expected to have two named storms but no major hurricanes.

Copyright (c) 2006, Greeley Tribune, Colo. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune
Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call
800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The
Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20060902-GY-0902-CSU-experts-downgrade-fall-hurricane-forecast

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GY


                         Copyright 2006 Greeley Tribune


                          FOCUS - 714 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 6, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Digging Out From One Storm, Hit Hard by Another

BYLINE: By JENNIFER 8. LEE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; HURRICANE FRANCES: THE BULL'S-EYE;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: LAKE WALES, Fla., Sept. 5


The lights went out about 2 a.m. Sunday for the Patel family here, just as they
did 23 days earlier.

Through the night the family listened to the rain dripping into the 20 buckets
they had set out in the living room. The tarps that covered the missing 25-foot
section of their roof could not keep out the rain. After Hurricane Charley,
Harry Patel had called an insurance adjuster to come take a look at their family
home and business, the London Inn, but decided against starting work on anything
more permanent.

''What's the point of making repairs now and having it blown away?'' Mr. Patel
said as he awaited Hurricane Frances.

Lake Wales had not experienced a major hurricane since Donna in 1960. But if the
paths of the eyes of Hurricanes Charley and Frances are drawn across a map of
Florida -- one slicing to the northeast toward the Atlantic, the other northwest
toward the Gulf of Mexico -- this city of 12,000, nestled among squat orange
groves and clear lakes, is located more or less at the intersection.

''You see that cross?'' asked Jackie Patel, the mother, drawing an ''X'' in the
air with her fingers. ''We are at the center of that cross.''

A bull's-eye now hit twice. In the days since Hurricane Charley, the water had
been made safe to drink again, the power was back on, the schools were open, the
supermarkets sold cold food, and you could buy gas at the pump rather than by
the bucket. Then came Hurricane Frances.

''We were just getting back to normal,'' said Helen McLeod, 68, a resident of
Parakeet Park, a mobile home park for retirees that is again without electricity
or telephone service. The residents now operate a generator, but only enough to
run the television for hurricane updates and a communal refrigerator for food
salvaged from their various homes. They play cards, cook and eat together in the
park's recreation room.

Central Florida was supposed to be cheaper and safer than the coastal areas,
Southern sunshine at a fraction of the risk and the price. ''When I moved here
it was because they didn't have hurricanes,'' Ms. McLeod said. ''It made us feel
secure.''

Hurricane Charley had damaged the back of the roof of Ms. McLeod's mobile home.
Hurricane Frances, with winds moving in the opposite direction, damaged the
front. ''Both did damage on either side,'' she said.

As other residents returned home Sunday night to assess the damage, they were
more relieved than not, given their experience three weeks ago. There were
additional leaks, flapping blue roof tarps that had been blown off, and some
additional damage to already shaky structures. But there was not the same level
of torn aluminum and wood.

Emotionally, however, this hurricane experience had been more stressful. ''This
one is more depressing because of the time spent waiting,'' said Marilyn Moore,
68, also a resident of Parakeet Park. ''The other one was quick and fast.''

While Hurricane Charley blew through Lake Wales in a matter of about two hours
in the evening, by Sunday evening many residents had been hunkered down almost
48 hours at shelters to wait out Hurricane Frances.

But the Parakeet Park residents took the wait in good spirits, playing cards
throughout the night. They also took bets to see which way a precariously
situated palm tree that was moved and replanted after the first hurricane would
fall. They painted their initials in a circle around the palm tree to stake
their positions.

The tree, they were happy to learn, stayed upright throughout the storm.

City officials wanted to move forward with recovery from Hurricane Charley,
which had been stalled a few weeks. But only a third of the debris had been
picked up before the dump trucks were pulled out to wait out Hurricane Frances,
and almost none of the roofs had been fixed.

On Wednesday, the Federal Emergency Management Agency shut down its operation at
the Eagle Ridge Mall, where workers had been distributing everything from peanut
butter sandwiches to $5,000 checks. ''You know you are in trouble when FEMA
leaves,'' said the fire chief, Tom Tonker. ''They said they would be back next
week.''

Others wanted the disruption to be minimal. ''I want to go back to school,''
said Rickin Patel, who was practicing his saxophone under a dripping roof as the
waning gusts of Hurricane Frances blew by outside. His father said he now
planned to repair the roof himself.

But local officials are also worried about whether the relief efforts can be as
robust for the second time in three weeks.

''Hundreds of truckloads of food, water, ice and baby supplies were brought in
two weeks ago for Charley,'' said Randy Wilkinson, a Polk County commissioner.
''We already stressed the supply line across the country. They have been very
generous in getting supplies to us. We don't know how much we have exhausted the
surplus.''

But hurricane season has 86 days to go, and the prospect of even more hurricanes
has left the residents on edge. Yet another storm, Ivan, reached hurricane
strength on Sunday in the central Atlantic.

''If Ivan hits, I'm leaving the state of Florida,'' said Pat Thomas, 56, a Lake
Wales resident who spent the night at a shelter with her husband and grandson.

''I had to watch my parents lose their home,'' Ms. Thomas said. ''I've watched
my father fall apart as he lost his home.'' Ms. Thomas, whose parents also live
in Lake Wales, rented a 40-foot trailer to store the belongings from her
parents' damaged home and sent her parents across the state border to Macon, Ga.

When she returned home, she was in better spirits when she found both her home
and the trailer with her parents' belongings intact. ''We're grateful that the
good Lord watched over us twice, and that he will do it again,'' she said.

Ms. Moore, of Parakeet Park, said she did not want to think about another
hurricane gathering strength. ''They should have waited until tomorrow to tell
us about Hurricane Ivan,'' she said. ''Today is not the day. This one is not
even out before they tell us about the other one. No mercy.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart/Map: ''Crossing Paths''The path of Hurricane Frances crossed some
of the areas that were already heavily damaged by Hurricane Charley just three
weeks ago. Darker areas indicate the greatest damage from the earlier storm.Map
of Florida highlights the following:Extent of hurricane-force winds as of 11
p.m. SundayDIRECTION OF HURRICANE FRANCESDIRECTION OF HURRICANE CHARLEYNumber of
applicants for federal assistance (to individuals) after Hurricane Charley, per
square mile(Source by Federal Emergency Management Agency)(pg. A15)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 715 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 6, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Back-to-Back Punch of Two Hurricanes Is Expected to Exact a $40 Billion Toll

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; HURRICANE FRANCES: THE DAMAGE; Pg.
15

LENGTH: 1230 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 5


As Hurricane Frances lumbered across Florida on Sunday, economic analysts
estimated the costs of the damage inflicted by the sprawling storm and Hurricane
Charley three weeks ago could run to $40 billion.

That would be a greater economic blow to Florida than any hurricane disaster the
state has previously endured.

''It's a one-two punch,'' said J. Antonio Villamil, the chairman of Gov. Jeb
Bush's economic council. ''There is no question, this will have a significant
impact on the state.''

Damage from Hurricane Frances will accentuate an economic slowdown begun by the
earlier storm, particularly hurting the state's two main businesses, tourism and
farming. But Mr. Villamil said federal assistance and insurance money, already
flowing since Hurricane Charley, would be stepped up because of the second
storm, and he forecast a return to strong growth for Florida by the end of the
year.

''We'll stagger a bit, but then we'll be back,'' he said.

In an election year in a pivotal state in which the governor is a brother of the
president, independent economists expect especially strong economic support to
flow from Washington.

Mr. Villamil said he also expected extra federal help for the state. But, as he
sees it, that will be mainly because of its closer coordination with Washington
since Hurricane Andrew hit the state in 1992.

With the onset of Hurricane Frances, President Bush declared all of Florida a
disaster area, immediately expanding opportunities for federal assistance to the
state. In response to Hurricane Charley, the president designated 21 of the
state's 67 counties as eligible for federal disaster assistance.

Almost immediately after the first hurricane, the Bush administration announced
it was sending Florida $50 million to assist those who lost jobs because of the
storm. The Department of Agriculture quickly estimated losses of at least $150
million for Florida's citrus crop, and state officials said they expected
federal farm assistance to cover most of that loss.

Until Hurricanes Frances and Charley, Hurricane Andrew was the state's worst
hurricane disaster, causing $35 billion in damage in today's dollars.

Sunday afternoon, Air Worldwide, a Boston company that assesses disaster damage
for the insurance industry, estimated losses from Hurricane Frances could cost
about $20 billion. As Hurricane Charley hit in August, the company estimated the
storm would inflict similar losses.

''Combined, the losses from these two storms are likely to be bigger than from
Andrew,'' said Karen Clark, the chief executive of Air Worldwide. ''This is more
than the state has ever had to deal with at any one time.''

Ms. Clark said that while Hurricane Charley was a more powerful storm, with
winds of 145 miles an hour as it struck Florida's Gulf Coast, Hurricane Frances
would probably be just as damaging even with wind speeds of only about 105
m.p.h.

The reason, she said, was that the hurricane-force winds this weekend stretched
across a 170-mile-wide band, making it more than three times larger than
Hurricane Charley. Equally significant, she said, Hurricane Frances was crawling
across the state at an average speed of perhaps 7 miles an hour, grinding away
at property for hours. By contrast, Hurricane Charley zipped along at an average
of 25 m.p.h.

''You won't see any areas like Punta Gorda and Port Charlotte with complete
devastation because the winds of Frances were weaker,'' she said. ''But Frances
is more spread out and pounding away much longer.''

Of the total estimated losses of up to $20 billion, Ms. Clark estimated that $5
billion to $10 billion would be covered by insurance. Other analysts are
estimating losses covered by insurance as low as $2 billion and as high as $10
billion.

Industry estimates put the losses covered by insurance in Hurricane Charley
around $7 billion.

Robert P. Hartwig, the chief economist for the Insurance Information Institute,
a trade group in New York, said Hurricane Frances ''probably caused more overall
damage'' than Hurricane Charley.

Mr. Hartwig said the evacuation of more than several million people from
Florida's east coast would add considerably to the costs of the storm,
particularly to tourism.

''From Miami to Jacksonville you had hotels empty, restaurants empty,'' he said.
''This was over an extended period of time because the storm moved so slowly.
And it was over a holiday weekend. The hurricane is going to have a very
substantial economic impact on those coastal areas.''

In Hurricane Andrew in 1992, insurance covered $15.5 billion of the losses,
which at the time were estimated at $25 billion. Half a dozen small insurance
companies collapsed then, and it took years for some of the insurance giants to
recover.

Since Hurricane Andrew, insurance coverage for hurricanes has been shrinking,
shifting more of the burden to home owners and business people. As one measure,
the insurance companies put into effect higher deductibles for hurricane damage.
In place of the standard $500 deductible, the hurricane deductible becomes a
percentage of the value of a property. With a widely used 2 percent deductible,
the owner of a $100,000 home pays the first $2,000 in losses rather than $500.

In areas the insurers regard as most threatened by hurricanes, like Miami and
Fort Lauderdale, they refuse to sell hurricane coverage at all. In those areas,
limited coverage is offered by a state agency.

Losses to the insurance industry are further buffered by a state catastrophe
fund that pays 90 percent of the losses above $4.5 billion. For Hurricane
Charley, the fund is expected to pay about $2.25 billion; for Hurricane Frances
the payment from the fund could be several billion dollars.

Insurance analysts have said in the last few days that it was not clear whether
the losses from the two storms would lead to an increase in property insurance
premiums.

Besides the immediate costs in the disruption of tourism and the prospect that
future vacationers may be scared off -- both repeats of the consequences of
Hurricane Charley -- the latest hurricane ripped through a part of the state's
citrus groves in the vicinity of Fort Pierce that was untouched three weeks ago.
Hurricane Frances also battered sugar cane fields near West Palm Beach.

Mr. Villamil said the growth of Florida's $500 billion economy would probably
slow to about 4 percent on an annualized basis for the three months ending in
September, down from 4.8 percent in the previous three months.

He said unemployment because of the two hurricanes would probably rise to 4.8
percent or 5 percent from 4.4 percent in July. In turn, he said, ''you are going
to see some of the national numbers come in weaker.''

Mr. Villamil estimated about 10,000 Floridians lost their jobs as a result of
Hurricane Charley, and he said about the same number could be expected from the
latest hurricane. ''The increase over the short term will be about 20,000,'' he
said.

Mr. Villamil said he would recommend that the state dip into its own funds to
stimulate the economy along with the federal aid and insurance money. Florida's
economy surged after Hurricane Andrew, and Mr. Villamil said that within months
he expected a similar sharp lift.

''By the end of the year we're going to be back to a very strong growth rate in
the 5 percent to 5.5 percent range,'' he said. ''These jolts are just
temporary.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Melanie Stansfield, Jack Smith and James Archer, teenage
visitors from England, played cards in the hallway of their hotel yesterday in
Orlando to keep away from the windows during the height of Hurricane Frances.
(Photo by Erik S. Lesser for The New York Times)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 716 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 11, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Floridians Are Left Weary by Threat of Another Hurricane

BYLINE: By SARA KENNEDY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 479 words

DATELINE: FORT MEADE, Fla., Sept. 10


Battered by Hurricane Charley, deluged by Hurricane Frances and with yet another
huge hurricane, named Ivan, approaching from the south, residents of this town
of 6,000 are getting pretty weary of multiple climatic assaults.

If Hurricane Ivan turns toward Florida in the next few days after deadly head-on
blows to Grenada and Jamaica, it will be the first time in 40 years that three
hurricanes have made landfall here in a single season, according to statistics
provided by the National Hurricane Center in Miami.

''We're sick enough, we're heading out,'' said Stu Myers, 43, a maintenance
rating program specialist for the Florida Department of Transportation, who on
Friday was planning to flee with his wife and children to South Carolina in his
new Chevy truck. ''That's what we do now: hurricanes. We're calling this
'hurricane leaving.' This ain't no vacation.''

Officials have not issued evacuation notices for this part of the state; only
the 79,000 residents of Key West have been urged to flee.

Fort Meade sits close to where the paths of Hurricanes Charley and Frances
crossed, in Central Florida 58 miles east of Tampa. Piles of brown, splintered
trees and brush line every street; City Hall, its windows boarded up for
protection when Hurricane Frances came through on Sunday, still wears its pocked
armor, should yet another hurricane visit.

''The people are stressed with the multiple storms,'' said Mayor Robert Elliott,
51, whose own home was flattened by a gigantic oak from the winds of Hurricane
Charley.

''Through the first storm, everybody was pretty upbeat and thankful; they had
tree damage, maybe shingle damage, but not a loss of life,'' Mr. Elliott said.
Then, he continued, ''another one came -- that's where the psychological effect
is.''

He said more than 60 percent of Fort Meade's homes were damaged in the storms.
Adding to the burden is serious damage to the town's economy and the area has
lost 40 percent to 60 percent of its most important crop, citrus.

In addition, residents have endured prolonged power failures, flooding, mud and
clouds of mosquitoes. On top of that are the rodents, snakes and raccoons, whose
natural habitat is underwater. ''Weary is the term,'' said Susan Walker, 49, who
was working at The Strawberry Patch, a florist and gift shop along Fort Meade's
main street. ''It's been an emotional roller coaster. You wonder what else can
befall you.''

Ms. Walker said stressed friends and relatives are depressing enough, but minor
irritations are equally maddening, like her permanently dark home, which
survived the two storms but whose windows remain boarded up with plywood.

''You wake up, you're all boarded up and you don't want to get up. The inside of
the house is dark,'' she explained. ''My husband said, 'I'm going to paint you
some stars on the inside of that plywood,' so I'll know when it's nighttime.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tony Wilson at home in Babson Park, Fla., 60 miles east of
Tampa. (Photo by Michael Wilson/The Ledger)Map of Florida highlighting Fort
Meade: Residents of Fort Meade, Fla., endured Hurricanes Charley and Frances
 now they could be in the path of Hurricane Ivan.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 717 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                           September 15, 2006 Friday

Hurricane Gordon no threat

SECTION: Z_NATION

LENGTH: 471 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


Tropical Storm Helene moved quickly in the open Atlantic on Thursday, and a
powerful Hurricane Gordon held on to its Category 3 strength, but neither posed
any threat to land, forecasters said.

In Canada, where Hurricane Florence's remnants raked Newfoundland with 100-mph
wind gusts and bands of rain on Wednesday, the winds were expected to drop as
the storm moved eastward during the day, the Canadian Hurricane Center said.

Helene, the eighth named storm of the Atlantic hurricane season, had top
sustained winds near 45 mph, well below the 74 mph threshold for a hurricane. It
formed late Wednesday night and was not expected to threaten land, National
Hurricane Center forecasters said.

''We feel fairly confident that this thing could end up over the middle of the
Atlantic,'' meteorologist Hugh Cobb said.

At 5 p.m. EDT, Helene was centered 885 miles west of the southernmost Cape Verde
Islands and moving west-northwest at 16 mph, down from 20 mph earlier in the
day, forecasters said. Some strengthening was expected over the next 24 hours,
forecasters said.

While the storm's path was somewhat uncertain, forecasters expected the storm to
eventually turn northward, Cobb said.

Gordon was upgraded to a Category 3 hurricane late Wednesday when its top
sustained winds jumped to 120 mph, up from 110 mph earlier in the day,
forecasters said.

The hurricane was moving out to sea and was no threat to land, according to the
hurricane center. Gordon's clearly defined eye was centered about 600 miles east
of Bermuda and moving northeast near 12 mph. Some gradual weakening was expected
Thursday and today, forecasters said.

''Although Gordon's eye remains distinct, it has become smaller and a little
less well-defined,'' said Richard Knabb, a senior hurricane specialist.

Some waves could reach Bermuda, but the British territory should not feel
tropical storm force winds, forecasters said.

The Atlantic hurricane season began June 1 and ends Nov. 30. The National
Hurricane Center's latest forecast for the season expects between seven and nine
hurricanes, a slight reduction from earlier predictions.

Federal scientists said Wednesday that the season hasn't been as busy because
weak El Nino conditions have developed in the tropical Pacific. El Nino means
higher ocean temperatures that inhibit hurricanes by increasing crosswinds over
the Caribbean. This vertical wind shear can rip storms apart or even stop them
from forming.

But National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientists warned that the
El Nino impacts on hurricanes have been small so far.

''We are still in the peak months of the Atlantic hurricane season, and
conditions remain generally conducive for hurricane formation,'' said Gerry
Bell, the agency's lead seasonal hurricane forecaster.

------

On the Net:

National Hurricane Center: http://www.nhc.noaa.gov

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 718 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              May 23, 2010 Sunday
                             South Pinellas Edition

5 YEARS LATER, DO WE HAVE AMNESIA?

BYLINE: EMILY NIPPS, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: 2010 TAMPA BAY HURRICANE GUIDE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 624 words



HIGHLIGHT: Hurricane anxiety reigned in 2004-2005. Now, planners worry we're
complacent.


Wayne Sallade remembers his tour in the Tampa Bay area five years ago, speaking
at various community seminars. He recalls addressing the "survivor's guilt"
Tampa Bay residents seemed to feel.

The Charlotte County emergency operations director was often invited to talk
about Hurricane Charley, which ravaged his county in August 2004. Charley was
supposed to hit Tampa Bay but suddenly and unexpectedly shifted toward Punta
Gorda. Three more hurricanes also hit the state that year.

The 2005 season brought Katrina, which hit Florida before striking the
Mississippi-Louisiana line. Rita, Dennis and Wilma also hit Florida that year.

Eight hurricanes in two years: Hurricane fear was at an all-time high across the
state.

But a lot can change after five hurricane-free years. Sallade, like most Florida
emergency managers, worries that communities may suffer from hurricane amnesia.
That makes it extra tough to preach the basics of hurricane vigilance - stocking
up on food and supplies, keeping all documents safe and up to date and knowing
your evacuation plan.

"The place I worry about the most is where you are, Tampa Bay," Sallade said. "I
bet you would be hard pressed to find people there who were even alive at the
time of the last direct hurricane hit."

That was 89 years ago.

Many Tampa Bay residents seem quick to forget the power outages and fear from
near-brushes with Frances, Ivan and Jeanne in 2004, then the horror of the flood
waters unleashed when the levees in New Orleans broke after Katrina.

"We already had people complacent that next year," said Holly Wade, a
Hillsborough County Emergency Management spokeswoman. "Too many people feel
like, 'If it doesn't happen here, if it didn't happen to me, it didn't happen.'
That's what makes it very, very difficult every hurricane season."

Pinellas County Emergency Management spokesman Tom Iovino said he has heard
every myth and urban legend about why Tampa Bay has been spared from hurricanes
for so long, and he has heard every excuse for not planning and buying supplies.

This year could be especially bad because of the economy and weariness from
other disasters, like the oil spill. But like other emergency management
officials around the state, Iovino is constantly creating ways to spread
awareness of hurricane season. He does it through meetings with community
centers and through schoolchildren, whom he hopes go home to ask their parents
if they're prepared.

Wade said Hillsborough County plans to use Facebook, Twitter and Nixle - a new
social networking site for government organizations to communicate - to reach
out to the public this year.

County management directors are constantly sharing ideas on how to get their
communities to wake up, she said.

"Of the 67 counties in Florida, I can promise you all 67 are having that
conversation right now," Wade said. "Inland counties especially, because they
feel protected, though Polk County proved that wasn't the case in 2004.'' Three
hurricanes struck Polk that year.

Awareness will likely be an ongoing message that officials hope reach Floridians
before a hurricane hits their community.

Disaster experts and emergency officials at this year's National Hurricane
Conference in Orlando spent hours discussing how to make hurricane preparation a
social norm, much like buckling seat belts or wearing sunscreen.

Could they create a fun slogan or campaign? Should they change the language they
use?

They kept coming back to the first hurdle: how to get people to pay attention at
all.

Emily Nipps can be reached at nipps@sptimes.com or (727) 893-8452.

* * *

Prepare for hurricane season:
tampabay.com/specials/2010/reports/hurricane-guide/

In the event of a hurricane: Visit tampabay.com for complete and ongoing
breaking news coverage.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION - JOHN CORBITT - Times PHOTO - CHRIS ZUPPA - Times:
Airplanes were flipped over by Hurricane Wilma at the North Perry Airport in
Hollywood, Fla., in October 2005.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 719 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              May 28, 2010 Friday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

STORMY 6 MONTHS AHEAD

BYLINE: EMILY NIPPS, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 632 words



HIGHLIGHT: With an "extremely active" hurricane season possible, many people are
ill-prepared.


Experts from NOAA forecast an "active to extremely active" hurricane season
Thursday, echoing what other meteorologists have been predicting for months.

Those latest numbers - 14 to 23 named storms, eight to 14 hurricanes, three to
seven major hurricanes (111 miles mph and above) - only added to officials'
worries that too many people are unprepared.

A survey of residents in hurricane-vulnerable states released Thursday at the
annual Governor's Hurricane Conference in Fort Lauderdale found that most feel
they are invulnerable and are unprepared for the hurricane season, which begins
Tuesday and runs through Nov. 30.

The National Hurricane Survival Initiative survey, conducted by Mason-Dixon
among residents from Virginia to Texas living within 30 miles of the coast,
found that 45 percent don't feel vulnerable to a hurricane and 47 percent have
no survival kit.

And 13 percent might not or would not evacuate even if ordered to leave, the
survey found.

"The safety and security of Americans in hurricane-vulnerable states must be a
top priority throughout this dangerous season, which is why I am urging all
residents to prepare in advance for hurricane season," Gov. Charlie Crist said.
"The time to prepare for hurricane season is now, and every family, business,
school and community should feel an urgency to get ready."

His words appear to be falling on deaf ears.

The survey found that 74 percent of people living in hurricane-vulnerable areas
have done nothing to strengthen their homes and 36 percent haven't even figured
out what they would do if they are threatened by a hurricane.

Florida has not been hit by a hurricane since the record-setting 2005 season,
and emergency managers across the state worry that residents have become
complacent.

Last season saw nine named storms with only three becoming hurricanes, none of
which hit the United States. Forecasters say that's largely thanks to El Nino,
an atmospheric phenomenon that causes cooler sea surface temperatures and wind
shear over the Atlantic, hindering tropical storm formation.

That's expected to end this season, experts say, because it appears El Nino
conditions are subsiding and La Nina could form by the middle of the season. La
Nina's cooler Pacific water temperatures result in lower wind shear in the
Atlantic and Caribbean, increasing the hurricane risk for the East Coast.

Colorado State University researchers Bill Gray and Phil Klotzbach said in April
that there's a 45 percent chance of a hurricane hitting the East Coast and
Florida this year. Their forecast, one of the most highly respected among
meteorologists, predicts 15 named storms, four of them developing into major
hurricanes.

Such seasonal outlooks are subject to error, though forecasters say the skill in
such prediction has improved. Last year, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, or NOAA, meteorologists predicted an average hurricane season,
with nine to 14 named storms, including four to seven hurricanes. There were
actually nine named storms and three hurricanes. NOAA forecast an accurate range
in 2007 and 2008, but overestimated the number of storms in 2006 and
underestimated the numbers in 2004 and 2005.

"They've made great improvement over the years," said Dennis Feltgen, spokesman
for NOAA's National Hurricane Center. "But we don't want people putting too much
focus on the forecasts. They mostly serve as a terrific reminder that hurricane
season is upon us."

People should prepare for each hurricane as if their area will be hit, Feltgen
said, regardless of the season outlook.

Besides, 1992 was a below-average hurricane season, with only one hurricane
hitting Florida. But it was a big one: Hurricane Andrew, which caused $25
billion in damage.

Emily Nipps can be reached at nipps@sptimes.com or (727) 893-8452.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - Getty Images: In Fort Lauderdale on Thursday, Gov. Charlie
Crist said it should be a top priority for everyone to be fully prepared for
hurricanes. PHOTO (Ran Page 3B)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 720 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            October 19, 2010 Tuesday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

BUSY STORM SEASON, BUT LITTLE DAMAGE

BYLINE: DANNY VALENTINE, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 529 words



HIGHLIGHT: We're not out of the woods yet, but the U.S. has largely escaped
hurricane damage this year.


As the 2010 hurricane season enters its final weeks, this year is poised to go
down as one of the most extraordinary in history.

For what didn't happen.

It has been one of the busiest seasons in many years, with 16 named storms, nine
hurricanes and five major hurricanes packing winds of at least 111 mph. But the
United States has been largely spared the type of catastrophic damage associated
with hurricanes because of persistent low pressure systems dropping down from
the north.

"I don't think there's ever been quite a season like this," said Jeff Masters,
the director of meteorology for weatherunderground.com.

Since 1995, the United States has been hit by one in every three hurricanes that
form in the Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea or Gulf of Mexico, Masters said.

The strongest winds to hit the nation so far this year came when Hurricane Earl
grazed North Carolina's Outer Banks. Tropical Storm Bonnie, the only named storm
to make landfall in the United States, produced 40 mph winds in South Florida.
Hermine, also a tropical storm, downed power lines and some trees in Texas after
hitting land in Mexico.

"You could say we have dodged a bullet," said Dr. Peter Ray, a meteorology
professor at Florida State University who independently studies hurricanes.

Of course, hurricane season isn't over.

With five weeks remaining, the greatest threat for development now lies in the
western Caribbean, where warm, 84-degree waters are ripe for hurricane
formation, said Daniel Brown, a senior hurricane specialist with the National
Hurricane Center in Miami.

An average of 2.3 named storms form after Oct. 20, and hurricanes that develop
in November nearly always make landfall because they form near land in the
western Caribbean, Masters said.

"Certainly if you live on the Gulf Coast of Florida you're not out of the woods
yet," he said.

But conditions are becoming less favorable for hurricane development.

Gulf waters are cooling and wind sheer is increasing because huge low-pressure
systems from the north are pushing farther south in the Atlantic, Ray said.

He predicts the United States won't be hit by a major hurricane this season.

"The likelihood of having a hurricane impacting the United States diminishes now
every day," Ray said.

Hurricane forecasters predicted this year to be above average, setting off alarm
bells across the state and triggering fears among emergency managers of
hurricane amnesia.

But forecasters could never have predicted that so many hurricanes would miss.

"[It] is a pretty good roll of the dice," Masters said.

Hurricane after hurricane, especially when most were forming off the coast of
Africa, have veered north as they churned across the Atlantic.

Brown attributes the track to persistent low-pressure systems strong enough to
knock the powerful tempests off their westerly track and push them east.

While powerful storms have formed in the Atlantic, no major hurricanes have
formed in the gulf yet.

Mike Clay, senior meteorologist for Bay News 9, said the number of storms
predicted doesn't really matter. It just takes one bad storm to make it a rough
season, he said.

"To the general public,'' he said, "the numbers don't really mean anything."

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: MAP - DANNY VALENTINE; STEVE MADDEN - Times: Hurricane Season

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 721 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           November 13, 2010 Saturday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

FIERCE STORM SEASON TOUCHES LITTLE HERE

BYLINE: DANNY VALENTINE, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 523 words



HIGHLIGHT: A year with 19 named storms winds down, and not one hurricane has
touched U.S. soil.


It was the third-busiest hurricane season in 160 years.

September and October never have produced more tropical storms.

Five storms became major hurricanes, with winds of 111 mph or more.

In a year that could have produced hundreds of deaths and billions of dollars in
damage, it appears the United States will escape one of the busiest hurricanes
seasons on record with relatively minor damage and a handful of deaths.

"The big word would be 'lucky,'" said Bay News 9 meteorologist Mike Clay.

Water temperatures are dropping, wind shear increasing and the other factors
hurricanes need to spawn and intensify are becoming less and less favorable,
portending the likely end of this season, which runs through Nov. 30.

"I think the likelihood of another hurricane is very low, and it's even lower
that it would hit the U.S.," said Peter Ray, a meteorology professor at Florida
State University who independently studies hurricanes.

This season will go down as the third-busiest season on record with 19 named
storms, trailing only 2005 (28 named storms) and 1933 (21 named storms),
according to National Hurricane Center records dating to 1851. Twelve of the 19
were hurricanes and five had winds of at least 111 mph.

But unlike other years with so many storms, this season saw only one named storm
- Tropical Storm Bonnie - make a direct impact in the United States. No
hurricanes touched U.S. soil.

"That's remarkable," said Jeff Masters, the director of meteorology for
weatherunderground.com.

Such an active but quiet season for the United States is extraordinarily rare:

- For seasons with 10 or more hurricanes, this is the first year since 1893 that
no hurricane made a direct hit on the United States.

- The 12 hurricanes this year tie 1969 for second most hurricanes in a season,
trailing only 2005, which had 15.

- This is the fifth consecutive year the United States has not been hit by a
major hurricane. The last time that happened was between 1910 and 1914. The
United States has never gone six years without a Category 3 or higher hurricane
striking the country.

- The eight named storms in September tied with 2002 for the busiest September.
The five hurricanes in October fell one short of the record set back in 1870 for
that month.

But the active stretch came as no surprise. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration predicted 14 to 20 named storms, eight to 12 hurricanes and three
to six major hurricanes.

"It turned out as advertised," said National Hurricane Center spokesman Dennis
Feltgen.

All summer, a persistent low-pressure system knocked storms off their westward
track as they chugged across the Atlantic, turning them to the east.

Storms that formed in more southerly waters were prevented from striking much of
the United States by a high-pressure system that hung over the southeastern
United States for most of the summer.

"The patterns seem to get locked in," said Clay.

The seemingly quiet summer poses challenges for next year's hurricane season,
Clay said, noting that hurricane apathy was a big issue this year.

"We say the same thing: You should prepare the same, as if it's the year you're
going to get it."

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC - DARLA CAMERON - Times

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 722 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             June 1, 2011 Wednesday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

WILL OUR LUCK HOLD THIS YEAR?

BYLINE: EMILY NIPPS, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 383 words


The 2011 hurricane season begins quietly today after six straight years without
a direct hit to Florida. Don't get too comfortable, emergency planners say, and
stay informed. Here are five things to know about this year's hurricane season,
which ends Nov. 30.

A BUSY SEASON PREDICTED ... AGAIN: All the major hurricane prediction
organizations forecast a busy season. NOAA's latest forecast predicts 12-18
named storms, 6-10 hurricanes, and 3-6 major hurricanes (111 mph or higher).
Forecasters predicted an active season last year, and it was - 19 named storms
and 12 hurricanes - but none came our way.

HURRICANE IMMUNITY: Indian blessings, iron deposits in the bay, ionic flux -
there are many theories for why no hurricane has hit Tampa Bay since 1921. Jeff
Masters of weatherunderground.com offers this: As the Earth rotates, three major
bands of wind blow in alternating directions. In the tropics, the band moves
east, and in the mid-latitudes area, the band moves west. Tampa Bay falls
between those bands and that could shift storms away from us. Or, he adds, maybe
we're just lucky.

NEUTRAL SEASON AHEAD: We're moving out of La Nina conditions, which tend to
produce busier Atlantic hurricane seasons, but not quite entering El Nino, when
wind shear hampers hurricane formation, into a neutral phase. Not good. "It's
like everything has calmed down and the ocean is pretty close to normal," said
Bay News 9 chief meteorologist Mike Clay. "Time to kick up some hurricanes."

SEA-SURFACE TEMPERATURES: Warm water feeds hurricanes, cooler water inhibits
them. The bad news for Tampa Bay: Water temperatures in the central Caribbean
Sea, where hurricanes that threaten Florida's West Coast tend to begin, are
trending warmer than normal.

BERMUDA HIGH: One of the biggest factors keeping hurricanes away from Florida
and the eastern U.S., the Bermuda high is a mass of high pressure hovering in
the Atlantic summer and autumn. It is centered near Bermuda and can extend
across the entire Atlantic. The high can steer hurricanes away from Florida,
which is what happened last year.

* * *

Are you ready? Get tips to help you prepare for hurricane season at
tampabay.com/hurricane-guide.

Have questions? Participate in a live chat with ourhurricane editor Tom
Scherberger at 11 a.m. today at tampabay.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2011 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 723 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             August 22, 2011 Monday

IN THE EYE OF THE STORM SEASON

SECTION: BAYLINK; ASK THE TIMES; Pg. 9F

LENGTH: 430 words


This seems like it's been a busy hurricane season already, but we haven't had a
hurricane yet, have we? Isn't that unusual?

You're right. This has been a busy season so far, with seven named storms
through Aug. 18, though none have reached hurricane strength.

The only years with as much or more activity at the same point in the year are
2005 (nine named storms, including four hurricanes), 1995 (seven named storms,
including three hurricanes) and 1936 (eight storms, including three hurricanes).

The lack of a hurricane so far this year makes 2011 different from those three.
We looked back through records since 1900 and discovered that no other season
has started with as many named storms but no hurricanes.

That's likely to change pretty soon. September is the month when the most
hurricanes strike, and Sept. 10 is the historical peak of the season.

And, of course, Florida is a favorite target. Of hurricanes making landfall
between 1851 and 2010, this state has been hit 113 times, 37 times by major
storms. Texas is next with 63 hurricanes, 19 of them major, and Louisiana has
been hit by 55 hurricanes, 20 of them major.

So keep those hurricane supplies handy, and watch the tropics closely for the
next two months.

* * *

Lonely letter comes and goes

For approximately a year, the Frank Stewart bridge column in your newspaper
carried the notation "(C)" after the opening lead. What did it mean? Why did it
suddenly appear with no explanation? Why did it disappear in similar fashion?

We thought we knew the answer to this, but decided to check with Frank Stewart
to confirm our suspicions, and he did.

"I think the answer to your reader's question is nothing bridge-related or
mysterious," he wrote in an e-mail. "The camera-ready copy of my columns that I
see has a copyright line: (C) Tribune Media Services Inc. at the bottom, just
below the opening lead. Apparently, only the (C) made its way into your paper
for a while."

Stewart welcomes questions and comments about his column or books via e-mail
(franks@watvc.com) or through the mail to P.O. Box 962, Fayette, AL 35555.

"Hardly a day passes that I don't get a couple of queries, and I try to respond
to everything," he wrote.

* * *

Governmental divisions: Japan

Regarding Japan, they don't use states or counties, but what is a "prefecture?"
What does that mean? And how many prefectures are there in Japan?

A prefecture is "any one of the areas into which some countries (such as Japan
and France) are divided for local government," according to a Merriam-Webster
online dictionary. There are 47 in Japan, according to the CIA.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - Associated Press: The effects of Tropical Storm Emily are felt
in the Dominican Republic earlier this month.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2011 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 724 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                             April 8, 2010 Thursday
                               FINAL - 5 EDITION

HURRICANE WARNINGS UP;
INSURERS KEEP WARY EYE ON FORECAST AS CENTER PREDICTS BUSIER YEAR

BYLINE: MATTHEW STURDEVANT msturdevant@courant.com

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 376 words


The Atlantic Ocean was quiet in 2009, but it will stir up more hurricanes than
usual this year, according to a new forecast, and that's ominous news for
property-casualty insurers in Connecticut and elsewhere.

Both The Travelers Cos. and The Hartford Financial Services Group Inc. mentioned
in their 2009 annual reports that a relatively calm hurricane season last year
helped their bottom lines.

The closely watched Colorado State University's Hurricane Forecast Team predicts
an above-average hurricane season this year in the Atlantic. Forecasters
anticipate 15 named storms; eight are expected to be hurricanes and four of
those may be major hurricanes, with winds of 111 mph or more.

The Atlantic churns up 9.6 named storms in an average year, including 5.9
hurricanes, 2.3 of which are major hurricanes.

"We expect current moderate El Nino conditions to transition to neutral
conditions by this year's hurricane season," said Phil Klotzbach, lead hurricane
forecaster at Colorado State. "The dissipating El Nino, along with the expected
anomalously warm Atlantic ocean sea surface temperatures, will lead to favorable
dynamic and thermodynamic conditions for hurricane formation and
intensification."

The Colorado center, which bases its work on 58 years of data, predicted at this
time last year that 2009 would bring 12 named storms and six hurricanes, two
major. The final count was nine named storms, with three hurricanes, two major.

The chance of a hurricane making U.S. landfall this year is 69 percent, the
center said, compared with 52 percent in an average year.

Hurricanes accounted for more dollars paid in catastrophe losses than tornadoes,
blizzards, earthquakes, floods, hail, wind and wildfires combined between 1989
and 2008, according to the Insurance Information Institute.

"We constantly monitor forecasts and other pre-hurricane season information from
multiple groups," including Colorado State, said The Hartford spokesman Thomas
Hambrick. "Our response to a particular event, however, will be driven by its
projected path and severity. ... Our primary concern is for the safety of our
customers," he said.

The chance that a hurricane will hit Connecticut this year is 3 percent to 11
percent; the average is between 2 percent and 7 percent.

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 The Hartford Courant Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 725 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                              May 28, 2010 Friday

Stormy outlook is now official

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: A; ARTICLE; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 792 words

DATELINE: FORT LAUDERDALE


FORT LAUDERDALE

HURRICANES: Season may be among busiest ever, federal scientists agree

The 2010 hurricane season could go down as one of the busiest and most
destructive ever, federal scientists warned on Thursday in a break from their
usual conservative tone.

All of the ingredients needed to turn the Atlantic into a conveyor belt of
hurricanes -- including record warm seas -- are converging, scientists with the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said. The agency's new outlook
calls for as many as 23 named storms, more than half of which could become
hurricanes.

And up to seven of the hurricanes could be classified as major, meaning Category
3 or higher, with sustained winds above 110 mph.

"The main uncertainty in our outlook is not whether it will be above normal, but
how much above normal it will be," said Gerry Bell, lead seasonal hurricane
forecaster for NOAA's Climate Prediction Center. "People need to make sure
they're prepared for this hurricane season."

Forecasters have been off the mark in predictions for above-average hurricane
seasons before. But this year's seasonal predictions are striking because they
all sound equally alarming.

NOAA issued its forecast days before the June 1 start of the six-month hurricane
season.

Federal scientists generally avoid tying landfall predictions with the seasonal
outlook, but they took another break from the norm to emphasize that in more
storms there is even more risk.

"The greater likelihood of storms brings an increased risk of a landfall. In
short, we urge everyone to be prepared," NOAA chief Jane Lubchenko said during a
news conference.

Busy hurricane years also bring an average of four named storms through the Gulf
of Mexico, Bell said, increasing chances that a tropical storm or hurricane will
interact with the catastrophic oil spill off the coast of Louisiana.

Bell said a combination of climate patterns drove NOAA's outlook, including
record-breaking temperatures in the tropical Atlantic where hurricanes form.
Atlantic seas along the main hurricane highway, between Africa and the
Caribbean, are about 4 degrees above normal for this time of year.

If that trend continues, this season could see more major hurricanes than ever
before.

While the Atlantic is heating up, the Pacific is cooling down -- more bad news.
A cooling Pacific means La Niña could form this fall, giving hurricanes an easy
ride across the Atlantic during the peak of the season, between August and
October.

La Niña is the opposite of the phenomenon called El Niño, the hotter than normal
Pacific temperatures that send more hurricane-busting wind shear across the
Atlantic. El Niño is credited with helping suppress hurricanes last year.

When the Pacific is cooler, fewer westerly winds interrupt the path of
hurricanes.

Accuweather.com last week predicted 16 to 18 named storms. Phil Klotzbach and
William Gray with the Tropical Meteorology Project at Colorado State University
predicted 15 named storms in April. Klotzbach said a new forecast, due June 2,
will fall in line with the NOAA forecast of 14 to 23 tropical storms and
hurricanes.

"We're looking at a lot of similar things," Klotzbach said. "I tend to agree
with what they're saying."

An average year brings 11 tropical storms and hurricanes. Last year's
below-average season produced nine storms, three of them hurricanes. NOAA had
forecast a 50 percent chance for an average year last May.

But this year, the agency offers an 85 percent chance for an above-average year.

The predicted busy season follows four consecutive years without significant
hurricane impacts in Florida.

The lull makes it harder for state leaders and emergency officials to rouse the
public from apathy toward the hurricane threat. Other distractions, including
the economy and the Gulf oil spill make that job even more difficult.

State leaders, hurricane forecasters and emergency responders at the conference
worried about public complacency, particularly after a public poll indicated
most coastal residents were not prepared for hurricane season.

The Mason-Dixon poll, commissioned by the National Hurricane Safety Initiative,
showed that nearly half of coastal residents from Virginia to Texas did not have
a hurricane survival kit and that more than a third did not have a hurricane
plan. Roughly half also did not view hurricanes as a threat.

"We don't need to suffer from hurricane amnesia. We need to be prepared," Gov.
Charlie Crist told reporters at the annual Governor's Hurricane Conference here.

Crist said the threat of hurricanes needs to be taken seriously this year
because of the higher chances for a strike on the U.S.

"Most likely it will hit Florida," he said, adding that the state's 1,300 miles
of coastline is a blessing and a vulnerability.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 726 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             May 17, 2012 Thursday

There's a cost with no storms, too

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: FORT LAUDERDALE


HURRICANES: After several mostly uneventful seasons, fears of complacency and
lost expertise

FORT LAUDERDALE

Six hurricane-free years have given Florida a welcome break from disaster, but
government leaders fear that the public may have become a little too
comfortable.

Hurricane Wilma in October 2005 was Florida's last. The large Category 3 storm
struck just south of Naples, packing 120-mph winds and causing $29 billion in
damage across the state's southern tip.

Wilma followed Dennis, which struck the Panhandle in July 2005, and Charley,
Frances, Ivan and Jeanne in 2004.

Now, those storms are a distant memory. Florida is approaching a new six-month
hurricane season -- it starts June 1 -- without a blow from even the weakest of
hurricanes over an unprecedented stretch.

The nation as a whole has seen a record run without a hit by a major hurricane
-- a Category 3 or higher storm. It's been more than a century since the country
saw such a lull, dating all the way back to the five-seaon run from September
1900 to September 1906.

"We've had a dearth of hurricanes," said Anne Miller, logistics chief for
Sarasota County Emergency Management and president of the Florida Emergency
Preparedness Association. "Complacency is our biggest problem, not just with our
citizens, but even within ourselves, even though we're always fighting to stay
ahead of the curve."

If attendance at the Governor's Hurricane Conference here this week is any
indication, that complacency is pervasive. This year's number, about 1,750 --
most of them emergency responders -- was lower than last year and less than half
of what it was after the busy 2004 and 2005 seasons.

Since Wilma hit, hurricane preparation has taken a back seat to job losses, the
foreclosure crisis, steep local and state budget cuts and the worst recession in
decades.

Meanwhile, emergency managers with hurricane experience have retired, residents
with hurricane experience have left and new residents with no such experience at
all have moved in.

The fewer people with personal hurricane experience, the harder it is for new
residents to understand what could potentially happen, said Bryan Koon, director
of the Florida Division of Emergency Management, who took the state's top
disaster preparedness job last year.

"We've got to have continual messaging to again make them understand hurricanes
are bad, but there's positive things you can do to lessen the impacts," Koon
said.

To make a hurricane strike more bearable, people need to have a disaster plan,
in addition to at least a three-day supply of food and water and a safe place to
store important papers, such as insurance policies. Now is the best time to get
those plans and supplies in place, before storms threaten.

But without land-falling hurricanes, it is difficult for the state to
successfully get people to prepare.

"What we really see is event-driven preparedness. That's how it goes," Koon
said.

The lack of storms also affects how much money emergency management departments
receive.

"Without hurricanes and disasters to remind people why we're here, complacency
comes and they funnel the money elsewhere," Miller said.

The budget for the state Division of Emergency Management has declined, but the
state is compensating with better coordination, Koon said. Counties help each
other respond to disasters when their own staffing levels fall short. The best
example, Koon said, is the response to the County Line fire near Jacksonville,
where several counties are working together to battle the blaze.

The state also is working better with businesses to make sure they are prepared
for disasters and have systems to help employees and customers.

"They have a captive audience there that they are reliant upon for their
business," Koon said.

Compounding the complacency this year are forecasts for fewer hurricanes this
season than in the past several years.

In response to such information, emergency managers and forecasters like to
point to Hurricane Andrew, which struck during one of the slower hurricane years
ever. It was the only major hurricane to hit Southeast Florida 20 years ago.

"I hope that we don't have a hurricane," Gov. Rick Scott said at the conference.
"But we all know the odds are not in our favor."

STORM-FREE TIMES

Longest periods since 1900 between strikes by a major hurricane (Category 3 or
higher). Months indicate when major hurricanes struck before and after each
lull:

UNITED STATES

6 years - Oct. 2005 to present

5 years - Sept. 1900 to Sept. 1906

5 years - Oct. 1909 to Aug. 1915

4 years - Aug 1999 to Aug. 2004

4 years - Oct. 1921 to Aug. 1926

3 years - Aug. 1970 to Sept. 1974

3 years - Sept. 1985 to Sept. 1989

3 years - Sept. 1975 to Sept. 1979

3 years - Oct. 1950 - Aug. 1954

Multiple 2-year periods.

FLORIDA

10 years - Sept. 1896 to Oct. 1906

10 years - Sept. 1965 to Sept. 1975

10 years - Sept. 1975 to Sept. 1985

10 years - Oct. 1950 to Sept. 1960

8 years - Oct. 1995 to Aug. 2004

7 years - July 1936 to Oct. 1944

7 years - Oct. 1909 to Sept. 1917

6 years - Sept. 1985 to Aug. 1992

6 years - Oct. 2005 to present

4 years - Sept. 1960 to Sept. 1965

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Port Charlotte braces for Hurricane Wilma in 2005. That was the last
time Florida took a hit from a hurricane. So much time has passed since then
that some experts now fear Florida may lack the expertise, and appropriate level
of readiness, to face the next one. AP FILE PHOTO / OCTOBER 2005 Craig Fugate
left his job as director of state emergency management in 2009. Bill Read is
retiring as director of the National Hurricane Center. Hurricane Wilma in
October 2005 was Florida's last. The large Category 3 storm struck just south of
Naples, packing 120-mph winds and causing $29 billion in damage across the
state's southern tip. HERALD-TRIBUNE ARCHIVE / OCTOBER 2005

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 727 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                              May 23, 2014 Friday

NOAA presents modest forecast for hurricanes

BYLINE: ZAC ANDERSON

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 807 words


After missing the mark in a big way last year, the nation's leading climate
prediction agency released a more modest forecast for the 2014 hurricane season
Thursday that calls for an average or below-average number of storms.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is predicting eight to 13
named storms, with three to six reaching hurricane strength and one to two
becoming major hurricanes, with winds above 110 mph.

An average year brings 12 named storms, including six hurricanes and three major
hurricanes.

Forecasters say water temperatures in the Atlantic Ocean are expected to be
cooler than recent years, which limits storm development, and higher wind shear
brought on by the El Nino climate pattern should help rip apart tropical systems
and prevent them from gaining strength.

Warmer water temperatures and the expectation of low wind shear led scientists
from a variety of leading hurricane prediction groups to forecast that last
year's season would be a busy one. Instead, it ended with the fewest number of
hurricanes in three decades.

Gerry Bell, NOAA's lead hurricane forecaster, said the larger climate patterns
all pointed to strong storm development last year, but they were offset by
factors that could not have been predicted. He described the season as something
of a fluke, one that does not change the long-term outlook of more active
hurricane seasons or alter the basic formula for predicting storms.

"This year I think our forecast is pretty confidant," he said.

The driving force behind the forecast is the expected El Nino formation. The
phenomenon -- which occurs every three to six years -- is characterized by a
region of warmer water in the Pacific Ocean that helps bring stronger winds
across the upper atmosphere over the Atlantic.

The last El Nino was in 2009, a below-average hurricane season. While the El
Nino pattern has not formed yet this year -- and some past predictions of one
have not panned out -- Bell said all signs point to this being the year for it.

"There's a pretty high confidence that El Nino will form," he said, adding that
the probably is roughly 75 to 80 percent.

Bell joined other climate scientists and emergency management experts in New
York City, which was devastated by Superstorm Sandy in 2012, to announce the
hurricane forecast Thursday.

An unusual storm that never reached hurricane strength, caused mostly flooding
problems and struck an area that had long gone without experiencing major damage
from a tropical cyclone, Sandy illustrated how the entire Atlantic coastline
must be prepared for storms of all types, said NOAA administrator Kathryn
Sullivan.

"No probability number high or low erases the fact that the real message is
we're starting the hurricane season," Sullivan said. "Any section of our
coastline can be hit with a tropical storm and ... one storm can wreck
tremendous havoc."

After eight years without a hurricane hitting Florida, emergency officials must
work harder to engage the public about storm dangers.

Sarasota County and the city of Sarasota are hosting a community forum next week
to offer hurricane preparation tips. The county also has taken to social media,
posting Twitter and Facebook messages with disaster planning advice.

And emergency workers continue to fine-tune their plans for a severe storm
event. A group of 75 emergency officials from Sarasota County and local cities
gathered Thursday for a hurricane drill on the sixth floor of the county
administration building.

The path of the fake storm, Hurricane Jones, was projected on a large screen
inside the command center. Another screen listed damage reports, the most urgent
highlighted in red. The task: Figure out how to coordinate relief efforts when
45 percent of the county is without electricity, 181 streets are blocked, 160
traffic lights are not working, cell phone service is out, hospitals and nursing
homes are running on generators and bridges are damaged.

Sarasota County emergency management chief Ed McCrane worked the room, checking
the progress of various response teams.

McCrane has heard it all when it comes to hurricanes. People sometimes tell him
"we're protected, the way our coastline is shaped or we have an Indian
blessing."

"Believe me I hope all those things are true," he said. "But we can't count on
that."

2014 NOAA HURRICANE SEASON PREDICTION

8 to 13 named storms

3 to 6 hurricanes

1 to 2 major hurricanes

Want more hurricane preparation info?

Sarasota County and city leaders will highlight hurricane preparation tips
during a community meeting next week. Speakers include county administrator Tom
Harmer, Sheriff Tom Knight, emergency management chief Ed McCrane, Sarasota
Police Chief Bernadette DiPino and City Manager Tom Barwin.

Where: John Chidsey Bay Front Community Center, 803 N. Tamiami Tr., Sarasota

When: Tuesday, May 27 from 6 p.m. to 8 p.m.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sarasota County Emergency Services team members keep track of incoming
information through the WEBEOC portal. The portal serves as an
information-sharing system for managers and staff members during severe storms
and other emergencies. Rob Day, left, and Ed McCrane of Sarasota County
Emergency Management operations discuss strategies during a 2014 hurricane
exercise in the county's Emergency Operations Center. The exercise Thursday
involved more than 100 county employees and representatives from supporting
agencies and municipalities participating in training.<NO>PHOTO BY STEVE DAWSON
/ SARASOTA COUNTY COMMUNICATIONS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 728 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            November 24, 2014 Monday

WHERE'D THEY GO?

BYLINE: ZAC ANDERSON

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 575 words


Florida beat the odds again, extending a hurricane-free stretch that climate
experts describe as remarkable.

It has now been nine years since a hurricane made landfall in the Sunshine
State, nearly double the previous record run without a strike.

As this hurricane season ends on Nov. 30, experts say there is no simple
explanation for this extended run of good fortune.

"Florida has been very, very lucky," said Phil Klotzbach, a research scientist
with Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project. "Hopefully, that
luck will continue."

The state has dodged catastrophe during epic hurricane years and not-so-busy
ones. There have been fewer storms to worry about lately. The 2014 season lived
up to predictions, generating an average number of hurricanes and below-average
tropical cyclone activity overall.

A typical hurricane season produces 12 named storms - but only eight formed this
year, with six becoming hurricanes. The accumulated cyclone energy - the
measurement takes into account the total number of storms, their duration and
their intensity - was 30 percent below average, Klotzbach said.

It was the second relatively quiet hurricane season in a row, leading to chatter
that a long period of above-average hurricane activity in the Atlantic Ocean may
come to a close.

Friendly winds

But Klotzbach is not so sure.

Water temperatures in the Atlantic remain unusually warm, he said, and warmer
water tends to be the dominant factor in hurricane formation.

"It's something we're looking at, but at this point I would say I don't think
so, just because of the water temperatures," he said.

Climate conditions limiting hurricane development this year included dry,
sinking air over the Atlantic and strong wind shear. Hurricanes have an easier
time forming when there is moisture in the atmosphere and calm upper-level
winds.

The unfavorable conditions for storm development are typical of an El Niño year.
The official thresholds for an El Niño climate pattern were never actually
reached, but strong winds still flowed from the Pacific to the Atlantic,
hampering cyclone formation.

Most experts predicted that would happen, a big change from last year, when
forecasters expected a busy season and the final hurricane tally was the lowest
in three decades.

"This hurricane season - after last year's forecast debacle - is much closer
than what we thought," Klotzbach said.

Nobody expected Florida would escape the path of destruction for so long,
though. Until recently, the state's longest run without a hurricane making
landfall was the five years from 1980 to 1984.

Based on historic landfall data, Florida is hit by a hurricane every other year,
on average.

There have been 61 hurricanes in the Atlantic since the last Florida landfall.
Klotzbach calculated the odds of all 61 missing the state at 1,150 to 1.

National Hurricane Center spokesman Dennis Feltgen cautioned that the state's
luck will eventually run out.

"This remarkable stretch will come to an end," he wrote. "And we have to be
prepared."

THIS SEASON'S NAMED STORMS, AND THEIR STRENGTH AT PEAK

JUNE-JULY

Arthur, Category 2 hurricane

JULY

Tropical Depression

Two

AUGUST

Bertha, Category 1 hurricane

Cristobal, Category 1 hurricane

SEPTEMBER

Dolly,

tropical storm

Edouard, Category 3 hurricane

OCTOBER

Fay, Category 1 hurricane

Gonzalo, Category 4 hurricane

Hanna, tropical storm

SOURCE: National Hurricane Center

AP File Photos

Floridians can give thanks this week for another hurricane-free year

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Tropical Storm Arthur is seen in a July 2 satellite image off Florida.
The storm -- the first of this hurricane season -- formed off Florida's Atlantic
coast and moved north parallel to it, before becoming a hurricane that grazed
North Carolina.AP / NOAA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 729 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                  Stock Watch

                       March 8, 2016 Tuesday 6:30 AM EST

Assessment of Spanish shipwrecks unveils relationship between hurricanes and
climate change

BYLINE: Betty Laseter

LENGTH: 656  words


Using records of Spanish shipwrecks, researchers have tried to know about
hurricane activity in the past and climate change. The new research focusing on
the shipwrecks in the Caribbean could shed light on the relationship between
global warming and storms.

The records of shipwrecks in the region were correlated with tree-ring records.
A decline in hurricane activity by nearly 75% in the years 1645 to 1715 was
found. The drop correlated with reduced sunspot activity and cooler temperature
on earth.

Study's lead researcher Valerie Trouet from the University of Arizona,
Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research said, "We found that in the years when many
ships wrecked in the Caribbean, the trees in Florida Keys showed the same signal
that trees show during hurricanes".

Trouet said that there is an indication that shipwreck records could be used as
proxy for hurricane activity. The researchers have looked at Spanish shipwreck
records for the region in part because Spaniards started visiting the Caribbean
earlier than any of the other colonizing nations.

The researchers looked at the past five centuries, the researchers found a 75%
drop in hurricanes between 1645 and 1715, which coincided with a climatic event
known as the Maunder Minimum. Trouet said that with cooler oceans, there are
fewer hurricanes.

Researchers have termed the study to be important as it provides a deeper
glimpse into the history of hurricanes and into the factors that affect them.
The researchers said that the link between the Maunder Minimum and a decline in
hurricane activity was critical.

Trouet said that she would like to expand her study area up the Atlantic coast
and into the Gulf of Mexico and may be in Asia as well. Trouet is of the view
that the period was one in which a lot of historical changes have taken place in
the Caribbean. It is vital to know the link between hurricane activity and
historical events.

EurekAlert News report added, "We're the first to use shipwrecks to study
hurricanes in the past," said lead author Valerie Trouet, an associate professor
in the UA Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research. "By combining shipwreck data and
tree-ring data, we are extending the Caribbean hurricane record back in time and
that improves our understanding of hurricane variability."

"Shipwrecks in the Americas: a complete guide to every major shipwreck in the
Western Hemisphere," had a detailed record of Caribbean shipwrecks. The team
also used "Shipwrecks of Florida: A comprehensive listing," by Steven D. Singer.

A report published in the CSMonitor News said, "We found that in the years when
many ships wrecked in the Caribbean, the trees in Florida Keys showed the same
signal that trees show during hurricanes," says lead author Valerie Trouet, an
associate professor in the University of Arizona Laboratory of Tree-Ring
Research, in a telephone interview with The Christian Science Monitor.

"The number of hurricanes is to a large extent dependent on the temperature of
the oceans. So, with cooler oceans, you get fewer hurricanes," Dr. Trouet tells
the Monitor. "Basically, you need ocean temperatures above 26.8/26.9 degrees
Celsius to produce hurricanes. That's why you get hurricanes in the Caribbean
and Asia, but not off the coast of England or up in Maine, because the
temperatures there simply aren't high enough."

"Records of Spanish shipwrecks combined with tree-ring records show the period
1645 to 1715 had the fewest Caribbean hurricanes since 1500, according to new
University of Arizona-led research. The study is the first to use shipwrecks as
a proxy for hurricane activity," according to a news report published by Phys.

Although global climate models indicate hurricanes will be more intense as the
climate warms, those models are not yet good at making regional predictions,
Trouet said. Learning more about how hurricanes correlated with climate for the
past 500 years may lead to better regional predictions of hurricanes.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


          Copyright 2016 Manas Informatics, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 730 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                    BBC Monitoring Latin America - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                             April 7, 2009 Tuesday

Experts predict average Caribbean hurricane season in 2009

LENGTH: 361 words


Text of report by Caribbean Media Corporation news agency website on 7 April

Colorado: Forecasters at the Colorado State University are predicting an average
2009 Atlantic hurricane season with 12 named storms and six hurricanes forming
in the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico.

The researchers, led by Phil Klotzbach, have downgraded their forecast for an
above-active season with 14 named storms citing weak La Nina conditions.
Klotzbach said two of the six hurricanes are expected to develop into major
hurricanes with maximum wind speeds of 111miles per hour or greater.

"We expect current weak La Nina conditions to transition to neutral and perhaps
weak El Nino conditions by this year's hurricane season," said team member
William Gray, who is beginning his 26th year forecasting hurricanes at Colorado
State.

"If El Nino conditions develop for this year's hurricane season, it would tend
to increase levels of vertical windshear and decrease levels of Atlantic
hurricane activity," he added.

Ana is the first named storm of theseason that runs from June 1 to November 30.
Colorado State's Tropical Meteorology Project is the US' longest-running and
most well-known forecast team. Their forecasts are used by insurance companies,
emergency managers and the media to prepare the United States and the Caribbean
region for the season's likely hurricane threat.

In 2008, the Colorado State forecasters predicted 15 named storms in the
Atlantic, of which eight would be hurricanes and half of them major.

The team came very close: The season ended with 16 named storms, of which eight
were hurricanes and five were major hurricanes.  The United States federal
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration is scheduled to release
its hurricane forecast May 21.

In March, AccuWeather, a privateforecasting company out of State College,
Pennsylvania, predicted that there would be fewer hurricanes than in 2008.
AccuWeather said 13 named storms would form and predicted that eight would be
hurricanes, with two of them being classified as major hurricanes.

Source: Caribbean Media Corporation news agency website, Bridgetown, in English
1740 gmt 7 Apr 09

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2009 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 731 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 6, 2017 Wednesday

As Historic 2017 Hurricane Season Comes to an End, Federal Support to Recovery
Continues

LENGTH: 816  words



Phoenix: Arizona Homeland Security has issued the following news release:

While Nov. 30 marks the end of a historic hurricane season, FEMA and its
partners continue to work diligently in support of disaster survivors recovering
from the devastating season.  Four hurricanes made landfall:  Harvey, Irma,
Maria and Nate (the first three were classified as major hurricanes, which
affected roughly 25.8 million people). Also during this season, nearly two dozen
large wildfires burned more than 200,000 acres of land in northern California.


Hurricanes Harvey and Irma marked the first time two Atlantic Category 4
hurricanes made landfall in the Continental United States, in the same season.
Hurricane Harvey set a new record for the most rainfall from a U.S. tropical
cyclone, with more than 50 inches of rain in some areas. The storm resulted in
catastrophic flooding in Texas and western Louisiana.  Two weeks later,
Hurricane Irma became the strongest Atlantic Ocean hurricane on record. Winds
peaked at 185 mph, and Hurricane Irma remained a hurricane for 11 days. Irma was
the longest-lived Atlantic hurricane since Ivan in 2004.  The public response to
Hurricane Irma, as the storm approached, resulted in one of the largest
sheltering missions in U.S. history.
Hurricane Maria devastated the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico soon after
Hurricane Irma struck their shores. Hurricane Maria was the first Category 4
hurricane to make landfall on the main island of Puerto Rico in 85 years, and
the resulting response became the longest sustained air mission of food and
water in FEMA history. In addition to these hurricanes, prior to the 2017 season
FEMA already had 17 Joint Field Offices working 28 presidentially-declared
disasters.
Since Harvey made landfall in Texas on Aug. 25, the President has granted 16
Major Disaster declarations and 14 Emergency Declarations, while FEMA has
authorized 25 Fire Management Assistance Grant declarations. Over a span of 25
days, FEMA and our partners deployed tens of thousands of personnel across
270,000 square miles in three different FEMA regions.
So far, more than 4.7 million disaster survivors registered for federal
assistance with FEMA - more than all who registered for hurricanes Katrina,
Rita, Wilma and Sandy combined.  To respond to the historic demand, FEMA
expanded its call center capacity by tenfold, and increased the number of home
and property damage inspectors fourfold.
"This historic hurricane season should serve as a gut check and an opportunity
for citizens, businesses, state, local, tribal and federal officials to
re-evaluate how we prepare for and respond to any disaster," said FEMA
Administrator Brock Long. "Response and recovery is dependent upon the whole
community to be successful. While we continue to support the recovery from these
storms, we must also take the opportunity to become better prepared for future
disasters."
To date, FEMA has placed more than $2 billion in disaster assistance into the
hands of disaster survivors to help them recover from these events.  As of
mid-November, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) policyholders filed
approximately 120,000 claims, resulting in payments totaling more than $6.3
billion.
"State, local, tribal, and territorial governments, along with the residents in
the impacted areas, are the true first responders," said Administrator Long.
"FEMA alone cannot deliver assistance to this vast number of survivors. We must
hit the re-set button on the culture of preparedness in our country."
Non-profit organizations provide crucial services to sustain lives in
partnership with the rest of the response and recovery infrastructure.  The
private sector also plays a significant role in disasters, as businesses work to
restore critical services and donate their time and resources - in close
coordination with emergency management personnel - to help communities rebound
in the wake of disasters.
Thousands of members of the federal workforce were deployed to Texas, Florida,
the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, including 13,892 staff from various
offices of the Department of Defense (DoD), including the military services. For
the first time, FEMA extended the Department of Homeland Security's "Surge
Capacity Force," to all federal agencies, deploying over 3,800 non-FEMA federal
employees.
FEMA search and rescue teams saved nearly 9,000 lives, in addition to those
saved or assisted by DoD, the Coast Guard, state and local partners, first
responders, and neighbors helping neighbors.
While the 2017 Hurricane Season has ended, recovering from these devastating
hurricanes will take years, and FEMA and our federal partners will continue to
support affected governments and survivors as they build back stronger.
 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 732 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 30, 2017 Thursday

Washington: As Historic 2017 Hurricane Season Comes to an End, Federal Support
to Recovery Continues

LENGTH: 798  words



Washington: Department of Homeland Security has issued the following news
release:
While Nov. 30 marks the end of a historic hurricane season, FEMA and its
partners continue to work diligently in support of disaster survivors recovering
from the devastating season.  Four hurricanes made landfall:  Harvey, Irma,
Maria and Nate (the first three were classified as major hurricanes, which
affected roughly 25.8 million people). Also during this season, nearly two dozen
large wildfires burned more than 200,000 acres of land in northern California.


Hurricanes Harvey and Irma marked the first time two Atlantic Category 4
hurricanes made landfall in the Continental United States, in the same season.
Hurricane Harvey set a new record for the most rainfall from a U.S. tropical
cyclone, with more than 50 inches of rain in some areas. The storm resulted in
catastrophic flooding in Texas and western Louisiana.  Two weeks later,
Hurricane Irma became the strongest Atlantic Ocean hurricane on record. Winds
peaked at 185 mph, and Hurricane Irma remained a hurricane for 11 days. Irma was
the longest-lived Atlantic hurricane since Ivan in 2004.  The public response to
Hurricane Irma, as the storm approached, resulted in one of the largest
sheltering missions in U.S. history.
Hurricane Maria devastated the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico soon after
Hurricane Irma struck their shores. Hurricane Maria was the first Category 4
hurricane to make landfall on the main island of Puerto Rico in 85 years, and
the resulting response became the longest sustained air mission of food and
water in FEMA history. In addition to these hurricanes, prior to the 2017 season
FEMA already had 17 Joint Field Offices working 28 presidentially-declared
disasters.
Since Harvey made landfall in Texas on Aug. 25, the President has granted 16
Major Disaster declarations and 14 Emergency Declarations, while FEMA has
authorized 25 Fire Management Assistance Grant declarations. Over a span of 25
days, FEMA and our partners deployed tens of thousands of personnel across
270,000 square miles in three different FEMA regions.
So far, more than 4.7 million disaster survivors registered for federal
assistance with FEMA - more than all who registered for hurricanes Katrina,
Rita, Wilma and Sandy combined.  To respond to the historic demand, FEMA
expanded its call center capacity by tenfold, and increased the number of home
and property damage inspectors fourfold.
"This historic hurricane season should serve as a gut check and an opportunity
for citizens, businesses, state, local, tribal and federal officials to
re-evaluate how we prepare for and respond to any disaster," said FEMA
Administrator Brock Long. "Response and recovery is dependent upon the whole
community to be successful. While we continue to support the recovery from these
storms, we must also take the opportunity to become better prepared for future
disasters."
To date, FEMA has placed more than $2 billion in disaster assistance into the
hands of disaster survivors to help them recover from these events.  As of
mid-November, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) policyholders filed
approximately 120,000 claims, resulting in payments totaling more than $6.3
billion.
"State, local, tribal, and territorial governments, along with the residents in
the impacted areas, are the true first responders," said Administrator Long.
"FEMA alone cannot deliver assistance to this vast number of survivors. We must
hit the re-set button on the culture of preparedness in our country."
Non-profit organizations provide crucial services to sustain lives in
partnership with the rest of the response and recovery infrastructure.  The
private sector also plays a significant role in disasters, as businesses work to
restore critical services and donate their time and resources - in close
coordination with emergency management personnel - to help communities rebound
in the wake of disasters.
Thousands of members of the federal workforce were deployed to Texas, Florida,
the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, including 13,892 staff from various
offices of the Department of Defense (DoD), including the military services. For
the first time, FEMA extended the Department of Homeland Security's "Surge
Capacity Force," to all federal agencies, deploying over 3,800 non-FEMA federal
employees.
FEMA search and rescue teams saved nearly 9,000 lives, in addition to those
saved or assisted by DoD, the Coast Guard, state and local partners, first
responders, and neighbors helping neighbors.
While the 2017 Hurricane Season has ended, recovering from these devastating
hurricanes will take years, and FEMA and our federal partners will continue to
support affected governments and survivors as they build back stronger.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 733 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 30, 2017 Thursday

Washington: As Historic 2017 Hurricane Season Comes to an End, Federal Support
to Recovery Continues

LENGTH: 798  words



Washington: Federal Emergency Management Agency has issued the following news
release:

While Nov. 30 marks the end of a historic hurricane season, FEMA and its
partners continue to work diligently in support of disaster survivors recovering
from the devastating season.  Four hurricanes made landfall:  Harvey, Irma,
Maria and Nate (the first three were classified as major hurricanes, which
affected roughly 25.8 million people). Also during this season, nearly two dozen
large wildfires burned more than 200,000 acres of land in northern California.


Hurricanes Harvey and Irma marked the first time two Atlantic Category 4
hurricanes made landfall in the Continental United States, in the same season.
Hurricane Harvey set a new record for the most rainfall from a U.S. tropical
cyclone, with more than 50 inches of rain in some areas. The storm resulted in
catastrophic flooding in Texas and western Louisiana.  Two weeks later,
Hurricane Irma became the strongest Atlantic Ocean hurricane on record. Winds
peaked at 185 mph, and Hurricane Irma remained a hurricane for 11 days. Irma was
the longest-lived Atlantic hurricane since Ivan in 2004.  The public response to
Hurricane Irma, as the storm approached, resulted in one of the largest
sheltering missions in U.S. history.
Hurricane Maria devastated the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico soon after
Hurricane Irma struck their shores. Hurricane Maria was the first Category 4
hurricane to make landfall on the main island of Puerto Rico in 85 years, and
the resulting response became the longest sustained air mission of food and
water in FEMA history. In addition to these hurricanes, prior to the 2017 season
FEMA already had 17 Joint Field Offices working 28 presidentially-declared
disasters.
Since Harvey made landfall in Texas on Aug. 25, the President has granted 16
Major Disaster declarations and 14 Emergency Declarations, while FEMA has
authorized 25 Fire Management Assistance Grant declarations. Over a span of 25
days, FEMA and our partners deployed tens of thousands of personnel across
270,000 square miles in three different FEMA regions.
So far, more than 4.7 million disaster survivors registered for federal
assistance with FEMA - more than all who registered for hurricanes Katrina,
Rita, Wilma and Sandy combined.  To respond to the historic demand, FEMA
expanded its call center capacity by tenfold, and increased the number of home
and property damage inspectors fourfold.
"This historic hurricane season should serve as a gut check and an opportunity
for citizens, businesses, state, local, tribal and federal officials to
re-evaluate how we prepare for and respond to any disaster," said FEMA
Administrator Brock Long. "Response and recovery is dependent upon the whole
community to be successful. While we continue to support the recovery from these
storms, we must also take the opportunity to become better prepared for future
disasters."
To date, FEMA has placed more than $2 billion in disaster assistance into the
hands of disaster survivors to help them recover from these events.  As of
mid-November, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) policyholders filed
approximately 120,000 claims, resulting in payments totaling more than $6.3
billion.
"State, local, tribal, and territorial governments, along with the residents in
the impacted areas, are the true first responders," said Administrator Long.
"FEMA alone cannot deliver assistance to this vast number of survivors. We must
hit the re-set button on the culture of preparedness in our country."
Non-profit organizations provide crucial services to sustain lives in
partnership with the rest of the response and recovery infrastructure.  The
private sector also plays a significant role in disasters, as businesses work to
restore critical services and donate their time and resources - in close
coordination with emergency management personnel - to help communities rebound
in the wake of disasters.
Thousands of members of the federal workforce were deployed to Texas, Florida,
the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, including 13,892 staff from various
offices of the Department of Defense (DoD), including the military services. For
the first time, FEMA extended the Department of Homeland Security's "Surge
Capacity Force," to all federal agencies, deploying over 3,800 non-FEMA federal
employees.
FEMA search and rescue teams saved nearly 9,000 lives, in addition to those
saved or assisted by DoD, the Coast Guard, state and local partners, first
responders, and neighbors helping neighbors.
While the 2017 Hurricane Season has ended, recovering from these devastating
hurricanes will take years, and FEMA and our federal partners will continue to
support affected governments and survivors as they build back stronger.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 734 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                          November 30, 2005 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                                  Home Edition

The worst hurricane season EVER!

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 45 words


Hurricane season 2005 officially ends today. But out in the Atlantic, Tropical
Storm Epsilon continues to churn --- one more reminder of the season of fury
that has left much of the Gulf Coast in tatters and broken the record for most
storms. More on hurricane season, A8

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 7, 2005



CORRECTION: A Nov. 30 front page chart showing the number of hurricanes and
tropical storms hitting the U.S. mainland was incorrect. The chart showed the
total number of hurricanes and tropical storms that formed each year from 1995
to 1999. The numbers from 2000 to 2005 were for hurricanes and tropical storms
that actually hit the United States. The correct chart is at left. In the same
graphic, a satellite photograph of Hurricane Katrina included the incorrect
date. The photograph was taken on Aug. 29. Also, a graphic inside the main news
section showing the path of hurricanes should have shown Hurricane Rita making
landfall between Sabine Pass, Texas, and Johnson's Bayou, La.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hurricane Katrina on Aug. 28
Graphic: JEROME THOMPSON / StaffMost storms26 named storms; previous record of
21 was set in 1933Most hurricanes13 hurricanes; old record of 12 set in 1969Most
destructiveEstimated $70 billion insured damage in U.S. tops $45 billion in 2004
Deadliest U.S. hurricane in decadesKatrina's estimated toll (1,325) was
surpassed only by 1928 hurricane in Florida (1,836) and 1900 Galveston hurricane
(8,000)Storms hitting U.S. mainlandAlthough the number of hurricanes and
tropical storms has increased, the number hitting U.S. mainland has
decreased.Line graph traces the number of huricanes and tropical storms hitting
the U.S. mainland from 1995 through 2005.Sources: Staff research; Associated
Press
Graphic: What's in store? The record 2005 hurricane season may be just a taste
of things to come. Forecasters say the roughly 40-year cycle of tropical storms
and hurricanes, in a lull since the 1960s, is on the upswing again.---Next on
the list Here is the list of hurricane and tropical storm names for 2006. But
will they be enough? The record-setting season just ending ran through all 21
names, so storm trackers had to dip into the Greek alphabet for the other five
storms. Alberto Beryl Chris Debby Ernesto Florence Gordon Helene Isaac Joyce
Kirk Leslie Michael Nadine Oscar Patty Rafael Sandy Tony Valerie
William---Awesome numbers This year saw not only the most hurricanes, but three
of the most powerful on record (fortunately, all were below their peak strength
when they made landfall): * Hurricane Katrina, fourth on the all-time list, with
a central pressure of 902 millibars. * Hurricane Rita, third on the list, with a
central pressure of 897 millibars. * Hurricane Wilma, the most powerful
hurricane ever recorded, at 882 millibars. ---Never again The list of hurricane
names rotates from year to year, but some names gain enough infamy that they are
never used again. Katrina will join the likes of Andrew, Camille, Donna and
Gilbert as a retired name.
Map: JEROME THOMPSON / StaffTRACKING THIS YEAR'S STORMSPaths of Atlantic
tropical storms and hurricanes in the 2005 season, which began June 1 and
officially ends
today.BretCindyDennisEmilyFranklinGertHarveyIreneJoseKatrinaLeeMariaNateOpheliaP
hilippeRitaStanTammyWilmaAlphaBetaGammaEpsilonNot shown: Tropical storms Vince
and Delta, which formed in the far eastern AtlanticSource: NOAA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 735 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                           September 19, 2004 Sunday

Unravelling a hurricane mystery

BYLINE: Peter Calamai, Toronto Star

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 1056 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


Despite the big blows from hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and tropical storm
Jeanne, experts say this is still likely to wind up as a run-of-the-mill season
for such storms.

What they can't say is why, since 1995, a run-of-the-mill season features more
hurricanes in total and also more major ones, compared with the 15 years before.

Scientists link this current busy hurricane cycle to natural influences like
warmer surface waters in the Atlantic Ocean and - paradoxically - better-behaved
crosswinds in the upper atmosphere.

But science does less well identifying why favourable conditions for the
formation of hurricanes recur in such regular cycles. Explanations include
disruptions to the "conveyor belt" of ocean currents, the varying strength of an
El Niño disruption of the ocean-atmosphere system in the tropical Pacific,
rainfall in the Sahel region that borders the Sahara desert and more exotic
theories like the Madden-Julian Oscillation.

The atmosphere and the oceans are complex and chaotic systems, so it's hardly
surprising that research has not yet been able to tease out the recipe and
ingredients that produce cycles of Atlantic hurricane activity.

"I don't think anybody had a really good answer on why we're seeing this number
of intense storms," says Peter Bowyer, who heads the Canadian Hurricane Centre
in Dartmouth, N.S.

His candour is echoed by Bill Gray of Colorado State University, dean of
hurricane forecasters.

"Meteorologists are brilliant at after-the-fact reconstruction of what went on,"
says Gray, whose team has been issuing Atlantic seasonal hurricane forecasts for
20 years and has scored high in accuracy for the past five years.

After working "long and hard" on why hurricanes come in cycles, Gray is
convinced the phenomenon is natural and not driven by man-made climate change.

Statistics for tropical storms in the Atlantic since 1950 seem to support a
skeptical approach to claims for any such linkage.

For instance, for the two decades between 1950 and 1969, the annual total energy
from all tropical storms in the Atlantic - that is, their intensity and duration
- averaged substantially higher than the total annual storm energy between 1970
and 1994 (as seen in the chart, above right).

Yet the levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere were much higher during the
more recent period. That's the reverse of what you'd expect if there were some
causative connection between climate change and hurricanes.

Climate-change skeptics have also been dumping on any suggestion that global
warming will cause more hurricanes, or at least more intense hurricanes.

To support their point of view, the doubters cite statistics from the U.S.
National Hurricane Center showing a supposed decline since the 1940s in the
number of Atlantic hurricanes.

A closer look, however, reveals that the numbers are only for hurricanes that
made landfall in the United States.

The skeptics don't explain why only these storms count when examining a possible
link with climate change, leaving the suspicion that this highly selective set
of statistics just happens to dovetail with their agenda.

Scientists anxious to convey the urgency of dealing with climate change are also
sometimes guilty of less than full and frank disclosure.

They point out that hotter ocean waters can feed more energy into the atmosphere
so that the winds in tropical storms - if they develop - could be more intense.
True, but not that much more intense, according to an extensive computer
simulation of what would happen in a world of doubled carbon dioxide levels.

In a study published by the Journal Of Climate in 2001, Tom Knutson of the
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory in Princeton, N.J., reported maximum wind
speeds would increase by 5 or 6 per cent for Atlantic hurricanes.

Says Chris Landsea: "It's not zero but it's pretty tiny."

A former co-worker with Gray in Colorado, Landsea is now in Miami with the
hurricane research division of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), the U.S. federal government agency that also runs the
fluid dynamics lab in Princeton.

Landsea points out that major hurricanes of categories 3, 4 and 5 form much more
readily in the Pacific than in the Atlantic. Of the 50 to 60 tropical
atmospheric waves that cross the Atlantic from Africa, usually no more than four
a year have triggered major hurricanes since 1995. The long-term average is 2.4
a year.

"You just have to have all the right conditions. It's difficult," Landsea says.

Those right conditions include water temperatures of at least 26.6 C down to a
60-metre depth. Warmer is better because more energy is transferred to the
atmosphere to drive the wind funnel of a tropical storm.

Also necessary is a deep layer of water vapour in the atmosphere itself. But
even then, a storm won't build into a hurricane if there's too much wind shear
high up in the atmosphere.

Shear occurs when the dominant winds at one level are blowing in one direction
and those in the layer above are blowing another way.

When the difference is more than 30 km/h, there's too much vertical shear for a
hurricane to hold together. A strong El Niño in the Pacific usually correlates
with fewer major hurricanes in the Atlantic and the experts speculate that's
because El Niño means more Westerlies and therefore more vertical wind shear
above the storm nursery.

Yet all this is still largely description, rather than fundamental explanation.

"I don't think we really have the capability of understanding the precise time
scales of hurricane variability," says John Gyakum, who heads McGill
University's department of atmospheric and oceanic sciences.

He and other experts point to the relatively long length of the hurricane cycles
- decades rather than years - as suggesting a prominent role for the ocean
responding at leisurely intervals.

Gyakum adds yet another complication. Late in the hurricane season, which runs
to the end of November, tropical storms in the Caribbean can actually be
triggered by troughs of cold air arriving from as far north as Canada, rather
than the customary trigger of an atmospheric wave from Africa.

In the end, the most important impact of hurricanes isn't measured in top wind
speeds or the length of the storm but in lost lives and devastation.

And that's why a better understanding of the hurricane cycle really matters.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  HENRY ROMERO reuters Hurricane Ivan moves through western Cuba on
Monday, leaving a trail of death and destruction as it followed Charley and
Frances in rampaging across the Caribbean and pounding the U.S. coast.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                  Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                          FOCUS - 736 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                            October 7, 2004 Thursday

Hurricanes wreak havoc

SECTION: PLANET; Pg. P03

LENGTH: 820 words


"There was a lady who owned a church. At night she was sleeping. The time was
11: 30 p.m. The hurricane broke a huge tree and it fell on the roof of the
church. The church was damaged and the lady died too. Many more people died
during this hurricane. But at Albion Heights Junior Middle School in Toronto,
we're giving coins and bills to fix buildings in communities."

- Aniket Verma, 9, Grade 4

"Hurricane Ivan killed many people. Many people were crushed when trees fell on
their homes. There was a girl who died because her roof fell. A 79-year-old
woman also died. My dad is worried, so we pray for my granddad that lives in
Jamaica."

- Andre Williams, 8, Grade 4

"I wonder why the hurricanes keep on hitting Florida. My heart goes out to the
people."

- Anish Kamboj, 9, Grade 4

"I feel sorry for the people who don't have homes. Actually, our whole school
felt sorry so we decided to donate a loonie or more money to those people who
got hit from the hurricanes."

- Ashley Mathews, 9, Grade 4

"When the hurricanes hit Florida, I felt sad and I hoped that my great
grandmother is alive because she had a shop and she used to send down some
clothes and stuff for us. She was so nice, I hope she didn't die. There are many
hurricanes during this season."

- Cynthia Looloo, 9, Grade 4

"Jeanne tore a fresh path of destruction. I wonder which is more dangerous, a
flood or a hurricane?"

- Dayab, 8, Grade 4

"My aunt lives in Florida. When we called and no one picked up the phone, we
were thinking that the electricity went out. So we called the next day and my
cousin picked the phone up because she loves to talk on the phone. My mom spoke
with my cousin. Then she asked, "Is everyone okay?" and my cousin said,
"Everyone is okay." She also said that the shop was ruined."

- Natasha Singh, Grade 4

"Hurricanes starts in hot water and hurricanes get power by water. Hurricanes
lose power in land. The hurricane season lasts from June to October. The eye of
the hurricane is in the middle of the hurricane. Hurricane Frances destroyed
buildings and homes and so did hurricane Ivan."

- Elizabeth Melgarejo, 9, Grade 4

"First, I thought my cousins were going to die because they live in Florida. But
when I called them, they said they were OK. In the United States many people
died in Florida. Many schools and homes were also damaged."

- Harpreet Atwal, 8, Grade 4

"The hurricane could make a big explosion in the city because it is made out of
water."

- Kamalpreet Cheema, 9, Grade 4

"One day I was flipping by the channels on television. I heard that in some
countries, the water was so high that the people had some racing boats to get
from one place to another place."

- Ramanpreet Singh, 9, Grade 4

"I never want to be in a hurricane because I might be really scared."

- Kristina Deokie, 9, Grade 4

"Hurricane Jeanne is very powerful in towns. It is one of the most powerful
hurricanes ever."

- Mikeesh Gupta, 8, Grade 4

"I wouldn't like anything to happen to the Caribbean because my relatives live
over there. My mom said that if anything happens to Trinidad, then my mom and my
other parents will carry money for them to build back their houses, schools and
stores. They will also bring food for them to eat and clothes for them wear."

- Racquel Mahadeo-Allan, 8, Grade 4

"When a hurricane hits land, it loses power."

- Roma Kant, 8, Grade 4

"In September, Hurricane Ivan passed through Jamaica. The hurricane was so
strong that it pushed buildings off their foundations."

- Samira Kassem, 9, Grade 4

"I'm going to try to bring as much money as I can to help repair the houses and
other stuff. I am going to tell all my friends to bring in money. The people had
to move, schools are broken, and money can be used to help rebuild communities."

- Shivani Jagota, 8, Grade 4

"Hurricanes Ivan, Charley, Jeanne and Francis were destructive and the Canadian
government started a fund to give financial help."

- Sivani Srikanthan, 9, Grade 4

"I was scared because I thought the hurricane will hit Canada. But when I
searched the web it said hurricanes only hit warm islands."

- Summaya Imran, 9, Grade 4

"Jeanne is my favourite hurricane because I have a relative named Jeanne. She is
my aunt. I would be super shocked if a hurricane came into Canada."

- Sunil Mohan, 9, Grade 4

"Ivan has either directly or indirectly claimed the lives of many people in
Kingston, Grenada, Florida and Cayman Islands. According to the communication
network, the fatalities are many."

- Taimoor Khan, 10, Grade 4

"My aunt and my cousins live in Florida. First, I thought that they were going
to die when I heard that Florida was hit by the hurricane. I was really scared.
Then I called them and asked if they were okay."

- Kiranpreet Kahlon, 9, Grade 4

Many GTA schools have rushed to the aid of world hot spots this past month. At
Albion Heights Junior Middle School, a number of students were personally
affected because they had family in the crisis zones. Here are their words:

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Daniel Aguilar Reuters Ravage damage A Jamaican child stands outside
the remains of his home.RICARDO RAMIREZ BUXEDA AP Not so much sunshine state
Hurricane Jeanne whips trees and other debris in Florida. The state was hit hard
and many areas had to evacuate.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                  Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                          FOCUS - 737 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday

Busy season forecast for hurricanes

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


As many as six major hurricanes will form in the Atlantic Ocean in 2006, U.S.
forecasters said yesterday, predicting another intense year of storms on the
heels of the most destructive and one of the deadliest seasons ever.

The season, which begins next week and ends in November, will yield 13 to 16
named storms in all, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said
yesterday. That would be significantly fewer than last year's record 28 named
storms.

This year, as many as 10 storms will strengthen into hurricanes, packing winds
of at least 119 kilometres per hour, NOAA predicted. A so-called "major"
hurricane (Category 3 or higher) has winds of at least 178 km/h.

Last year's season broke records that had stood since 1851. There were 15
hurricanes, seven of which were major.

Officials said ocean and climate conditions suggest that above-average hurricane
activity may continue for two more decades.

Other forecasters already had predicted another intense hurricane season.

Although water in the Atlantic Ocean is not as warm as it was at this stage in
2005, surface temperatures remain warmer than average.

"That's not good news, and the message is very clear: We need to be prepared,"
Max Mayfield, director of coastal and marine resources at NOAA's National
Hurricane Center in Miami, said during a news conference.

Four of the seven major Atlantic hurricanes hit the U.S. last year, including
Hurricane Katrina, which submerged New Orleans and devastated the central Gulf
Coast, causing an estimated $80 billion (U.S.) in damage and killing almost
1,600 people. An average season has 11 named storms, six of them hurricanes, two
of them major.

During the past five years, more major hurricanes already have hit the U.S. than
in any decade since the 1950s, according to NOAA data.

If this year's forecasts are right, this may become the fiercest decade for
hurricanes on record, eclipsing the 10 major hurricanes that struck the U.S. in
the 1940s.

Last year set the record for total hurricanes with 15, topping the 12 hurricanes
of 1969. The hurricane season, which officially ends Nov. 30, continued into the
new year.

All but two of the past 11 years have produced above-average numbers of tropical
storms or hurricanes as Atlantic Ocean temperatures have remained above normal.

NOAA forecasters say factors that help disrupt storms - including so-called wind
shear that breaks them up and trade winds that prevent them from forming - will
be weak this year.

"We'll be in this cycle until at least 2015," AccuWeather forecaster Joe
Bastardi said. Last week, he predicted that hurricanes will strike the U.S. five
times, with North Carolina, South Carolina, New York, New Jersey and the
southern New England coastlines facing the most risk.

Three of those landfalls will be from major hurricanes, according to Bastardi,
who is the firm's chief hurricane forecaster.

"We are in a very, very ramped-up cycle of hurricane activity," he said in an
interview.

The government forecasters said they can't accurately predict how many
hurricanes will come ashore.

Based on past trends, they said, it is "statistically within reason" that two to
four of them may hit the coastal U.S., Conrad Lautenbacher, undersecretary of
commerce for oceans and atmosphere, said during the news conference.

Lautenbacher cautioned against reading too much into the numbers, though.

"It only takes one hurricane in your neighbourhood to make it a bad season," he
said.

The names chosen for 2006 storms are: Alberto, Beryl, Chris, Debby, Ernesto,
Florence, Gordon, Helene, Isaac, Joyce, Kirk, Leslie, Michael, Nadine, Oscar,
Patty, Rafael, Sandy, Tony, Valerie and William.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  DANIEL AGUILAR reuters file photo Smashed, uprooted trees litter a
main avenue in the Mexican resort town of Cancun after Hurricane Wilma roared
through last October. Last year's record-breaking hurricane season devastated
the area.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                  Copyright 2006 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                          FOCUS - 738 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Greeley Tribune (Colorado)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 4, 2009 Tuesday

CSU team lowers hurricane expectations

BYLINE: Greeley Tribune, Colo.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 445 words


Aug. 4--FORT COLLINS -- El Nino conditions have reduced the chance of hurricanes
this year.

That's the finding by the Colorado State University hurricane team who lowered
its hurricane forecast based on developing El Nino conditions that are expected
to intensify over the remainder of the hurricane season.

The team now anticipates 10 named storms forming in the Atlantic basin between
June 1 and Nov. 30.

Four of those storms are predicted to become hurricanes, and of those four, two
are expected to develop into major hurricanes with sustained winds of 111 mph or
greater.

The scientists reduced their forecast from June's prediction of 11 named storms,
five hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

Long-term averages are 9.6 named storms, 5.9 hurricanes and 2.3 major hurricanes
per year.

"We have witnessed the development of an El Nino event over the past couple of
months," said William Gray, who is in his 26th year of forecasting hurricanes.

"These conditions are expected to intensify to a moderate El Nino over the next
few months. El Nino events tend to be associated with increased levels of
vertical wind shear and decreased levels of Atlantic hurricane activity," Gray
said in a press release from the university.

Phil Klotzbach is the lead author of the forecasts.

The team also updated its U.S. landfall probabilities. The probability of a
major hurricane making landfall along the U.S. coastline is 46 percent compared
with the last-century average of 52 percent.

The hurricane forecast team's probabilities for a major hurricane making
landfall on various portions of the U.S. coast. It said there is a 27 percent
chance that a major hurricane will make landfall on the U.S. East Coast,
including the Florida Peninsula (the long-term average is 31 percent).

It said there is a 26 percent chance that a major hurricane will make landfall
on the Gulf Coast from the Florida Panhandle west to Brownsville, Texas. The
long-term average is 30 percent.

New with this year's forecasts are probabilities that a major hurricane will
make landfall in the Caribbean and Central America. The team lowered that
probability to 37 percent --the long-term average is 42 percent.

The complete hurricane forecast for 2009 may be found at
www.e-transit.org/hurricane.

To see more of the Greeley Tribune, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.greeleytribune.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Greeley Tribune, Colo.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090804-GY-CSU-team-lowers-hurricane-expectations-0804

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GY


                         Copyright 2009 Greeley Tribune


                          FOCUS - 739 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                              June 12, 2016 Sunday

Take time to prepare for a hurricane

SECTION: Pg. E-4

LENGTH: 724 words


For nearly 11 years, Florida has been playing a game of "hurricane roulette."

Hurricane Wilma was the last hurricane to hit Florida, reaching landfall in
October 2005. Since then, our state has been spared confronting the damage and
destruction that hurricanes wreak on property and life alike.

A total of 3 million people have moved to Florida since 2005, reports the Tampa
Bay Times. And many of the rest of us may have short memories.

Jacksonville hasn't had a direct hit from a hurricane since Hurricane Dora in
1964. Dora was the only hurricane to hit the city in the 20th century

Happily, the state has been on an historic winning streak. But do we really want
to assume that avoiding another hurricane is a blessing that will be boundless
and endless?

Just visualize the potential scenes - merely on Jacksonville's construction-busy
and vehicle-clogged highways, much less across Florida if a hurricane was
heading toward our state.

HURRICANE AMNESIA

That's why public, health and corporate officials across Florida, including
Mayor Lenny Curry and Duval County emergency manager director Steve Woodard, are
right to warn citizens not to suffer from "hurricane amnesia."

Don't procrastinate on precautions now that our state's hurricane season, June 1
through Nov. 30, has arrived.

Yes, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has given a "near
normal" forecast for this year's hurricane season in our region - and that's
reassuring.

But when the agency gives a "near normal" forecast, that means it is still
projecting a 70 percent chance of 10 to 16 named storms in the Atlantic region
during hurricane season - and that four to eight of them could build enough
force to turn into hurricanes.

Yes, Florida's Hurricane Catastrophe Fund - the pool of money first created by
the state to help homeowners rebuild after Hurricane Andrew's deadly rampage in
1992 - is flush with billions after years without hurricanes.

But no one should be deluded about the potential impact on the CAT Fund if a
hurricane actually hits Florida. Experts estimate that in today's dollars, the
damage caused by Hurricane Andrew would total more than $40 billion.

So let's be realistic: Florida has been historically lucky. The fact that we've
been without a hurricane for so long is certainly reason to feel thankful but
hardly cause to feel any sense of complacency.

SENSIBLE PRECAUTIONS

Even tropical storms can create massive disruptions, knocking out power for
days. To avoid developing such ill-advised, misplaced overconfidence, Floridians
everywhere should clearly be taking steps to prepare for a potential hurricane
this season:

- Have a basic evacuation plan in place so that you will know where you will go
if a hurricane approaches.

- Create a disaster supply kit that includes a flashlight, batteries, cash, a
battery-powered radio, an adequate number of batteries, first-aid materials,
enough water and non-perishable food to last at least three days, a portable
generator and copies of critical documents and other important information.

- Prepare an "emergency communication plan" for contacting loved ones and
coordinating your evacuation.

- Make a thorough examination of your home and property to assess potential
areas of vulnerability. Trim or remove damaged trees that could be susceptible
to falling during hurricane-like winds, secure gutters and make sure your roof,
doors and windows have proper reinforcement.

- Know how your community sends out alerts to residents - texts, emails, etc. -
to warn citizens about a potential or approaching hurricane.

These and other steps are good ones for Floridians to take to face the prospect
of a hurricane arriving during the current season - and to prevent developing
"amnesia" about the reality that one could happen.

HURRICANE FACTS

- In 2004, three hurricanes battered Central Florida in six weeks: Charley,
Frances and Jeanne. A few unlucky cities in the Port Charlotte area got hit all
three times.

- When Hurricane Andrew hit just south of Miami in 1992, many residents had less
than a day to prepare their homes and to evacuate coastal areas.

- From The Miami Herald, 1992: "Hurricane Andrew, which killed at least 10
people in Dade County, knocked out power to 1.3 million households, punished
South Dade and changed the very nature of the region, left a cleanup job Monday
of nightmarish dimensions."

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
Bob.Self@jacksonville.com The devastation of a Category 5 hurricane was
illustrated in 1992 by Hurricane Andrew, which struck Homestead in South Florida
with sustained winds of 150 miles an hour. One lucky factor - the hurricane took
a fairly narrow path and just missed areas with more people. Many houses built
with concrete block construction were able to withstand the high winds.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2016 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 740 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                             May 29, 2010 Saturday

Hurricane season to be busier than usual; Experts warn to prepare for active
hurricane season

BYLINE: Charles Perry Times & Transcript Staff

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 414  words


Anticipating an "active hurricane season" this year, the Canadian Hurricane
Centre is urging Atlantic Canadians that preparedness is always the best line of
defence.

Chris Fogarty of Halifax, manager of the centre, told reporters this week during
a conference call that warmer Atlantic waters and the absence of El Niño this
year favour increased tropical storm activity.

He said the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the United
States, earlier yesterday, called for 14 to 23 named storms, eight to 14
hurricanes and three to seven major hurricanes for 2010. To be designated a
name, a disturbance has to reach tropical storm status, the level immediately
below that of a hurricane.

Although the Canadian Hurricane Centre does not get into predicting numbers of
expected named storms, he said those numbers released by NOAA appear reasonable
considering the circumstances affecting the Atlantic this year.

Fogarty said 2009 was an unusually quiet season for tropical storms in the
Atlantic Ocean and more particularly in eastern Canada. He said there were only
eight named storms last year in the Atlantic, two of which became hurricanes --
Hurricane Bill and Hurricane Fred.

Fogarty said El Niño played a major role in the reduced number of named storms
last year.

El Niño, he explained, creates winds high in the atmosphere. These winds, he
said, produce a shearing action, literally knocking the tops off tropical
disturbances before they can develop into tropical storms or hurricanes.

But with this being a La Niña year and with the water temperatures being higher
than normal, Fogarty said the ideal ingredients are in place for a busy year for
hurricanes.

The hurricane season runs from June 1 to the end of November.

Atlantic Canadians are therefore encouraged to be ready for this prospect by
preparing themselves and their properties and following Environment Canada
hurricane bulletins, said Fogarty.

Andy Latham of Halifax, chief executive officer for Nova Scotia Emergency
Management, said there are a number of precautions people can take to prepare
for a tropical storm or hurricane.

For instance, Latham said people should have an adequate supply of drinkable
water in their homes in case their water is contaminated by flooding.

If there are electricity interruptions due to trees or branches being blown onto
power lines, he emphasized that you should not run a generator inside a garage
and you should turn off all electrical fixtures until the power is restored.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 741 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        The Patriot Ledger (Quincy, MA)

                            October 11, 2005 Tuesday
                                  ROP Edition

Experts predict stronger hurricanes

BYLINE: Lindsay Taub

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 499 words


While some experts said no cause-and-effect link exists between global warming
and the increase in hurricane activity, most agree climate change plays a role.

"This is presently a matter of vibrant and often polarized debate," said Mark
Serreze, a senior scientist at the National Snow and Ice Data Center in Boulder,
Colo. "The basic argument is that the warmer the oceans get, the more likely it
is that we'll get hurricanes and that they'll be intense."

Meteorologists at the National Hurricane Center in Miami said there is a strong
likelihood that another intense hurricane will occur this month.

Unusually warm ocean temperatures and low wind velocity have made for optimal
hurricane conditions. That's why some researchers at the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration said this could be one of the most active Atlantic
hurricane seasons on record.

"The average (number of hurricanes to make landfall) in a season is less than
two, so even if no more were to hit this year, it's still been a busy season,"
said Chris Landsea, a science and operations officer at the National Hurricane
Center. "But the season's not over, and there's a good chance we'll have more."

In fact, NOAA raised its 2005 hurricane outlook last month, forecasting an
additional 11 to 14 tropical storms through the end of the season, which ends on
Nov. 30. They expect seven to nine of them to become hurricanes and three to
five of those to become major hurricanes, defined as Category 3 storms or
higher, with sustained winds of at least 111 mph.

If so, this season will tally 18 to 21 tropical storms, with at least nine of
them developing into hurricanes, including Dennis, Emily, Ophelia, Katrina and
Rita.

Landsea was one of several scientists who published a paper in the July 2001
journal, Science, that discussed whether global warming had any effect on
hurricane activity.

"It's a very hot area of discussion right now, especially with the increased
intensity of hurricanes over the last 15 years," Landsea said. "Many scientists
now believe that it could be related to global warming, but I don't think that
(all of the studies) are convincing enough to take it as pure fact because they
don't take into account our changing physical understanding of hurricanes."
Under current climate change trends, Daniel Schrag, Harvard professor of earth
and planetary sciences, predicts ocean temperatures will increase by 2 to 4
degrees.

And if that is the case, "hurricanes would be stronger by about 5 percent,"
Landsea said. He added a 100 mph hurricane today, would be a 105 mph hurricane
100 years from now.

If you go

"Climate Change: Our Global Experiment" is an ongoing exhibit at Harvard's
Museum of Natural History, 26 Oxford St., Cambridge. General admission is $4.50
for adults, $6 for seniors and students, $5 for children (3-18), and free for
children under 3. The museum is open daily from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.

For more information, go to hmnh.harvard.edu or call 617-495-3045.

Lindsay Taub The Patriot Ledger

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2005 The Patriot Ledger


                          FOCUS - 742 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                           October 25, 2006 Wednesday
                                  Lake Edition

Forecasting is best defense against hurricanes

BYLINE: J. Hope Babowice

SECTION: NEIGHBOR; Kids ink; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 631 words


You wanted to know

Blanca Casillas, 10, of Mundelein wanted to know:

Can people make a hurricane less powerful? Why doe sa hurricane go to certain
places? How does a hurricane make itself?

If you have a question you'd like Kids Ink to answer, write Kids Ink, care of
the Daily Herald, 1795 N. Butterfield Road, Suite 100, Libertyville, IL 60048 or
send an e-mail to lake@dailyherald.com. Along with the question, include your
name, age, phone number, hometown, grade and school.

For more information

To learn more about hurricanes, the Warren Newport Public Library in Gurnee
suggests the following.

DVDs

- "Hurricanes & Tornadoes," hosted by Spencer Christian

- "Friends to the Rescue" created by Sesame Street Workshop

Books

- "Eye of the Storm: A Book About Hurricanes" by Rick Thomas

- "Hurricanes" by Seymour Simon

- "Howling Hurricanes" by Louise and Richard Spilsbury

- "Hurricane and Typhoon Alert!" by Paul Challen

- "Hurricane Hunters and Tornado Chasers: Life In The Eye of the Storm" by Lois
Sakany

"Can people make a hurricane less powerful? Why does a hurricane go to certain
places? How does a hurricane make itself?" asked Blanca Casillas, 10, a
fourth-grader at Diamond Lake School in Mundelein.

A hurricane is one of Mother Nature's fiercest storms. Starting small, the
storms brew in the Atlantic Ocean, starting small as a tropical cyclone. With
the right conditions, wind speeds kick up to more than 33 mph, whipping the
cyclone into a hurricane.

Last year was the worst on record for hurricanes. In 2005, scientists recorded
the highest number of topical storms - 27 - and hurricanes - 15. Of those 15
hurricanes, a record four touched down in the United States and four were the
most powerful type of hurricanes, what scientists call category 5. Last year's
disasters caused the worst damage on record. Katrina and Rita wrecked hundreds
of miles of coastline, caused loss of life as well as billions of dollars in
damage.

No one can make a hurricane less powerful, but scientists are working hard to
become better at predicting the severity of the storms and the direction they
take. They hope to develop better warning systems so they can alert people to
get out of the way.

Why do hurricanes go certain places and how are they formed?

Certain conditions have to be present in order for a storm to become a
hurricane. Those conditions are only present in the southeastern United States,
Mexico and Central America.

Hot water temperatures deep beneath the ocean's surface mix with cold air
temperatures in the atmosphere. As the storm begins to twirl, it gets additional
momentum from the Earth's rotation. Twirl doesn't begin to give the true meaning
of the force of the winds; in a worst case they can gain speeds of up to 650
mph.

When it's on water, the hurricane can gain top speeds. Once it hits land, it
slows down, but is still very destructive and can churn with winds of more than
100 mph.

This year, there have been nine topical storms and hurricanes. The highest wind
speed has reached 125 mph.

Scientists have been researching ways to improve forecasting. In Miami The AOML
(Atmospheric Oceanic Meteorological Laboratory Hurricane Division) -a part of
the government organization National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration -
works with top scientists to perform research and collect data that will some
day help minimize the terrible outcomes of hurricanes.

Researchers send pilots of special small planes into hurricanes to collect
information on wind speeds and direction. They use satellites, microwave
radiometers and wind analysis to develop forecasts.

When there are fewer dust storms in the desert, there are more hurricanes.
Scientists at NOAA recently announced a link between desert storms and
hurricanes, which may mean that desert dust helps keep hurricanes at bay.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Blanca Casillas

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 743 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                       August 24, 2017 Thursday 00:00 EST

Hurricane Harvey Strengthens and Heads for Texas

BYLINE: CHRISTINE HAUSER

SECTION: US

LENGTH: 914 words



HIGHLIGHT: Gov. Greg Abbott declared a state of disaster ahead of the hurricane,
which could affect the lower Mississippi Valley and Louisiana.


Tropical Storm Harvey strengthened into a hurricane on Thursday as it headed to
coastal Texas, where it was expected to bring life-threatening flooding,
meteorologists said.

The National Hurricane Center said that Air Force hurricane hunter planes had
spotted Tropical Storm Harvey strengthening in the Gulf of Mexico, with about
60-mile-per-hour winds more than 300 miles off the southern coast of Texas early
Thursday. A hurricane warning, meaning hurricane conditions are expected, had
been in effect from Port Mansfield in far southern Texas to Matagorda, about 100
miles southwest of Houston.

But later in the day, the planes spotted the system strengthening, and the
estimated maximum sustained winds increased to close to 100 m.p.h. the hurricane
center said early Friday. It was expected to make landfall Friday night or early
Saturday.

Parts of Louisiana and the lower Mississippi Valley were also in the path of
hurricane conditions from the storm system, the hurricane center said. Gov. John
Bel Edwards of Louisiana said on Thursday that Hurricane Harvey was expected to
hit Corpus Christi early Saturday as a Category 3 hurricane, but that its outer
bands of rain could be felt earlier. The impact on Louisiana was expected early
next week, he said.

"It is getting more and more serious as time goes by," Mr. Edwards said in a
news conference. He said the weather service had told him there was a
possibility the hurricane could make landfall in Texas and then re-enter the
Gulf before moving east to Louisiana, he said.

Hurricane watches were also in place on Thursday, as were tropical storm
warnings, in other parts of the state, mostly along the coast, the National
Hurricane Center said.

The movement of the hurricane was expected to slow while over land, meaning it
could drop more rain. "This is going to play out over the next week or so," Mr.
Edwards said. "This is a very serious storm."

In some areas, the storm could unleash at least two feet of rainfall
accumulation that could cause "flooding catastrophe" through the weekend, a
meteorologist said.

Texas and Louisiana have been bracing for the storm to affect populated areas
for days, after the National Hurricane Center predicted this week that it could
make landfall, affecting Corpus Christi, Tex., Houston and New Orleans, among
other cities.

When the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration issues a hurricane
warning through its hurricane center, it means that conditions including
sustained winds of 74 m.p.h. or higher are expected in the next 36 hours,
allowing for preparations by state authorities and residents.

On Thursday, Texas escalated its readiness level for the storm, saying that even
as a tropical depression, Harvey posed a threat of imminent disaster, including
severe flooding, storm surge and damaging winds, in at least 30 counties.

Gov. Greg Abbott announced that he was pre-emptively declaring a state of
disaster for those counties, a formal declaration that allows Texas to quickly
deploy resources for any emergency. He encouraged Texans to get ready.

"As the State Operations Center increases its readiness levels, I also encourage
Texans in the storm's path to make their own emergency preparations, heed
warnings from local officials, and avoid high water areas," he said on
Wednesday.

Some organizations voluntarily ordered evacuations. At Texas A&M University in
Corpus Christi, students were told to evacuate by Thursday and to avoid parts of
Southeast Texas, including the Victoria, Houston and Galveston areas.

The police in Aransas Pass, Tex., about 20 miles northeast of Corpus Christi,
ordered a mandatory evacuation and said city crews would shut off city water on
Friday. Officials in Calhoun County and San Patricio County also issued
mandatory evacuation orders.

The Houston Independent School District -- the largest school district in Texas
-- canceledclasses on Monday.

And late Thursday afternoon, President Trump weighed in on Twitter, urging
people to plan ahead as Hurricane Harvey strengthened.

If the storm were to reach New Orleans, the impact could be particularly
troubling. The city is still recovering from floodingcaused by a severe
thunderstorm this month, after a turbine that powered pumping systems failed. In
its latest update on Thursday, the city said it expected up to 10 inches of rain
and potential flooding starting late Sunday and potentially lasting through
midweek.

When NOAA announced the start of hurricane season in June, there were
predictions of as many as five major hurricanes. A hurricane this weekend would
be the first test of its kind for the leadership of Brock Long, the new
administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which is responsible
for coordinating the government's relief efforts after natural disasters.

Mr. Trump has proposed cutting a number of programs and grants at the federal
agency that many cities and states say would leave them unable to deal with
disasters.

Matt Stevens contributed reporting.

PHOTOS: Preparing for the worst in Corpus Christi, Tex., where Hurricane Harvey
was expected to make landfall as a Category 3 storm. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GABE
HERNANDEZ/CORPUS CHRISTI CALLER-TIMES, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS; RACHEL DENNY
CLOW/CORPUS CHRISTI CALLER-TIMES, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)

Related Articles


     ·    Trump's Leader for FEMA Wins Praise, but Proposed Budget Cuts Don't
     ·    Remnants of Tropical Storm Harvey Gain Strength and Hurricane Watch Is
          Posted
     ·    Hurricane Season Is Heating Up. So Is the Planet. Coincidence?


LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 744 of 881 DOCUMENTS

              San Gabriel Valley Tribune (San Gabriel Valley, CA)

                          September 15, 2005 Thursday

It's tempting to blame man, but we aren't causing more hurricanes

BYLINE: James O'Brien

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 592 words


WITH hurricane season in full swing and the devastating effects of Hurricane
Katrina being felt in the southeast, there has been some disagreement among
climate scientists on the potential impact of global climate change on future
hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean. Last year, claims were made that the frequency
of hurricanes will increase due to global climate change.

For example, after Hurricane Bonnie, Charley and Frances hit Florida in 2004,
the prime minister of England, Tony Blair, and many prominent American
scientists told the world that the hurricanes were due to global warming.

Luckily, scientists who actually study hurricanes regularly quickly responded
with the facts, and for once the misinformation was curbed quickly and
effectively. But now the alarmists are at it again, claiming that global warming
will increase the intensity of hurricanes. Don't worry; there is absolutely no
scientific support or correlation of hurricane intensity or hurricane frequency
with global warming.

Hurricane scientists and experts actually believe that variations in the
Atlantic Ocean Conveyer, not global temperatures, determine the frequency of
hurricanes. It is predicted that we will see an increase in the number of
Atlantic hurricanes for the next 10-15 years compared to recent years. This is
nothing new the last peak occurred between 1930 and 1970.

What is the Atlantic Ocean Conveyer and why does it affect hurricanes?

In the North Atlantic in the Labrador and Gin Sea, water is cooled and sinks to
the bottom in winter. The sinking water is replaced by warm Gulf Stream water
that leaves the North Carolina coast and proceeds toward the Northeast to
Ireland and Norway. The Gulf Stream draws water from the South Atlantic. The
rest of the conveyer belt is in the other oceans, but the Atlantic portion is
the dominant feature.

This oceanic phenomenon varies and changes the sea-surface temperatures. When it
is strong 1930-1970; 1995-now there are more Atlantic hurricanes. When it is
weak 1905-1925; 1975-1994 the hurricane season is mild.

And what about intensity? Hurricanes have to keep moving or they die by
upwelling the cold water below the warmer sea- surface temperatures. Hurricane
Mitch, 1998, is a textbook example of this. Mitch stalled off Honduras when it
lost its upper atmospheric steering currents. This caused it to die and drop
over six feet of rain on the residents of Honduras and Nicaragua!

A hurricane will also grow stronger as it moves over water warmer than 80 F
[26.5 C]. This is why some people believe that global warming will increase
hurricane intensity, but there are no scientific calculations that show the
areas of water this warm increasing in size. However, if one graphs the ocean
environment for Category 3, 4 and 5 storms, there is no difference in
ocean-surface temperatures for tropical storms nor Category 1 and 2 storms.
What's more, the scientific literature documents that the western Atlantic off
Africa is the prime breeding ground for the stronger storms and many of those
stronger storms never make it to landfall.

While it is tempting to blame the frequency or intensity of hurricanes on man,
we all must remember how variable nature is and specifically in this case, the
effect of natural variations on hurricanes' intensity and frequency is extremely
higher than the possibility of man's interference.

Dr. James O'Brien is the Florida state climatologist and a professor of
meteorology and oceanography at Florida State University in Tallahassee.

<!-- -->

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2005 MediaNews Group, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 745 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                           September 28, 2004 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

(Baylife Rail)

BYLINE: A staff and wire report

SECTION: BAYLIFE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 667 words


HURRICANE TRIVIA

Ice That Idea

Q: I seem to remember an experiment in the 1950s or '60s to divert a hurricane
by dropping dry ice into it. Would this work?

A: It's a "beguiling notion," the National Hurricane Center admits, but there's
no chance it would work.

Numerous techniques to modify hurricanes -- including seeding clouds with dry
ice -- have been considered over the years. But, the hurricane center says, all
share the same shortcoming: They fail to appreciate the size and power of
tropical cyclones.

Other suggested techniques have included seeding clouds with silver iodide,
cooling the ocean with icebergs or cryogenic material, changing the radiational
balance in the hurricane environment by absorption of sunlight with carbon
black, using hydrogen bombs to explode the hurricane apart, and even using giant
fans to blow the storm away from land.

As an example of why such ideas won't work, the hurricane center cites Hurricane
Andrew, which struck South Florida in 1992. Andrew's eyewall devastated a swath
20 miles wide. The heat energy released around the eye was 5,000 times the
combined heat and electrical power generation of Turkey Point nuclear power
plant, over which Andrew's eye passed.

Because hurricanes are chemically simple -- air and water vapor -- introduction
of catalysts is "unpromising," the hurricane center says. Attacking weak
tropical waves or depressions before they have a chance to grow into hurricanes
isn't promising, either.

Side Effects

Q: Why are winds in the northeast quadrant of a hurricane stronger than those
elsewhere?

A: The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration prefers to use the term
"right side of the storm" as the typical location of the strongest winds.

The right side is defined in relation to the storm's motion. If the hurricane is
moving to the west, the right side would be to the north of the storm; if the
hurricane is moving to the north, the right side would be to the east of the
storm.

As explained by NOAA, the strongest winds generally are on the right side
because the motion of the hurricane also contributes to its swirling winds. A
hurricane with 90-mph winds while stationary would have winds up to 100 mph on
the right side and only 80 mph on the left side if it began moving (any
direction) at 10 mph.

Low-Sodium Storms

Q: I understand that the moisture carried up into hurricanes is mostly sea
water. If so, why isn't the rain produced by hurricanes salty?

A: It's possible that rain produced by hurricanes could contain some degree of
salinity because it has drawn in droplets whipped off the ocean surface by high
winds.

But hurricanes also draw in water that has condensed from water vapor that has
evaporated from the ocean surface, leaving most, if not all, of the salt behind.

Once hurricanes leave the ocean and move over land, the amount of salinity in
the rain decreases.

A spokesman at the hurricane center said that, to his knowledge, the amount of
salinity in rain resulting from a hurricane never has been measured, so
statistics are unavailable.

Cox News Service

DANCE

"Nutcracker' Auditions

The West Florida Ballet will audition youngsters for roles for its December
production of "The Nutcracker" beginning at noon Saturday.

Students should wear appropriate dance clothes and shoes to the auditions, which
will be conducted at West Florida Youth Ballet Studio, 550 Main St., Safety
Harbor. There are a $15 audition fee and $45 rehearsal fee, both payable during
Saturday's casting call.

The audition schedule:

Noon to 1:30 p.m.: advanced dancers, ages 12 and up, with a strong background in
pointe.

1:30 to 2:30 p.m.: elementary to intermediate dancers, ages 8 and up. If on
pointe, bring pointe shoes.

2:30 to 3:30 p.m.: youngest dancers, ages 2 to 8.

3:30 to 4:30 p.m.: auditions for the starring role of Clara; young women at
least 10 years old with pointe experience.

For information, call (727) 797-2030.

Jennifer Barrs

Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 746 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            July 19, 2006 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Months Past Are Not A Prelude

BYLINE: NEIL JOHNSON, The Tampa Tribune

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 636 words


HURRICANE SEASON PICKS UP IN AUGUST

By NEIL JOHNSON

The Tampa Tribune

TAMPA - Forget the relatively quiet start of the 2006 hurricane season as August
rolls in.

June and July are just the opening acts of the six-month storm season, and next
month begins the peak of the season as attention shifts to the vast tropical
Atlantic for the birthplace of hurricanes.

"August is the month when the hurricane season becomes active. There's very
little relationship with what happens in June or July," said Jim Elsner, a
Florida State University professor who studies hurricanes.

The past two years clearly show that storm activity the first two months of the
season does not reflect what August or the rest of the season will bring.

In 2004, the first named storm formed July 31, and Florida went on to be thumped
by four hurricanes.

In 2005, the first named storm formed June 8 and seven tropical storms or
hurricanes had formed before August. When the season was done, four hurricanes
had hit the state again.

So far, this year has produced tropical storms Alberto and Beryl.

In the past 100 years, 32 tropical storms or hurricanes had some impact on
Florida during August, either from glances or savage landfalls such as
hurricanes Andrew and Charley.

In the early season, storms tend to form in the western Caribbean and Gulf of
Mexico.

By August, things become more hospitable for growing storms churning across the
Atlantic.

Water temperatures begin to simmer, providing fuel.

More importantly, winds high in the atmosphere that thwart hurricane development
become weaker. The winds act like a giant lawn mower and cut the tops off
developing storms.

"By the second and third week of August, the cloud clusters coming off West
Africa hold together and are more likely to form storms," Elsner said.

(CHART) AUGUST'S STORMS

In the past 100 years, Florida has felt the effects of 32 tropical storms or
hurricanes during August.

Some notables:

Hurricane Elena, 1985: Storm caused significant damage to Pinellas County before
turning and making landfall near Biloxi, Miss., as a Category 3.

Hurricane Andrew, 1992: Category 5 storm devastated southern Miami-Dade County.

Hurricane Charley, 2004: Category 4 storm caused serious wind damage to
Charlotte County, where it made landfall, as well as inland.

Hurricane Katrina, 2005: Category 1 storm made landfall in South Florida,
intensified to a Category 5 in the Gulf of Mexico and caused widespread
destruction along the central Gulf Coast as a Category 3.

Research by BUDDY JAUDON

Researcher Buddy Jaudon contributed to this story. Reporter Neil Johnson can be
reached at (352) 544-5214 or njohnson@tampatrib.com.

Photo credit: Associated Press file photo

Photo: Katrina hits Boynton Inlet and other portions of South Florida, before it
goes on to batter Mississippi and Louisiana. The tropical system was named Aug.
24, made landfall Aug. 25 in Florida as a Category 1 storm, headed into the Gulf
and strengthened before slamming into the Gulf Coast on Aug. 29.

Photo credit: Associated Press file photo (2004)

Photo credit: Tribune file photo 1985

Photo: (2) May Mayfield, above, director of the National Hurricane Center,
closely monitors the arrival of Hurricane Charley on Aug. 13, 2004. At left,
Tampa residents take a dangerous walk down Bayshore Boulevard as Hurricane Elena
floods cars and does extensive damage in 1985.

Photo credit: Tribune file photo (1992)

Photo: Residents in Cutler Ridge, south of Miami, are shocked by the destruction
wrought by Hurricane Andrew on Aug. 24, 1992. Initial reports said the storm hit
as a Category 4. Ten years later, scientists upgraded the storm to Category 5,
based on evidence that winds hit 165 mph. By any measure, damage was
catastrophic.

Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: HURRICANE UPDATE JULY 2006

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 4 CHART
.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 747 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            November 26, 2007 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricane Frenzy Fades From Memory

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 374 words


Hurricane season ends Friday, and barring any unusual events, it was a quiet one
for Florida: A strong area of high pressure kept the two most ferocious storms
of 2007 pinned well to the south.

But it was far from a quiet season across the Atlantic. There were 14 named
storms, four more than in an average year, and for the first time, as far as
scientists know, two Category 5 storms made landfall in one season.

Still, many of the storms that formed, especially the eight in September, turned
out to be weak. Some may not even have rated a name a generation ago. One
reason: "Shears," the term for winds blowing in different directions at
different heights, tore storms apart.

The reason winds in the upper atmosphere were strong at a time of year they are
normally weak is a mystery. "We may never know the answer to that," said Chris
Landsea, science officer at the National Hurricane Center.

One thing experts do know: With two quiet seasons behind us, Floridians are
beginning to forget what we once knew about the need for preparedness.

DETAILS, Metro, Page 1

(CHART) (STORM LANDFALLS 2004-07)

Tropical Storm Bonnie

August 2004

Wind at landfall: 45 mph

Hurricane Charley

August 2004

Wind at landfall: 150 mph

Hurricane Frances

August 2004

Wind at landfall: 105 mph

Hurricane Jeanne

September 2004

Wind at landfall: 120 mph

Tropical Storm Arlene

June 2005

Wind at landfall: 60 mph

Hurricane Dennis

July 2005

Wind at landfall: 120 mph

Hurricane Katrina

August 2005

Wind at landfall: 80 mph

Hurricane Wilma

October 2005

Wind at landfall: 120 mph

Tropical Storm Alberto

June 2006

Wind at landfall: 45 mph

Tropical Storm Ernesto

August 2006

Wind at landfall: 45 mph

Tropical Storm Barry

June 2007

Wind at landfall: 40 mph

(CHART) 2007 BY THE NUMBERS

2 Category 5 hurricanes made landfall

15 years since last Category 5 hurricane made landfall in Florida

14 named storms

5 hurricanes*

4 tropical storms or hurricanes struck the United States

51 hours it took Felix to grow from a tropical depression to a Category 5
hurricane

14, 5, 2 named storms, hurricanes and major hurricanes in 2007, compared with 10
named storms, six hurricanes and three major storms in an average season

Copyright © 2007, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 748 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              May 23, 2008 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Storm Clouds On Horizon

BYLINE: NEIL JOHNSON, The Tampa Tribune

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 725 words


NOAA PREDICTS BUSY HURRICANE SEASON

By NEIL JOHNSON

The Tampa Tribune

TAMPA - Conditions are in place for an active hurricane season, with government
scientists predicting an above-average number of storms in 2008.

Twelve to 16 named storms this season are expected during the June 1 to Nov. 30
season, six to nine of which might become hurricanes, said Gerry Bell, lead
seasonal forecaster with the National Climate Prediction Center.

Bell also said two to five of those hurricanes could grow to Category 3 or
stronger, with winds of 111 mph to 130 mph.

The team of scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
that put together the season's forecast does not pinpoint a number of predicted
storms nor where they might hit, if anywhere.

NOAA's prediction would mean a season with more hurricanes than average, which
is 11 named storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

The prediction follows a trend of more active seasons that started in 1995, Bell
said. The Atlantic Ocean entered a phase of more active hurricane seasons 13
years ago that could last another 12 to 27 more years.

"There's no indication this period has ended," Bell said as NOAA unveiled its
seasonal prediction at MacDill Air Force Base, where the agency's two hurricane
hunter aircraft are based.

La Nina Lingers

In addition to the period of heightened hurricane activity, Bell said lingering
effects on the atmosphere of a La Niña pattern also pointed to a more active
season.

During a La Niña, water in the equatorial Pacific Ocean cools a few degrees
below normal. The pattern causes shifts in the jet stream that reduce
hurricane-busting winds. Seasons during a La Niña typically have more hurricanes
than when the Pacific is at its normal temperature or warmer than normal.

This year, NOAA officials emphasized that any forecast may not be 100 percent
accurate. Bell said agency scientists are 60 to 70 percent certain the number of
storms will be within the forecast range. But there's a 25 percent chance of a
near-normal season and 10 percent possibility the season will produce fewer than
normal storms.

Last year, NOAA predicted 13 to 17 named storms, seven to 10 hurricanes and
three to five major storms with winds topping 111 mph, or Category 3. The number
of storms was within NOAA's predicted range, but the season produced only six
hurricanes and just two reached major storm strength.

Those were hurricanes Dean and Felix, which became the first two Category 5
hurricanes to hit land in the same season since modern records started in 1850.

Most storms last season did not become strong or last long. One hurricane,
Humberto, hit the United States in 2007 as a Category 1 storm that shrank to a
tropical storm after landfall in Texas.

Bell said 2007 was a busy hurricane season, but the prediction was flawed in
other ways.

"What missed was the overall intensity and duration of the storms," he said.

NOAA didn't do enough to make the public understand that any forecast has a
possibility of being wrong, said Louis Uccellini, director of the National
Centers for Environmental Prediction that includes the center were Bell works.

"We don't have the skill level to predict the exact number of storms," Uccellini
said. "But climate conditions point to an active season."

The Africa-Amazon Connection

Those conditions include rainfall in tropical west Africa and the Amazon basin,
Bell said. Rain that is above average in Africa and below average in the Amazon
creates winds in the atmosphere favorable for hurricanes, and that has happened
since the Atlantic entered the active phase in 1995.

NOAA's expectations mirror the April seasonal forecast by William Gray and Phil
Klotzbach of Colorado State University. They forecast 15 named storms, with
eight becoming hurricanes and four of those growing into major storms.

Gray and Klotzbach will issue a revised forecast June 2, the day after hurricane
season starts. NOAA will revise its forecast in August when hurricane season
begins its busiest 10 weeks.

Reporter Neil Johnson can be reached at (813) 259-7731 or njohnson@tampatrib.com

Photo credit: Tribune photo by CHRIS URSO

Photo: NOAA Hurricane Hunter aircraft will be busy this season if predictions
about a high number of storms are accurate.

Copyright © 2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2008 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 749 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            October 7, 2008 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Keeping Fingers Crossed

BYLINE: Neil Johnson

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 261 words


So far, so good, for the Sunshine State.

With a bit more than seven weeks left in the hurricane season, hurricanes have
steered away from Florida. Only Tropical Storm Fay made landfall - again and
again.

The 13 named storms puts 2008 well ahead of average hurricane seasons, which see
nine named storms by Oct. 12 and five hurricanes - there have been six this year
- by Oct. 10. Lucky No. 13, Marco, formed Monday off the coast of Mexico.

Will the state's luck hold?

During October, the most likely hurricane birthplace is the western Caribbean
Sea, and their most likely path is crossing Florida on the way to the Atlantic
Ocean.

During the past 10 hurricane seasons, 31 storms have formed later than today,
including eight in the record-setting 2005 season.

Of those 31 storms, two hit Florida: Tropical Storm Mitch in 1998 and Hurricane
Irene in 1999.

Neil Johnson

(CHART) DIGITS

130

Maximum wind speed of season's strongest storm, Hurricane Gustav

3

Number of major hurricanes of Category 3 or stronger for 2008

2

Number of major hurricanes of Category 3 or stronger in an average season

2008 Hurricane Season

(1) Tropical Storm Arthur

(2) Hurricane Bertha

(3) Tropical Storm Cristobal

(4) Hurricane Dolly

(5) Tropical Storm Edouard

(6) Tropical Storm Fay

(7) Hurricane Gustav

(8) Hurricane Hanna

(9) Hurricane Ike

(10) Tropical Storm Josephine

(11) Hurricane Kyle

(12) Subtropical Storm Laura

(13) Tropical Storm Marco

Tribune map; Sources: National Hurricane Center, FLHurricane.com

Copyright © 2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2008 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 750 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             April 12, 2009 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Gathering storm threatens Florida taxpayers

BYLINE: DON CRANE JR., Special to the Tribune

SECTION: VIEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 818 words


An ex-lawmaker says residents are responsible for an underfunded property
insurance system. A safer bet is a state-managed hurricane fund.

By DON CRANE JR.

Special to the Tribune

As the 2009 legislative session nears the finish line, our leaders' strategic
plan for dealing with hurricane insurance seems to be prayer: Pray that
Floridians will be spared a major hurricane this season.

The facts are irrefutable. If a Category 3 or greater hurricane slams our state,
current insurance will be inadequate.

Gov. Charlie Crist will wring his hands in dismay, and he and the Cabinet will
announce that they have no choice. They will have to place 20 percent to 30
percent assessments on all forms of insurance in Florida to make up for the
shortfall.

Floridians will be shocked by the huge assessments to all of their insurance
policies (except workers' compensation and medical malpractice). Crist knows
this. The Legislature knows this. The Cabinet knows this. But no one has done
anything to protect Floridians from this foreseeable disaster.

Florida's hurricane risk is too great to be handled efficiently by the private
insurance market. These companies are dependent upon a layer of "at-cost
reinsurance" from the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund plus expensive
reinsurance from unregulated reinsurers, most of which are offshore companies.

Floridians do not realize that the Cat Fund has only a tiny net worth (less than
10 percent of the state's actual exposure) and that when the next big hurricane
hits, it will have to borrow (through issuance of bonds) the billions of dollars
it promises to pay.

Rating agencies are informing insurance companies that the Cat Fund is not
sufficiently capitalized and may be unable to fund losses from a major storm.

In 2006, private market reinsurance rates spiked, causing property insurers to
seek large rate hikes. The Florida Legislature responded by increasing the
Cat-Fund reinsurance for residential hurricane risk from $15 billion to $27
billion, believing that $15 billion in post-event bonds could be sold.

The reality is that Floridians are financially responsible for a state property
insurance system that is knowingly underfunded and cannot fully pay Floridians'
claims. Floridians are paying off previous hurricane losses by assessments to
our insurance policies. My 2008 assessments totaled $167. Do you know yours?

Research by Hurricane InsuranceCoalition.org contends that a State Hurricane
Fund that collects all residential hurricane premiums is stronger, more
economical and safer than the current hurricane program. Our primary goal is to
have the state verify our proposed financial solution to make sure it is
actuarially and economically sound.

For three years, we have asked the insurance commissioner to disclose how much
is paid each year in hurricane premiums for all buildings and what the
projections are for future years. We also want to know about historical
hurricane losses and other details, including the cost of reinsurance, so that
everyone can see how much we're paying the insurance industry each year.

One has to wonder why this information has not been provided to the Legislature
in clear and accurate form. Most legislators are being lobbied by the
well-heeled insurance industry that opposes our plan.

If annual premiums for residential properties are $7 billion and if average
annual hurricane losses are $4 billion, as our research indicates, a State
Hurricane Fund can finance hurricane losses.

Twenty years at $7 billion is $140 billion. Even if hurricane losses are $80
billion, it's still a good bet.

If we continue the present system and there are significant storms, the
insurance industry will have to be supplemented by assessments. If we get lucky
and have a period of less-than-average storms, the insurance industry gets our
money.

The question all legislators need to address is this: Is Florida better off
sending $7 billion of hurricane premiums out of state every year or capturing
the premium in a State Hurricane Fund to finance hurricane losses over many
years?

The volunteers of the Hurricane Insurance Coalition have devoted several
thousand hours to this issue. Meanwhile, our leaders refuse to face what they
know is an inevitable financial crisis.

Frankly, we are frustrated, and you should be, too.

We have done what the media asks of its readers. We got involved.

(CHARTING) TARGETING FLORIDA

Since 2002, 16 named storms, including eight hurricanes, have hit Florida.
Hurricane experts at Colorado State University predict this year will be an
average season with 12 named storms, including six hurricanes.

Former state lawmaker Donald R. Crane Jr. is president of the Hurricane
Insurance Coalition Inc., www.hurricaneinsurance coalition.org.

Photo credit: Associated Press file photo

Photo: (storm trackings)

Copyright © 2009, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2009 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 751 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              May 28, 2010 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

NOAA scientists predict a busy hurricane season

BYLINE: NEIL JOHNSON, njohnson@tampatrib.com

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 390 words


There could be twice the number of storms seen in a typical season.

By NEIL JOHNSON

njohnson@tampatrib.com

TAMPA - Scientists with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said
Thursday the 2010 hurricane season could produce as many as twice the number of
storms seen in an average season.

The NOAA outlook said the season could have 14 to 23 named storms with eight to
14 becoming hurricanes. Three to seven of those could be major hurricanes of
Category 3 or higher with winds topping 111 mph.

The lower end of the prediction from NOAA, which oversees the National Hurricane
Center, is close to the outlook from William Gray and Phil Klotzbach from
Colorado State University who last month forecast 15 named storms this season
with four becoming major hurricanes.

Unlike Gray and Klotzbach, NOAA's outlook is in a range rather than a specific
number.

The upper end of NOAA's range, though, is more than twice the number of named
storms seen in an average season of 11 named storms, six hurricanes and three
major hurricanes.

A main reason NOAA predicts an active hurricane season is because water in the
Pacific Ocean has cooled to near normal temperatures after being warmer than
normal last summer.

Called an El Niño, the warm water over a vast expanse of the Pacific Ocean
causes changes in winds high in the atmosphere that can snuff out developing
hurricanes.

It is the main reason the 2009 season produced only nine named storms with three
becoming hurricanes.

Another reason for the anticipated active season is the extremely warm water
across the Atlantic Ocean where storms develop. Temperatures in the development
region of the tropical Atlantic are up to 4 degrees above normal.

Also, since 1995, the Atlantic Ocean has been in a period of active hurricane
seasons with more storms than the long-term average of 10 named storms, six
hurricanes and two or three major storms.

NOAA scientists expect this to continue.

Eight of the past 15 hurricane seasons are in the top 10 for the most storms.
With 28 storms, 2005 is the most active Atlantic hurricane season on record.

NOAA's prediction does not say where individual storms will go or how many will
make landfall.

Reporter Neil Johnson can be reached at (813) 259-7731.

Copyright © 2010, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2010 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 752 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             April 10, 2015 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Forecasters expecting quiet hurricane season

BYLINE:  By Matt Morgan     Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 509 words


Two Colorado State University forecasters expect the 2015 hurricane season to be
one of the quietest since the mid-20th century, according to a report released
Thursday.

Philip Klotzbach and William Gray predict seven named storms, three hurricanes
and one major hurricane, the report said. The historical averages are 12 named
storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

The report places the possibility of a major hurricane hitting the East Coast at
15 percent, lower than the historical average of 31 percent. The probability of
a major hurricane hitting any portion of the United States' coastline is 28
percent, down from the average of 52 percent, the forecast says.

Klotzbach and Gray also predict only 30 named storm days and 10 hurricane days,
both less than 50 percent of the averages.

A major hurricane is a Category 3, 4 or 5 storm with wind speeds of at least 111
mph on the Saffir-Simpson scale.

"The tropical Atlantic has anomalously cooled over the past several months, and
the chances of a moderate to strong El Niño event this summer and fall appear to
be quite high," Klotzbach said. "Historical data indicate fewer storms form in
these conditions."

El Niño is a periodic warming of the Pacific Ocean waters that often helps
suppress Atlantic hurricane activity.

The report also notes that it is impossible to predict the season each year with
perfect accuracy.

Despite the quiet forecast, Klotzbach and Gray said that people in
hurricane-prone areas should stay vigilant.

It just takes one hurricane making landfall to cause catastrophic damage.
Hurricane Andrew, in 1992, ripped through Florida in an otherwise quiet season.

Last season yielded eight named storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes.
The Colorado State prediction was for nine named storms, three hurricanes and
one major hurricane.

The Atlantic is still technically in an active hurricane phase, which shifts
about every one to three decades. This active era started in 1995, but at the
National Hurricane Conference last week in Austin, Texas, Klotzbach theorized
that the phase could be shifting.

"It's hard to get, maybe, three quiet seasons in a row in an active era, so
perhaps we are moving out of this active period," he said.

Gray, who has been working on the seasonal forecasts for 31 years, said he is
turning over the operation completely to Klotzbach, who joined the team in 2000.
Gray said he will stay on in an advisory role but will be spending most of his
time working with climate change.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will release its 2015
hurricane season outlook in May.

mmorgan@pbpost.com Twitter: @metromattmorgan

eye on the storm

Follow The Post's hurricane season coverage on the Eye on the Storm blog at
eyeonthestorm.blog.palmbeachpost.com and veteran hurricane writer Eliot
Kleinberg on Twitter at @eliotkpbp

INSIDE: What will storms be named in 2015? A10

2015 hurricane names

* Ana

* Bill

* Claudette

* Danny

* Erika

* Fred

* Grace

* Henri

* Ida

* Joaquin

* Kate

* Larry

* Mindy

* Nicholas

* Odette

* Peter

* Rose

* Sam

* Teresa

* Victor

* Wanda

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 753 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             May 28, 2015 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

NOAA forecasts quiet season, urges caution;
Official offers reminder that Hurricane Andrew came in a light season.

BYLINE:  By Matt Morgan   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 670 words


Despite more predictions Wednesday from experts that it will likely be a quieter
than normal hurricane season, the information comes with two caveats -- they
don't know where the storms will go and below average doesn't mean zero.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicts six to 11 named
storms (winds of 39 mph or higher), of which three to six could become
hurricanes (winds of 74 mph or higher), including zero to two major hurricanes
(winds of 111 mph or higher) for the 2015 hurricane season. They also project a
70 percent likelihood that it will be below average.

In a similar report released last month, Colorado State forecasters William Gray
and Phil Klotzbach also projected a season that won't reach the average of 12
named storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

Still, anyone in areas that could be affected by hurricanes should make their
plans before a storm is bearing down, said Joseph Nimmich, FEMA deputy
administrator. Families should assemble kits that include three days' worth of
food and water, secure their homes and make evacuation plans before the June 1
start to hurricane season.

"You need to think about that now," he said. "You need to think about it for
yourselves and you need to think about it for your neighbors."

NOAA's forecasters attributed the prediction to the formation of El Niño in the
Pacific Ocean and about average ocean temperatures in the Atlantic. El Niño is a
phenomenon of warmer water in the Pacific Ocean that creates more windshear in
the atmosphere, causing a suppressing effect for hurricanes in the Atlantic.

Though El Niño and the below-normal outlook are good signs, it only takes one
storm to cause catastrophic damage to an area, said Kathryn Sullivan, NOAA
administrator.

The 1992 season produced only seven named storms, but the first was Andrew -- a
devastating Category 5 hurricane that leveled Homestead. It also occurred during
an El Niño year.

"It doesn't matter how many pitches we face, just how many hit the strike zone,"
she said.

Sullivan praised new technology that will help NOAA and the National Hurricane
Center in forecasting, enabling local emergency management teams to make more
informed decisions.

Using 2014 Hurricane Arthur as an example, Sullivan said only a portion of the
Outer Banks was evacuated when 10 to 20 years ago it would have been all of the
North Carolina coast.

Last May, NOAA predicted eight to 13 named storms, three to six hurricanes and
one to two major hurricanes. The final totals were eight named storms, six
hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

No major hurricanes have made landfall in the country in nine years, which
causes some concern that people might not take the season seriously or remember
proper procedures. White House press secretary Josh Earnest emphasized that
ahead of President Barack Obama's visit today to Miami's National Hurricane
Center.

Since Wilma in 2005, no storm of at least Category 3 on the Saffir-Simpson Scale
has struck the U.S. mainland and no hurricane of any kind has struck Florida; in
that time, Florida's population has increased by 3 million.

Earnest stressed that state and local leaders have the responsibility to lead
response to hurricanes. And he said that, while this White House hasn't itself
steered management of a major hurricane, it has an ace in the bullpen: Federal
Emergency Management Agency Director Craig Fugate, who as Florida's emergency
manager, handled the manic 2004 and 2005 seasons.

And he said that, as head of FEMA under Obama, Fugate also has "a lot of
experience in dealing with natural disasters that have put a lot of Americans in
harm's way."

Anyone with questions on hurricane preparedness and what they should be doing
can visit ready.gov.

mmorgan@pbpost.com Twitter: @metromattmorgan

coming sunday

A 24-page print section will prepare you for hurricane season with important
information on securing your home.

MORE NEWS ONLINE: Get the latest news all hurricane season at the Eye on the
Storm blog. eyeonthestorm.blog.palmbeachpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 754 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                          September 26, 2015 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

El Niño packed knockout punch;
In historic year, no hurricanes have made it to western Atlantic.

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller     Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 696 words


For the first time in 100 years, no hurricane has reached the western Atlantic
Ocean as each powerful cyclone this storm season has been obliterated by a
historically strong El Niño.

Although nine named storms have formed, only two reached hurricane strength --
Danny and Fred -- and neither maintained that status to the longitude line of 55
west, as noted this month by National Hurricane Center specialist Erik Blake.

The last time that happened this far into the storm season, which begins June 1,
was 1914.

"The western part of the basin is a death zone for tropical cyclones this year,"
said Todd Kimberlain, a hurricane specialist with the National Hurricane Center
in Miami. "Is it unusual? Yes."

Kimberlain cautioned Florida against letting its guard down, as a major
hurricane could still barrel off the African coast and make a beeline for the
Sunshine State. But this late into the year, the chances of a tropical wave
becoming a hurricane in the Atlantic are greatly diminished.

As the Northern Hemisphere experiences its seasonal shift from summer to autumn,
westerly wind shear increases, reducing the ability for tropical waves coming
off the coast of Africa to spin up into something stronger in the Atlantic.

Come October, it's more likely for a tropical wave to become a hurricane in the
Caribbean Sea or the Gulf of Mexico after traversing the Atlantic as a jumble of
thunderstorms. That's where 2005's Hurricane Wilma was born. The storm reached
Category 5 strength in the Gulf, before making landfall in southwest Florida as
a Category 3 storm with 120-mph winds. It walloped Palm Beach County on Oct. 24
as a Cat 2.

Phil Klotzbach, a research scientist with Colorado State University's Department
of Atmospheric Science, said there has never been a major hurricane landfall
after Oct. 1 during an El Niño year. A major hurricane is defined as a Category
3 with winds between 111 mph and 129 mph.

"The way things are croaking, it's pretty classic for an El Niño season," said
Bob Smerbeck, senior meteorologist with the Pennsylvania-based AccuWeather. "We
only had one major hurricane, and it was that little pipsqueak Danny out there."

Hurricane Danny, which lived Aug. 18 to Aug. 24, peaked with wind speeds at 115
mph, but was only a major hurricane for about eight hours. Danny made it the
closest to the 55 west longitude, but dropped to tropical storm strength before
reaching it.

"You can still get an El Niño season where one doozy hits the U.S. and it's a
big deal," Smerbeck said. "But if something's going to happen, it better happen
soon."

Although the 2015 hurricane season has been no match for El Niño, hurricane
specialists say it's still notable.

Klotzbach found:

The Atlantic has been hurricane-free since Sept. 2. That has only happened four
times since 1950: in 1956, 1962, 1987 and 1994.

No Atlantic hurricane has been within 2,000 miles of the U.S. mainland this
year.

The 2010 storm season had more days with a major hurricane than the past five
years combined, including 2015 to date.

This season's "accumulated cyclone energy" -- a measure of storm strength and
duration -- is less than half of the 30-year average.

The Atlantic has produced 63 hurricanes since the last Florida landfall --
2005's Hurricane Wilma. The previous record between landfalls was 33 hurricanes
between 1979 and 1985.

"A lot of this has just been good old-fashioned luck," Klotzbach said about the
length of time between hurricanes making landfall.

As of Friday, the Na- tional Hurricane Center was tracking a system over the
northwestern Caribbean Sea and portions of Central America. As it heads into the
Gulf of Mexico, forecasters give it a 20 percent chance of developing over five
days.

Kimberlain said in a non-El Niño year, there would be more concern about the
storm.

"There is one thing about the hurricane climate in Florida," Kimberlain said.
"It's not terribly unusual to see a string of a few years when we don't have a
whole lot, but when they come, they tend to come in droves."

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

WEEKEND UPDATES

Get online updates throughout hurricane season at the Post's Eye on the Storm
blog at eyeonthestorm.blog.PalmBeachPost.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 755 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                            November 6, 2017 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

WHY DO HURRICANES OCCUR WHERE THEY DO?

BYLINE:  Sarah Griffin

SECTION: LOCAL; BLUE SKY SCIENCE; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 345 words


Q: Why do hurricanes occur where they do?

- Kylan Pratsch, 8, Crestwood Elementary School, Madison

A: Hurricanes form near places like Florida because hurricanes need some
critical components to develop. They need a lot of water, and they also form
near the tropics because they need a lot of sunlight.

The sun heats the water, and that water starts evaporating and cools into
clouds. As the water evaporates, a hurricane will get its energy from the
clouds.

A hurricane also needs very low vertical wind shear. That means the wind at the
surface needs to be about the same speed as the wind near the upper parts of the
atmosphere. If the wind is changing a lot with elevation and getting stronger as
it gets higher in the atmosphere, hurricanes can't form because they end up
getting sheared. Wind will blow the top off the clouds, and a hurricane can't
develop and get its spin.

This year, hurricanes hit the states of Florida and Texas, as well as Puerto
Rico, a U.S. territory. The western Pacific Ocean near Japan and China gets a
lot of hurricanes as well, though they're referred to as tropical cyclones.

Tropical cyclones that form in the Southern Hemisphere turn clockwise, while
those that form in the Northern Hemisphere turn counter-clockwise.

While Wisconsin doesn't get hurricanes, it can still feel the effects of
hurricanes. Once a hurricane makes landfall, like Hurricane Irma did in Florida,
the effects can be far-reaching and can extend up the East Coast.

Some hurricanes, especially the ones that don't hit land, will eventually
undergo something called extratropical transition. This means the hurricane no
longer has a warm core that defines a hurricane, but it's still a very strong
wind storm.

This recently happened with Hurricane Ophelia, which hit Ireland and the United
Kingdom. Ophelia was a Category 3 hurricane, so it was a major hurricane with
winds over 100 miles per hour. It underwent a sort of transition and then still
hit Ireland with winds at about 80 miles per hour.

So effects of hurricanes can be felt farther north from where they form.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Sarah Griffin is an associate researcher at the Space Science and
Engineering Center at UW-Madison.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 756 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Capital Times (Madison, Wisconsin)

                           February 24, 2007 Saturday
                                  ALL EDITION

SCIENTIST OFFERS A HURRICANE WARNING;
STORMS TO WORSEN, PROFESSOR SAYS

BYLINE: By Kelly McClurg Special to The Capital Times The writer retains the
copyright for this article

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 564 words


The increasing intensity of hurricanes hitting the U.S. is partly driven by
global warming, and the ferocity of storms to come is likely to increase as
surface temperatures of the ocean rise, says a noted scientist visiting
UW-Madison.

"The effects of global warming do not only concern scientists," Massachusetts
Institute of Technology Professor Kerry Emanuel told an audience at a public
lecture Thursday. "I want to put this issue into a societal context."

Emanuel, a professor in the department of earth, atmospheric and planetary
sciences at MIT, has published two books and over 100 scientific articles. One
article published in the journal "Nature" in 2005, addressed the increasing
destructiveness of hurricanes in recent years.

Weeks within its publication, Hurricane Katrina hit the Gulf Coast and the
article gained Emanuel widespread attention. Time magazine named him one of the
"100 Most Influential People" of 2006 for his findings on hurricane intensity.

"Hurricanes account for the bulk of natural catastrophe and loss economically in
the U.S.," Emanuel said. "And as with Hurricane Katrina, a shocking loss of
life."

Emanuel said hurricane intensity has increased by almost 10 percent since the
1990s; over half of the hurricane damage in the U.S. comes from a mere eight
powerful hurricanes. These higher hurricane intensities in the U.S. have
resulted in more hurricane-related damage and a subsequent increase in recovery
expenditures as well.

Emanuel looked at the natural and human-related factors that have affected
change in the intensity, duration and frequency of hurricanes over the past
several decades. He said a primary factor is greenhouse gases heating surface
waters in the ocean. Hurricanes form by converting energy derived from
evaporated ocean water, meaning that as greenhouse gases increase, sea
temperatures rise and therefore so does the likelihood of hurricanes.

"Hurricanes depend for their existence on the greenhouse effect and global
warming," said Emanuel. "There is no real controversy about that ... and it is
impossible to believe that global warming is only due to natural causes, humans
are having an effect on global climate."

However those effects are hard to discern since scientists are uncertain about
the history and evolution of hurricanes, Emanuel said, due to past variations in
measurements and absence of data. For this reason, he said, it is not
particularly useful to look at the past for help in deciding future action when
it comes to determining hurricane behavior.

"Unfortunately future projections are that global warming will just keep going
up," Emanuel said. "If we are going to look at the long-term effects of that on
hurricane risk we had better contend with climate change first."

Both community members and UW-Madison students came to hear Emanuel speak.

"He structured the lecture in a way that it would be meaningful to a broad range
of disciplines," said Andrea Lang, a graduate student in the atmospheric and
oceanic science department at UW-Madison who attended the lecture. "I think he
brought up some really interesting points I never thought of before that I am
interested in looking into for myself."

Emanuel's lecture, "Is Global Warming Affecting Hurricanes?" was part of the Roy
F. Weston Distinguished Global Sustainability Lecture Series, named for the
UW-Madison alumnus whose donation made it possible.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 757 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Capital Times (Madison, Wisconsin)

                              May 23, 2008 Friday
                                  ALL EDITION

HURRICANE PREDICTIONS PUSH OIL PRICES UP

BYLINE: Bill Novak

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. WEB

LENGTH: 305 words


Predictions of as many as nine hurricanes forming in the Atlantic Ocean this
summer pushed oil prices upward again Friday, not good news for price-weary
gasoline consumers.

Pam Moen of AAA Wisconsin said hurricane predictions in 2006 and 2007 hiked
gasoline prices in early June both years, even though the actual number of
hurricanes didn't come close to the predictions.

The same thing could be happening Friday, as oil futures went up $2.68 to
$133.19 a barrel, according to Bloomberg.com, after falling to $130.81 Thursday
from the record $135.09 Wednesday.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration issued its hurricane
forecast Thursday, predicting as many as nine hurricanes this season, which
begins June 1, but the report also said as few as six hurricanes could form,
including two major hurricanes.

NOAA predicted 10 hurricanes in 2007, and only six formed. In 2006, five
hurricanes formed when nine were forecast.

"Some of the (oil price) reaction today could be the result of the hurricane
predictions," Moen said. "The predictions the past two years were wrong, but
even though the hurricanes didn't come to pass, the predictions had an effect on
gas prices."

Hurricanes Katrina and Rita wreaked havoc on Gulf of Mexico oil production in
2005, causing oil prices to surge.

Moen said similar storms in 2008 would be disastrous.

"If a hurricane or two disrupts Gulf production, we will be in a lot of
trouble," she said.

AAA Wisconsin reported last week summer travel is expected to decline this year
for the first time in a decade because of the high fuel prices.

The survey was taken before gas bubbled over the $4-a-gallon mark.

"Some who planned to travel might be changing their plans because of the new
prices," Moen said. "I can't imagine as many people traveling this summer, if
gas stays at or above $4 a gallon."

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2008 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 758 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                             May 14, 2005 Saturday
                               CHARLOTTE EDITION

Hurricane forum a wealth of information

BYLINE: By PATRICK WHITTLE patrick.whittle@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: B SECTION; Pg. BCE1

LENGTH: 505 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


Hurricanes have a way of getting people talking, so this week's Governor's
Hurricane Conference was a jackpot for statistics, factoids and pithy quotes.

"When I give this talk in Colorado, nobody shows up," joked hurricane predicter
Dr. William Gray, a professor of atmospheric science at Colorado State
University.

Gray was speaking to several hundred people at the Tampa Convention Center.

His message was not encouraging.

The 2005 storm season will likely bring three to five powerful hurricanes to the
United States, Gray said. There could be 13 hurricanes and tropical storms this
year and 35 "hurricane days," he said.

And the hurricane experts have had nine months to compile statistics that show
just how bad 2004 was.

OVERALL The 2004 storm season (15 named storms, 9 hurricanes, six of which were
major) killed 60 people in the United States and caused $45 billion in damage.
Charley caused the most damage at $14 billion.

RED CROSS The American Red Cross spent $109 million on the 2004 hurricanes. It
spent $82 million on Hurricane Andrew. The 2004 hurricanes also outpaced Andrew
on shelters used (1,828 to 488), people seeking shelter (424,428 to 138,926),
meals served (16,642,370 to 5,672,303), relief workers (34,771 to 14,788),
relief cases opened (73,779 to 68,252) and service centers (329 to 30).

VOLUNTEERS There were more volunteers in Florida after the 2004 hurricanes than
in any state at any time in American history.

TARPS FEMA now keeps four times as many blue roof tarps in stock.

FEEDINGS 20,000 meals were served by Outback Steakhouse to emergency workers in
three counties after Hurricane Charley.

STORM FREQUENCY There have been 45 six-hour periods when a Category 3, 4 or 5
hurricane took place since 1995. From 1926 to 1994, there were 46.

WHO WAS THERE 2,900 people attended the hurricane conference from 23 states and
territories. Participants were from Hawaii, the British West Indies, Canada and
American Samoa.

321

The number of tornadoes that accompanied the storms.

8

The number of deaths attributed to the tornadoes.

MORE statistics, plus quotes from the conference, Page 5B

92

People died as an indirect result of the hurricanes.

33

Of those, the number of deaths that occurred in debris removal or roof repairs.

40,000

of 1.7 million insurance claims are still unresolved.

11,000

residential units destroyed in Charlotte County.

41,000

pool cages destroyed in Charlotte County.

27,000

roof replacements needed in Charlotte County after Charley.

11,500

mobile homes are housing hurricane victims in Florida.

16,000

mobile homes were housing hurricane victims in Florida at peak occupancy.

50

families move out of the mobile homes every day.

"We won't need as many heroes next year if people prepare as they should."

GOV. JEB BUSH

"I don't want to be accused of just giving out taxpayer money willy-nilly."

MICHAEL BROWN,

Federal Emergency Management Agency undersecretary, on complaints from hurricane
victims who were rejected for FEMA aid

"You just love me for my money."

BROWN

at the opening ceremonies in front of 2,900 people

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2005 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.


                          FOCUS - 759 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                             April 11, 2006 Tuesday
                                SARASOTA EDITION

Emergency officials get ready;
They tally volunteers and prepare residents for hurricane season

BYLINE: By DOUG SWORD doug.sword@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: B SECTION; Pg. BS1

LENGTH: 646 words


As emergency management officials in the region prepare for the upcoming
hurricane season, which officially begins June 1, they're reporting a host of
improvements to their disaster plans.

Compared with figures from immediately before Hurricane Charley, Manatee County
has nearly doubled its Red Cross volunteers to 1,119. In Sarasota and DeSoto
counties combined, Red Cross volunteers ballooned from about 50 to 650.

Charlotte County lost a lot of volunteers because of the destruction of
Hurricane Charley. But there have been enough new volunteers during the past two
years to replace them, said Mike Lee, disaster director for the Charlotte County
chapter.

"Almost immediately after Hurricane Katrina hit, our phone rang off the hook,"
said Kevin Lindberg, executive director of the American Red Cross Southwest
Florida chapter, which covers Sarasota and DeSoto counties.

"Prior to Hurricane Charley we didn't have enough volunteers to respond to a
disaster," Lindberg said, noting that the Sarasota/DeSoto chapter contributed
300 volunteers to aid in disaster recovery last hurricane season.

Pet owners will have more places to go with the boost in the number of hurricane
shelters that will accept pets this year. Sarasota County has doubled its
pet-friendly shelters to four, and Charlotte County will open its first such
shelter at Port Charlotte Middle School.

Emergency workers seem keenly aware that they have only seven weeks left before
the next hurricane season. Their schedules are busy with hurricane conferences
and local hurricane awareness events in April and May.

Many are headed for Orlando this week for the National Hurricane Conference,
where topics include an overview of last year's record-breaking hurricane
season, the future of the embattled Federal Emergency Management Agency, the
lack of gasoline during 2005 evacuations and predictions for the 2006 season.

Others will head for the Florida Hurricane Conference in Fort Lauderdale next
month.

It's also time to drill the message of preparedness into the public's
consciousness. Manatee County holds its Hurricane Summit on Wednesday at the
Manatee Convention Center. Charlotte County is gearing up for its big push for
residents to get their hurricane kits ready at an event set for May 20 at the
Port Charlotte Mall.

Charlotte County Emergency Management Director Wayne Sallade said he had four
speaking engagements last week, two this week and the schedule will get more
crowded the closer it gets to National Hurricane Awareness Week May 20-27.

Storm preparation improvements

Emergency management officials in the region say they've made a number of
improvements to their disaster plans. Those improvements include:

* The Red Cross will open a new Lakewood Ranch office next month to recruit
volunteers and serve as a backup site if its 59th Street offices are closed by a
hurricane.

* Low-lying Charlotte County hopes to open its first Red Cross-approved
hurricane shelter at Kingsway Elementary in Port Charlotte. The county has
refuge sites, but this will be the first hardened shelter that meets the
requirement of being at least 18 feet above sea level.

* Sarasota County spent $2 million on its special-needs shelters, increasing
capacity and hard-wiring generators to keep oxygen flowing to patients. The
county also doubled its pet-friendly shelters to four.

* A team of 180 doctors, nurses and other health care workers have been
assembled by the Sarasota County Health Department to assist in disasters.

* The Senior Friendship Center in Sarasota County is working with neighborhood
and faith-based groups that want to volunteer to assist after a storm, which
could include distributing water or clearing debris.

* The Sarasota County K-9 Search and Rescue Team bought an $8,000 trailer to not
only haul supplies to disaster areas but provide an air-conditioned spot to cool
its hot four-legged workers.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.


                          FOCUS - 760 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                          November 28, 2007 Wednesday
                                  ALL EDITION

Experts puzzle over quiet '07 storm season

BYLINE: By ANNA SCOTT anna.scott@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 818 words


As forecasters prepare for the season's end on Friday, they are pondering a new
climate puzzle.

The Atlantic basin experienced nearly as many named storms as in the record 2004
season. And yet, at least for the coastal United States, it was one of the
quietest seasons in three decades.

Half of the 14 storms lasted one day or less -- defying all predictions. And the
majority, with the exception of twin Category-5s that barreled south in the
Caribbean, spun away from land.

With the average storm stretching a mere 2.3 days, this year marked the lowest
ratio of storm days per storm since 1977.

"We had two Category 5 hurricanes and 12 really kind of pathetic storms," said
Phil Klotzbach of Colorado State University's forecasting team. "They were
short-lived and didn't do very much. That pretty much sums up the season."

An unexpected pocket of heavy wind shear tore apart many of the storms before
they could become hurricanes. But forecasters have yet to figure out why the
shear increased -- especially in a year when a La Nina pattern was expected to
break it up.

One of the leading theories at the Climate Prediction Center in Miami is that
unusual monsoon patterns in the eastern part of the world had something to do
with it. The idea is that a weakened La Nina could be linked to cooler
temperatures and heavier rains in the east, but scientists are still in the
early stages of their investigation.

"This was a situation where a lot of things were favorable for tropical cyclones
to form," said Gerry Bell. "Something else was going on in the climate."

Wind shear over the Atlantic Ocean grew fierce in early September, tearing apart
tropical storms Melissa, Ingrid and Jerry, and even Hurricane Karen, before they
approached land. Hurricane Humberto, which intensified faster than any other
storm on record, lasted only about six hours and quickly turned into a tropical
depression over Texas.

Shear refers to the way wind blows at different speeds and in different
directions at various levels in the atmosphere. Tropical storms can only
strengthen if the shear is light, meaning the winds are fairly uniform with
increasing height, allowing the delicate eye-structure to develop.

"Especially in the eastern Atlantic, where the major hurricanes tend to form,
they just got sheared to death," Klotzbach said.

Even so, September brought eight named storms -- the most of any September on
record.

Forecasters predicted an above-average season -- the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration said there was an 85 percent chance -- but it turned
out to be "near normal."

Of the 14 named storms, six were hurricanes, including Karen, which was upgraded
after post-storm reanalysis by the National Hurricane Center. Forecasters
expected up to 17 named storms and around 8 hurricanes.

For the second year in a row, hurricanes avoided Florida, setting off more
concern among emergency management officials that residents will be less likely
to prepare next year. The season has also served as a reminder that forecasting
is an uncertain science.

Scientists were initially driven by belief that this is a high-hurricane era,
and by the expected development of La Nina, which is supposed to make the
environment friendly to hurricanes.

The high wind shear was not the only surprise. Forecasters downgraded
predictions midseason after realizing that sea-surface temperatures were cooler
in the eastern Atlantic than they thought. At about 85 degrees, the water was
still about 2.5 degrees cooler than in 2005 -- a slight difference thought to
play a significant role in formation of hurricanes, which feed off warm water.

And they still have not figured out what happened in October. Usually the month
brings storms out of the Caribbean, but only one came: Hurricane Noel, which
lasted a single day.

Last year, forecasters were caught off guard by El Nino, which creates an
unfavorable climate for hurricanes, and clouds of African dust thought to be
either suffocating hurricanes or blocking the sun and forcing the water to cool.

The National Hurricane Center will release a verification of its forecast
Thursday. The Colorado State University team released its summary Tuesday.

"Every year you pick up something new," Klotzbach said. "When you have a bad
forecast you learn even more."

Almost 200 people died this year from Atlantic basin hurricanes, mostly during
Hurricanes Felix and Dean. At least 133 deaths were reported from Hurricane
Felix, which hit Nicaragua and Honduras in September. Hurricane Dean killed 42
people and caused an estimated $4 billion in damage. Hurricane Lorenzo caused
five deaths in Mexico.

The most deadly hurricane to hit the U.S. coast this year was Hurricane
Humberto, which killed one person and cost an estimated $500 million in damage
when it hit Texas. Tropical Storm Erin, whose strong winds and heavy rain across
Missouri, Texas and Oklahoma, is thought to have killed 18 people.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
 ASSOCIATED PRESS ARCHIVE / 2007 / ARIANA CUBILLOS Almost 200 people died this
year from Atlantic hurricanes. Yet, for the coastal United States, it was one of
the quietest seasons in three decades. Above, refugees line up to get food and
supplies at a school in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, on Oct. 31 after Tropical Storm
Noel hit.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 761 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                           September 24, 2004 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricane alarmists full of hot air: Most global warming advocates agree
--Mother Nature's to blame, not SUVs

BYLINE: Lorne Gunter, The Edmonton Journal

SECTION: OPINION; Lorne Gunter; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 805  words


Atlantic hurricanes form over warm water, mostly off the west coast of Africa.
Global warming is promised to warm the oceans, ergo, this year's spate of
forceful hurricanes must be the result of global warming, right?

Not quite.

Although they are big and powerful, hurricanes are rather delicate, complex
beasts, too.

While it is true hurricanes cannot form without warm water, they also cannot
survive powerful crosswinds aloft. As the tropical depressions that lead to

hurricanes begin to churn up moisture from the ocean and charge off across the
tropical Atlantic towards the Caribbean and the United States, they risk being
blown away, literally, by strong westerly winds coming off North or Central
America.

No matter how powerful hurricanes are, a strong wind from the west can disrupt
their formation. That is why there are so few hurricanes formed in years with
strong El Ninos. The winds generated over the extra-warm Pacific rush into the
Caribbean basin and the Atlantic and help keep tropical depressions from
becoming tropical storms and then hurricanes.

Even moderate winds can protect North America and the Caribbean, even if they
can't keep the 'canes themselves from forming.

There is a hurricane whirling and swirling right now up the middle of the
Atlantic, east of Newfoundland -- hurricane Karl. He's been out there, at
hurricane strength, since last Saturday. His maximum sustained winds hit 225
kilometres per hour on Monday. (That made him a Category Four.) But I'll bet
you've never even heard of him.

You see, poor Karl caught a modest, outgoing, high-altitude wind as he crossed
the mid-Atlantic and it (among other things) carried him out to sea.

No mention has been made of Karl by any media since Tuesday because he threatens
nothing except some transatlantic freighters and a couple of stunned seabirds.

Then there's Jeanne, which is expected to hit Florida sometime late Saturday or
early Sunday.

Much has been made of Jeanne's death toll in Haiti. But Jeanne barely touched
Haiti. Indeed, she was only at tropical storm strength when she skirted by. What
killed so many was the almost total denuding of Haitian forests for firewood,
which left coastal areas susceptible to flash flooding and mudslides.

And what caused this denuding? Civil strife and dictatorship that, over decades,
destroyed the economy and compelled desperate Haitians to cut down all the
trees.

Not global warming.

Hurricane formation can also be helped or hampered by wave motion south of
Sub-Saharan Africa. Even the salinity of ocean water can affect them. Not
surprisingly, so can solar activity.

And scientists who are dubious about whether manmade global warming is happening
caution that even if it is real -- even if our carbon dioxide emissions do force
up the Earth's temperature -- that warming will affect all the other factors
that come into play in hurricane formation, and not just the warmth of the
oceans.

So it is not clear whether anthropogenic warming will create more and stronger
hurricanes, as the alarmists project.

But as to whether or not this season's higher-than-usual hurricane activity is
the result of manmade warming, even most scientists who believe in manmade
warming do not think enough of that warming has occurred yet to be the cause of
this year's numerous hurricanes -- perhaps in the future, but not now.

The Sierra Club and environmental activists such as author Ross Gelbspan may
claim global warming is driving the spike in hurricanes. British Prime Minister
Tony Blair may get in the act, too, by asking the U.S. government to curb
emissions in order to stop warming and reduce hurricanes.

But even such leading manmade warming believers as Benjamin Preston at the
environmentalist-friendly Pew Center on Global Climate Change admits current
hurricane levels are within "natural variability."

Besides, this year's activity is not all that unusual; what is unusual is our
knowledge of it as a public.

More of the 'canes are making landfall in the U.S., which is always good for
more news coverage than when they strike little underdeveloped islands in the
Caribbean. There are 24-hour news outlets now; there weren't when hurricanes
were last this active (the 1960s). And, far more people have moved into
hurricane zones -- into harm's way --since the last active hurricane period
(1925-1965).

The main Atlantic current has been going through 20- to 40-year cycles of
stronger and weaker flow, higher and lower temperatures, greater and less
salinity, and more and fewer hurricanes for thousands of years.

What we are witnessing this year is a return to normal.

The 100-year average is one in three major hurricanes making U.S. landfall.

From 1965 to 1995, it was a fraction of that. Since then it's back up, but only
to one in seven.

Hurricane activity was due for an increase, SUVs or not.

lgunter@telus.net

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 762 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                           September 16, 2005 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Scientists link severe hurricanes to global warming of oceans

BYLINE: Tom Spears, Ottawa Citizen; CanWest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 434  words


Hurricanes are becoming more violent worldwide, with twice as many Category 4
and 5 hurricanes, the strongest types, as there were 35 years ago, scientists
are warning.

And while they won't blame the ferocity of hurricane Katrina on this trend, they
say warmer oceans are making the recent natural disaster to hit New Orleans the
face of the future.

The number of hurricanes has not increased over the past decades, but a greater
proportion are growing into monsters like Katrina, Andrew and Hugo, says a study
by the Georgia Institute of Technology and the U.S. National Center for
Atmospheric Research to be published today in Science.

"What we found was rather astonishing," says lead scientist Peter Webster. "In
the 1970s, there was an average of about 10 Category 4 and 5 hurricanes per year
globally. Since 1990, the number of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes has almost
doubled, averaging 18 per year globally."

He says warmer sea temperatures are feeding hurricanes, making them stronger.
Whether this is due to global warming caused by humans or whether there's a
natural cycle involved, he won't say.

Between 1975 and 1989, the North Atlantic and Caribbean had 16 of these
hurricanes, the study says. From 1990 to 2004, the number increased to 25.

The western Pacific Ocean went from 85 to 116 strong hurricanes in the same
period. The south Indian Ocean went from 23 to 50, and the eastern Pacific from
36 to 49, the study says.

The study also found that Category 4 and 5 storms are making up a larger share
of the total number of hurricanes.

"Category 4 and 5 hurricanes made up about 20 per cent of all hurricanes in the
1970s, but over the last decade they account for about 35 percent of these
storms," says Judith Curry.

Many environmentalists and hurricane victims have pointed to Katrina as evidence
that global warming is causing stronger storms. But scientists agree it's
impossible to read a trend in a single storm.

"If you look at Katrina you can say, 'Was that climate change or not?' I don't
know. It's an argument we could debate for a long time," says Canadian climate
scientist Gordon McBean of the University of Western Ontario.

"But in the aftermath of Katrina, the redevelopment strategy for that part of
the U.S. should factor in, in my view, the expectation that the hurricane
intensities of the future will be greater than those of the recent past."

Katrina was a Category 5 over the Gulf of Mexico, dropping to Category 4 before
reaching land. Category 4 hurricanes have sustained winds of at least 210
kilometres an hour at sea level. Category 5 winds are at least 250 kilometres an
hour.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 763 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             January 2, 2006 Monday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

QUALITY OF LIFE INDEX

BYLINE: JAY CRIDLIN

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 171 words


Number of named storms that formed during (and after) the 2005 Atlantic
hurricane season, a record: 27

Number of hurricanes that formed in 2005, a record: 13

Number of Category 5 hurricanes that formed in 2005, a record: 3

Number of hurricanes that have formed over the past three years, a record: 30

Number of major hurricanes that have made landfall in Florida over the past two
years, a record: 5

Number of millibars of pressure (the unit used to measure a storm's strength)
recorded in Hurricane Wilma, a record: 882

Number of millibars of pressure recorded in hurricanes Rita and Katrina, giving
2005 three of the six strongest hurricanes on record: 897, 902

Top sustained winds recorded in Hurricane Dennis, beating a record for July
hurricanes that had stood for 79 years: 150

Top sustained winds recorded in Hurricane Emily, beating the July record that
Hurricane Dennis had set a week earlier: 155

Number of days until hurricane season 2006: 150

Compiled by Jay Cridlin. Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 764 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Star Phoenix (Saskatoon, Saskatchewan)

                           December 8, 2007 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricane forecasters predict active '08 season

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. D6

LENGTH: 448  words

DATELINE: MIAMI


MIAMI (Reuters) -- The noted Colorado State University hurricane research team
predicted on Friday that 13 tropical storms will develop in the 2008 Atlantic
hurricane season, seven of which would strengthen into hurricanes.

The team formed by forecasting pioneer William Gray, whose long-range forecasts
have been wrong for the past three years, said that would make 2008 a "somewhat
above-average" hurricane season. The long-term average is for 10 tropical storms
and six hurricanes during the six-month season starting June 1.

Gray's team, now led by his protege Philip Klotzbach, said three of the
hurricanes next year would be the most dangerous Category 3 or above storms,
with winds of at least 178 kilometres per hour.

The Colorado State University hurricane experts, whose forecasts are closely
followed by energy and commodity markets as well as disaster relief
professionals, had predicted there would be 17 tropical storms in the 2007
season that ended on Nov. 30.

In the end, the season saw 14 Atlantic tropical storms, six of which
strengthened into hurricanes.

Two of the hurricanes, Dean and Felix, reached the maximum Category 5 strength
on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale of hurricane intensity. Dean killed at
least 27 people as it raced through the Caribbean and hit Mexico's Yucatan
peninsula, while Felix killed more than 100 in Nicaragua.

It was the second year in a row the United States was largely spared after the
devastating years of 2004, when four hurricanes hit Florida, and 2005, when
Katrina swamped New Orleans, killing 1,500 people and causing $80 billion US in
damage.

"Despite fairly inactive 2006 and 2007 hurricane seasons, we believe that the
Atlantic basin is still in an active hurricane cycle," Gray said in a statement.

"This active cycle is expected to continue at least for another decade or two,"
he said. "After that, we're likely to enter a quieter Atlantic major hurricane
period like we experienced during the quarter-century periods of 1970-1994 and
1901-1925."

Gray is at odds with some hurricane researchers who believe that global warming
could be contributing to intensified hurricane activity.

The CSU team said it expected "fairly warm" tropical Atlantic sea surface
temperatures in 2008. Hurricanes draw their strength from warm water.

They also expected weak or neutral La Nina conditions -- unusually cold ocean
temperatures in the eastern equatorial Pacific which are part of the recipe for
active hurricane seasons in the Atlantic.

La Nina's opposite, the warm-water El Nino phenomenon, tends to dampen Atlantic
hurricanes by increasing wind shear, a difference in wind speeds at different
altitudes that can tear apart nascent hurricanes.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2007 The Star Phoenix, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 765 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 11, 2013 Thursday

'Enhanced' hurricane season predicted

BYLINE: Laura B. Martinez, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 413 words


April 11--As South Texas farmers and municipalities continue to deal with
ongoing drought, some say a hurricane might be needed to ease the water
shortage.

The first forecast of the 2013 Atlantic Hurricane Season by meteorologists
Philip Klotzbach and William Gray at the Tropical Meteorology Project at
Colorado State University's in Fort Collins, Colo., predicts "enhanced activity"
this Atlantic hurricane season, which begins June 1.

According to the forecast, there is a 47 percent chance that a hurricane will
make landfall along the Gulf Coast from Florida to Brownsville. In 2012, the
probability was 24 percent for the coastline from the Florida panhandle westward
to Brownsville.

The current forecast states there is an above-average probability for major
hurricanes making landfall along the U.S. coastline and in the Caribbean. It
predicts 18 named storms and nine hurricanes, four of them major.

Gray and Klotzbach cite state a combination of an anomalously warm tropical
Atlantic and a relatively low likelihood of the development of El Nino -- a
system of warm oceanic currents that shuts down the tropics -- in predicting an
above-average season.

"Coastal residents are reminded that it only takes one hurricane making landfall
to make it an active season for them, and they need to prepare the same for
every season, regardless of how much or how little activity is predicted," they
wrote.

Gray and Klotzbach's April forecast for the 2012 Atlantic Hurricane Season
predicted 10 named tropical storms and four hurricanes, two of them major. They
revised their forecast in August to predict 14 named storms and six hurricanes,
two major.

According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 19 named
storms, 10 hurricanes and two major hurricanes appeared in 2012.

Accuweather and NOAA will issue their forecasts within the upcoming weeks.

The Atlantic Hurricane Season runs from June 1 through Nov. 30.

Laura B. Martinez writes for The Brownsville Herald. She can be reached at
lmartinez@brownsvilleherald.com

GULF HURRICANES

The 2013 Atlantic hurricane season forecast gives a 47 percent chance that a
hurricane will make land fall along the Gulf Coast from Florida to Brownsville.
In 2012, the probability was 24 percent.

Source: Department of Atmospheric Science-Colorado State University

___ (c)2013 The Brownsville Herald (Brownsville, Texas) Visit The Brownsville
Herald (Brownsville, Texas) at www.brownsvilleherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130411-BV-Enhanced-hurricane-season-predicted-0411-20130411

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2013 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 766 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 11, 2013 Thursday

Expert: 47% chance of Gulf Coast hurricane

BYLINE: Laura B. Martinez, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 355 words


April 11--As South Texas farmers and municipalities continue to deal with
ongoing severe drought, some say a hurricane might be needed to ease the water
shortage.

The first forecast of the 2013 Atlantic Hurricane Season by meteorologists
Philip Klotzbach and William Gray at the Tropical Meteorology Project at
Colorado State University's in Fort Collins, Colo., predicts "enhanced activity"
this Atlantic hurricane season, which begins June 1.

According to the forecast, there is a 47 percent chance that a hurricane will
make landfall along the Gulf Coast from Florida to Brownsville. In 2012, the
probability was 24 percent for the coastline from the Florida panhandle westward
to Brownsville.

The current forecast states there is an above-average probability for major
hurricanes making landfall along the U.S. coastline and in the Caribbean. It
predicts 18 named storms and nine hurricanes, four

of them major.

Gray and Klotzbach cite state a combination of an irregularly warm tropical
Atlantic and a relatively low likelihood of the development of El Nino -- a
system of warm oceanic currents that shuts down the tropics -- in predicting an
above-average season.

"Coastal residents are reminded that it only takes one hurricane making landfall
to make it an active season for them, and they need to prepare the same for
every season, regardless of how much or how little activity is predicted," they
wrote.

Gray and Klotzbach's April forecast for the 2012 Atlantic Hurricane Season
predicted 10 named tropical storms and four hurricanes, two of them major. They
revised their forecast in August to predict 14 named storms and six hurricanes,
two major.

According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 19 named
storms, 10 hurricanes and two major hurricanes appeared in 2012.

Accuweather and NOAA will issue their forecasts within the upcoming weeks.

The Atlantic Hurricane Season runs from June 1 through Nov. 30.

lmartinez@

brownsvilleherald.com

___ (c)2013 The Brownsville Herald (Brownsville, Texas) Visit The Brownsville
Herald (Brownsville, Texas) at www.brownsvilleherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130411-BV-Expert-47-chance-of-Gulf-Coast-hurricane-0411-20130411

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2013 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 767 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             April 12, 2013 Friday

BRIEF: Active Atlantic hurricane season predicted

BYLINE: Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 211 words


April 12--MIAMI -- Two leading hurricane forecasters have both predicted
higher-than-normal tropical cyclone activity during this year's Atlantic
hurricane season, which runs from 1 June to 30 November.

On Thursday, Phil Klotzbach and William Gray issued Colorado State University's
Tropical Meteorology Project's hurricane forecast for the 30th year. They have
predicted 18 named storms, nine hurricanes and four major hurricanes of Category
3 strength or higher during the 2013 hurricane season, all significantly higher
than average.

University College of London professors Mark Saunders and Adam Lea of the
UK-based Tropical Storm Risk also predicted a more active hurricane season in
their report on 5 April, forecasting 15.2 named storms, 7.5 hurricanes and 3.4
major hurricanes.

The Klotzbach/Gray report listed five hurricane seasons since 1900 with
characteristics most similar to what was observed in February-March 2013. Those
years include 1915, 1952, 1966, 1996 and, most recently, 2004, the year that
spawned 15 named storms, nine hurricanes and six major hurricanes.

___ (c)2013 the Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) Visit the
Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) at www.caribbeannewsnow.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20130412-1CN-BRF-Active-Atlantic-hurricane-season-predicted-0412-20130412

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CN


        Copyright 2013 Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands


                          FOCUS - 768 of 881 DOCUMENTS


              St. Charles County Business Record (St. Charles, MO)

                           September 2, 2006 Saturday

Hurricane law: Four lawyers carve out niche in wake of devastation

BYLINE: Dick Dahl

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1220  words


New Orleans attorney Jeffrey Berniard was a refugee from the ravages of
Hurricane Katrina last year when he realized that the monstrous storm could
contain a silver lining for his practice.

"I had an inkling there were going to be a lot of insurance problems out there,"
he recalled. "So I created a strategy, and when I came back I focused on that. "

Berniard was a title attorney in a small New Orleans firm when Katrina forced
him to evacuate and head for his family's home in Lake Charles, La. But when he
went back five weeks later, he didn't return to the firm. Instead, he set up
shop on his own as "Jeff Berniard, Louisiana Hurricane Lawyer," and created a
Web site to bring in Katrina-related insurance business.

The strategy was successful. His new Web site brought in a flood of insurance
cases, and by May he was so swamped with work that his wife, Melissa Elaine
Wilson, left her job as a lawyer in Jefferson Juvenile Court to join him.
Although the number of hits on the site has receded in recent months, Berniard
said the work remains constant - and with most insurers extending the deadline
for filing Katrina and Rita claims to August 2007, it promises to continue.

Adding value

Type the phrase "hurricane lawyer" into any search engine and dozens of Web
sites will appear - mostly for law firms and lawyer-referral services in
Louisiana, Texas, Mississippi and Florida that are marketing their services in
handling hurricane-related insurance matters.

For some, hurricane law is a new practice area. For others, like Berniard, it is
an entirely new professional identity.

Florida attorney Gary A. Poliakoff has taken another approach to hurricane law -
he has been marketing hurricane-related "add on" services to his primary client
base of homeowners associations and housing cooperatives.

Poliakoff is a founding partner and managing principal of Becker & Poliakoff, a
125-lawyer firm in Fort Lauderdale and 11 other Florida cities. The firm has
long focused its practice on representing "common-ownership housing" entities,
and in 1992 was "literally blown into [hurricane work] by Hurricane Andrew. "

Andrew was a Category 5 hurricane that held the distinction of being the most
destructive hurricane in U.S. history until Katrina. For Poliakoff and his
colleagues, the task of sorting out "who pays for what" following Andrew was
many-faceted. In common-ownership housing, not all property is covered by
insurance - landscaped common areas are not, for instance - so sometimes
Poliakoff had to work with groups to develop money-raising ventures or arrange
loans. He also settled disputes between individual owners and associations and
handled bidding procedures.

In the process, Poliakoff said, he saw that many clients could have avoided some
of the post-hurricane headaches if they had they done a better job of planning
and preparation. And there he saw a marketing opportunity.

Poliakoff estimates that he now gives 20 to 25 speeches on disaster preparedness
and recovery to homeowners and associations each year, offering advice on how to
perform risk analyses and develop good disaster plans.

In addition, his firm has been working on the creation of a "mobile office" - an
RV outfitted with satellite phones and connections to the firm's computers -
that could be called into service if a hurricane or other catastrophe causes a
sustained power outage.

The hurricane law blog

The firm of McGlinchey Stafford has taken a different approach - it has created
"The Hurricane Law Blog. "

Partner Bennett S. Koren acknowledges that the blog creates "an indirect
business benefit [with] our existing clients" - making them appreciate the firm
more - but that its primary purpose is public service.

Whatever the strategy behind the blog, it's drawing significant attention. A
firm spokesman said that each day about 300 individuals visit the site, which
features the latest news on hurricane-related litigation and regulatory efforts
that a team of lawyers culls from media and court documents. In addition, the
site contains a variety of links to government agencies, laws and proposed
legislation, among other things.

Koren said the idea for the blog was born last September, when 60 of the 100
lawyers in the eight-city firm's New Orleans office had to be taken in by the
Baton Rouge office. He said lawyers in the crammed temporary space began
discussing how to cope with the new and difficult post-Katrina landscape.

"A number of us were sitting around a table talking about how someone needed to
aggregate the relevant legal information that would be coming out of this
storm," recalled Koren. "Someone suggested that we do it ourselves. "

Koren and nine other McGlinchey Stafford lawyers became the blog's co-editors,
and he said they're as busy keeping it up-to-date now as they were in the weeks
and months following the hurricane.

"I spend a couple of hours a week and each of the other editors probably spends
the same," he said. "However, it is not uniform. There might be nothing for a
month, and then a [big] decision comes down which takes a lot of time. "

One such decision was Leonard vs. Nationwide. On Aug. 15, U.S. District Court
Judge L.T. Senter Jr. issued a big post-Katrina defense victory for the
insurance industry. Senter ruled that Nationwide Mutual Insurance Co. 's
policies do not cover damage from water or storm surge, a ruling that could
affect hundreds of other pending insurance cases. (No. 1:05CV475 LTS (S.D.
Miss.).)

The CLE route

Pensacola sole practitioner Samuel W. Bearman has launched a marketing campaign
proclaiming himself "The Hurricane Lawyer. " His activity as a speaker at CLE
and bar functions indicates that he may be living up to his chosen moniker.

Bearman had his first taste of hurricane litigation in 1995 after Hurricane Opal
slammed into Florida. The storm caused $3 billion in damage and brought Bearman
more than 50 insurance cases, one of which he tried before a jury that awarded
his client the full policy limits of $100,000.

Nearly 10 years elapsed before another big storm, Hurricane Charley, hit Florida
in August 2004. But by the end of the 2005 hurricane season four more Category 3
storms had struck and Bearman was overwhelmed by insurance cases - particularly
in the wake of Hurricane Ivan, which caused extensive damage in southern Florida
and killed 14 people, including a friend of Bearman.

The volume of work allowed Bearman to establish himself as an authority on
hurricane-related insurance claims. He's written articles for law journals and
lectured to a variety of bar groups and CLE programs on the subject. He's also
created a Web site, "Florida Hurricane Law," which provides information to
consumers about how to go about filing a hurricane insurance claim.

Bearman contends that people need his services because hurricane claims are
different from other catastrophic events.

"The client typically has both wind and flood damage to his house," he said.
"More times than not, the wind insurance company is blaming flood and the flood
insurance company is blaming wind. "

And in May, Bearman took another marketing step and launched the "Florida
Hurricane Hotline" - 1-800-760-6065 - as a service for people seeking
information about hurricane insurance and filing claims.

This article was originally published in Lawyers USA, a sister publication.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 769 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Minnesota Lawyer (Minneapolis, MN)

                               September 4, 2006

Hurricane law: Four lawyers carve out niche in wake of devastation

BYLINE: Dick Dahl

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1221  words


New Orleans attorney Jeffrey Berniard was a refugee from the ravages of
Hurricane Katrina last year when he realized that the monstrous storm could
contain a silver lining for his practice.

"I had an inkling there were going to be a lot of insurance problems out there,"
he recalled. "So I created a strategy, and when I came back I focused on that. "

Berniard was a title attorney in a small New Orleans firm when Katrina forced
him to evacuate and head for his family's home in Lake Charles, La. But when he
went back five weeks later, he didn't return to the firm. Instead, he set up
shop on his own as "Jeff Berniard, Louisiana Hurricane Lawyer," and created a
website to bring in Katrina-related insurance business.

The strategy was successful. His new website brought in a flood of insurance
cases, and by May he was so swamped with work that his wife, Melissa Elaine
Wilson, left her job as a lawyer in Jefferson Juvenile Court to join him.
Although the number of hits on the site has receded in recent months, Berniard
said the work remains constant - and with most insurers extending the deadline
for filing Katrina and Rita claims to August 2007, it promises to continue.

Adding value

Type the phrase "hurricane lawyer" into any search engine and dozens of websites
will appear - mostly for law firms and lawyer-referral services in Louisiana,
Texas, Mississippi and Florida that are marketing their services in handling
hurricane-related insurance matters.

For some, hurricane law is a new practice area. For others, like Berniard, it is
an entirely new professional identity.

Florida attorney Gary A. Poliakoff has taken another approach to hurricane law -
he has been marketing hurricane-related "add on" services to his primary client
base of homeowners associations and housing cooperatives.

Poliakoff is a founding partner and managing principal of Becker & Poliakoff, a
125-lawyer firm in Fort Lauderdale and 11 other Florida cities. The firm has
long focused its practice on representing "common-ownership housing" entities,
and in 1992 was "literally blown into [hurricane work] by Hurricane Andrew. "

Andrew was a Category 5 hurricane that held the distinction of being the most
destructive hurricane in U.S. history until Katrina. For Poliakoff and his
colleagues, the task of sorting out "who pays for what" following Andrew was
many-faceted. In common-ownership housing, not all property is covered by
insurance - landscaped common areas are not, for instance - so sometimes
Poliakoff had to work with groups to develop money-raising ventures or arrange
loans. He also settled disputes between individual owners and associations and
handled bidding procedures.

In the process, Poliakoff said, he saw that many clients could have avoided some
of the post-hurricane headaches if they had they done a better job of planning
and preparation. And there he saw a marketing opportunity.

Poliakoff estimates that he now gives 20 to 25 speeches on disaster preparedness
and recovery to homeowners and associations each year, offering advice on how to
perform risk analyses and develop good disaster plans.

In addition, his firm has been working on the creation of a "mobile office" - an
RV outfitted with satellite phones and connections to the firm's computers -
that could be called into service if a hurricane or other catastrophe causes a
sustained power outage.

The hurricane law blog

The firm of McGlinchey Stafford has taken a different approach - it has created
"The Hurricane Law Blog. "

Partner Bennett S. Koren acknowledges that the blog creates "an indirect
business benefit [with] our existing clients" - making them appreciate the firm
more - but that its primary purpose is public service.

Whatever the strategy behind the blog, it's drawing significant attention. A
firm spokesman said that each day about 300 individuals visit the site, which
features the latest news on hurricane-related litigation and regulatory efforts
that a team of lawyers culls from media and court documents. In addition, the
site contains a variety of links to government agencies, laws and proposed
legislation, among other things.

Koren said the idea for the blog was born last September, when 60 of the 100
lawyers in the eight-city firm's New Orleans office had to be taken in by the
Baton Rouge office. He said lawyers in the crammed temporary space began
discussing how to cope with the new and difficult post-Katrina landscape.

"A number of us were sitting around a table talking about how someone needed to
aggregate the relevant legal information that would be coming out of this
storm," recalled Koren. "Someone suggested that we do it ourselves. "

Koren and nine other McGlinchey Stafford lawyers became the blog's co-editors,
and he said they're as busy keeping it up-to-date now as they were in the weeks
and months following the hurricane.

"I spend a couple of hours a week and each of the other editors probably spends
the same," he said. "However, it is not uniform. There might be nothing for a
month, and then a [big] decision comes down which takes a lot of time. "

One such decision was Leonard v. Nationwide. On Aug. 15, U.S. District Court
Judge L.T. Senter Jr. issued a big post-Katrina defense victory for the
insurance industry. Senter ruled that Nationwide Mutual Insurance Co. 's
policies do not cover damage from water or storm surge, a ruling that could
affect hundreds of other pending insurance cases. (No. 1:05CV475 LTS (S.D.
Miss.).)

The CLE route

Pensacola sole practitioner Samuel W. Bearman has launched a marketing campaign
proclaiming himself "The Hurricane Lawyer. " His activity as a speaker at CLE
and bar functions indicates that he may be living up to his chosen moniker.

Bearman had his first taste of hurricane litigation in 1995 after Hurricane Opal
slammed into Florida. The storm caused $3 billion in damage and brought Bearman
more than 50 insurance cases, one of which he tried before a jury that awarded
his client the full policy limits of $100,000.

Nearly 10 years elapsed before another big storm, Hurricane Charley, hit Florida
in August 2004. But by the end of the 2005 hurricane season four more Category 3
storms had struck and Bearman was overwhelmed by insurance cases - particularly
in the wake of Hurricane Ivan, which caused extensive damage in southern Florida
and killed 14 people, including a friend of Bearman.

The volume of work allowed Bearman to establish himself as an authority on
hurricane-related insurance claims. He's written articles for law journals and
lectured to a variety of bar groups and CLE programs on the subject. He's also
created a website, "Florida Hurricane Law," which provides information to
consumers about how to go about filing a hurricane insurance claim.

Bearman contends that people need his services because hurricane claims are
different from other catastrophic events.

"The client typically has both wind and flood damage to his house," he said.
"More times than not, the wind insurance company is blaming flood and the flood
insurance company is blaming wind. "

And in May, Bearman took another marketing step and launched the "Florida
Hurricane Hotline" - 1-800-760-6065 - as a service for people seeking
information about hurricane insurance and filing claims.

(This article was originally published in Lawyers USA, another Dolan Media
publication).

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 770 of 881 DOCUMENTS

            Copyright 2010 AWP AG für Wirtschaftspublikationen, Alle
                               Rechte Vorbehalten

                             AWP Financial Analysis

                          Zurich Financial Services AG

                                2. November 2010

AUSBLICK/ZFS 9M: Reingewinn zwischen 2'330 Mio und 2'610 Mio USD erwartet



   Zürich (awp) - Die Zurich Financial Services (ZFS) wird am Donnerstag, 4.
November, die Zahlen zu den ersten neun Monaten 2010 publizieren. Elf Analysten
haben dazu folgende Prognosen:

9M 2010E
 In Mio USD              AWP-Konsens
Bandbreite
       9M 2009A    Schätzungen

Betriebsgewinn
 (BOP)      3'652       3'456 - 3'752         4'066       11

Reingewinn
                2'465       2'33 2'610         2'163       10
 Combined Ratio (%)         97,5        96,9 - 97,8           96,9        6

 Per 30.09.10E
 In Mio USD              AWP-Konsens
Bandbreite
     30.06.2009A    Schätzungen

Eigenkapital
              30'537    29'10 32'698        28'469        7

   FOKUS: Die meisten Analysten erwarten von der ZFS für die ersten neun Monate
2010 ein solides Zahlenset ohne Überraschungen. Allerdings dürfte der
Zwischenbericht weiterhin vom schwierigen Finanzmarktumfeld geprägt sein, der
vor allem auf den Erfolg aus den Finanzanlagen und im Lebengeschäft gedrückt
haben dürfte. Im Nichtleben-Geschäft sollte sich die Schadenquote und damit die
Combined Ratio im Vergleich zum ersten Halbjahr verbessert haben, da in der
Berichtsperiode weniger Grossschäden zu verzeichnen waren. Zudem wird erwartet,
dass sich das US-Nichtleben-Geschäft zu stabilisieren begonnen hat. Auch Farmers
sollte sich gut entwickelt haben, wobei allerdings der Vergleich zur Sammelklage
aus dem Jahr 2003 belastet.

   ZIELE: Über die gesamte Gruppe hinweg strebt die ZFS eine Eigenkapitalrendite
auf dem operativen Ergebnis (BOP) von 16% an. Dieser Wert soll über den
Versicherungszyklus erreicht werden. Kurzfristig seien aber Schwankungen
möglich, vor allem in Berichtsperioden mit hohen Schadenbelastungen im
Nichtlebengeschäft, hiess es anlässlich der Präsentation der Semester-Zahlen
Anfang August.

   Bestätigt wurden damals auch die Zielsetzungen für das
Effizienzsteigerungsprogramm "The Zurich Way". So sollen in den Jahren 2010 und
2011 Ergebnisverbesserungen von jeweils rund 900 Mio USD realisiert werden.

   PRO MEMORIA: Der Vergleich in den Rechtsstreitigkeiten der ZFS in den USA im
Zusammenhang mit dem Geschäftsmodell der Tochter Farmers Group belastet die
Rechnung des dritten Quartals nach Abzug von Rückstellungen mit 295 Mio USD,
teilte der Versicherer Anfang Oktober mit.

   Die Integration von 21st Century verläuft gemäss CFO Dieter Wemmer besser als
ursprünglich geplant und die Gesellschaft habe bereits im ersten Jahr einen
Gewinnbeitrag geleistet.

   Der CFO sah anlässlich der Präsentation des Halbjahres-Ergebnisses im Leben-
und Farmers-Geschäft "grosses organisches Wachstumspotenzial". Entsprechend
seien Akquisitionen "wohl weniger ein Thema", Gelegenheiten würden aber dennoch
laufend geprüft, hiess es weiter. Der Bereich General Insurance leidet gemäss
dem CFO in den USA unter einem Druck auf den Prämien. Auch in Europa sei die
Profitabilität in einigen Sparten ungenügend und es werde versucht höhere
Prämien durchzusetzen.

   Der Versicherer will an einem Investor Day am 2. Dezember über die
strategischen Prioritäten informieren.

   AKTIENEINSTUFUNG: Gemäss AWP-Analyser bewerten Analysten den Titel
folgendermassen:

Kaufen:    16
 Halten:     5
 Verkaufen:  2

 Durchschnittliches Kursziel: 283,32 CHF

   Nachfolgend die detaillierten Schätzungen:

Rechnungslegung nach IFRS

 In Mio USD             9M 2010E       9M 2009A      Analyst
                                           +/-%

Betriebsgewinn
 (BOP):                    4'066
 Vontobel                  3'752                     Schürmann
 JPMorgan                  3'717                     Huttner
 Kepler                    3'732                     Croce
 Merrill Lynch             3'698                     Shea
 Jefferies                 3'687                     Shuck
 Exane BNP Paribas         3'679                     Jacquet
 UBS                       3'676                     Thiele
 KBW                       3'599                     Hawkins
 Helvea                    3'590                     Effgen
 Deutsche Bank             3'585                     Horgan
 ZKB                       3'456                     Marti

 AWP-Konsens               3'652          -10,2


Reingewinn
:                              2'163
 Vontobel                  2'610
 ZKB                       2'595
 Merrill Lynch             2'533
 Jefferies                 2'454
 UBS                       2'451
 Kepler                    2'449
 Helvea                    2'447
 Exane BNP Paribas         2'420
 KBW                       2'363
 Deutsche Bank             2'330

 AWP-Konsens               2'465         +14,0%

 Combined Ratio (%):                       96,9
 Vontobel                   97,8
 ZKB                        97,8
 Deutsche Bank              97,7
 KBW                        97,6
 Kepler                     97,4
 Merrill Lynch              96,9

 AWP-Konsens                97,5           n.m.

 In Mio USD            30.09.2010E    30.06.2010A

Eigenkapital
:                           28'469
 Merrill Lynch            32'698
 Kepler                   30'841
 UBS                      30'700
 KBW                      30'598
 Vontobel                 30'561
 Helvea                   29'260
 ZKB                      29'100

 AWP-Konsens              30'537          +7,3%

   Ausgewählte Analystenkommentare zu ZFS (im Originalwortlaut):

   Exane BNP Paribas (Thomas Jacquet): The quarter was finally exempt of
hurricanes in the US, which is good news for Zurich. However, figures from
Allstate suggest that other weather related events had a significant impact. The
burden from natural catastrophes at Allstate was 6.7ppt for the quarter which
seems to be the sign of a rather active quarter. We expect combined ratio at
97.3% for Zurich including a modest 2.4% reserve release benefit. UNDERPERFORM

   DEUTSCHE BANK (Spencer Horgan): Operating trends should remain robust in Q3,
but with the previously flagged settlement for the Farmers class action, and low
interest rates continuing to depress economic capital, we think it unlikely the
numbers will act as a catalyst. The December investor day could offer more
enticing newsflow, as new divisional heads set out strategic priorities,
hopefully accompanied by some aspirational targets. Given a successful track
record of delivery in the past, any such ambitions are likely to be given a high
degree of credibility by the market, in our view. BUY

   JEFFERIES (James Shuck): We reiterate our Buy recommendation ahead of the Q3
results despite the shares underperforming the sector by 3% in the last 3
months. We believe the next leg up is supported by a strong underlying combined
ratio, and the potential for share buybacks to support the already attractive
dividend yield. The shares trade at 1.06x EV vs the sector on 1x EV for a stable
15-16% ROEV. Our CHF279 PT is derived from our discounted sum of the parts
cashflow analysis. Key risks are competitive non-life pressures, deterioration
in sovereign risk and Nat Cats. BUY

   Homepage: www.zurich.com

UPDATE: 6. November 2010


                          FOCUS - 771 of 881 DOCUMENTS

            Copyright 2010 AWP AG für Wirtschaftspublikationen, Tous
                                droits réservés

                             AWP Financial Analysis

                          Zurich Financial Services AG

                                2 Novembre 2010

PRÉVISIONS/ZFS 9 mois: bénéfice net attendu entre 2330 et 2610 mio USD



   Zurich (awp) - Zurich Financial Services (ZFS) publie jeudi 4 novembre ses
résultats des neuf premiers mois 2010. Onze analystes ont établi les prévisions
suivantes:

9 mois 2010E
 en mio USD              consensus AWP   fourchette       9 mois 09   nombre de


prévisions
 Bénéfice opérat. BOP)     3'652       3'456 - 3'752         4'066       11
 Bénéfice net              2'465       2'33 2'610         2'163       10
 Combined ratio (%)         97,5        96,9 - 97,8           96,9        6

 au 30.09.10E
 en mio USD              consensus AWP  fourchette     30.06.2009     nombre de


prévisions
 Fonds propres             30'537    29'10 32'698        28'469        7

   FOCUS: la plupart des analystes prévoient que ZFS publiera de solides
résultats, sans surprise, sur les neuf premiers mois de 2010. Le rapport
intermédiaire devrait toutefois être marqué par un environnement de marché
difficile. On devrait en constater les effets notamment dans les revenus
financiers et les activités vie. Dans le secteur non vie, le faible taux de
dommages et le ratio combiné qui y est corelé devraient par contre s'être
améliorés, compte tenu du plus faible nombre de gros évènements sur la période.
Aux USA, ZFS devrait avoir de plus enregistré une certaine stabilisation de ses
activités dans le secteur non vie. Les analystes prévoient que Farmers a connu
un bon développement, même si la base de comparaison est affectée par la plainte
collective de 2003.

   OBJECTIFS: ZFS vise un rendement des fonds propres sur résultat opérationnel
(BOP) de 16% au niveau du groupe. Ce taux devrait être atteint au cours du cycle
d'assurance. A court terme, des variations sont possibles, tout particulièrement
sur les périodes de résultats marquées par des taux de dommages élevés dans le
secteur non vie, avait indiqué ZFS au mois d'août dans la documentation remise à
l'occasion de la publication des résultats S1.

   La compagnie zurichoise avait également confirmé à cette occasion ses
objectifs de programme d'efficience "The Zurich Way", avec une amélioration des
résultats 2010 et 2011 de respectivement 900 mio USD.

   POUR MÉMOIRE: L'accord dans l'affaire US avec le modèle d'affaires de la
filiale Farmers Group pèsera sur les comptes du troisième trimestre. Un montant
de 295 mio USD, après retrait d'impôts et amortissements antérieurs, sera porté
au bilan, avait indiqué ZFS tout début octobre.

   L'intégration de 21st Century se déroule mieux que prévu, a précisé le CFO
Dieter Wemmer. La société a déjà apporté sa contribution aux bénéfices la
première année.

   Le CFO a estimé lors de la présentation des résultats que le potentiel de
croissance organique est important dans le secteur vie et chez Farmers. Les
acquisitions figurent moins à l'ordre du jour, mais les opportunités sont
étudiées. Le secteur de l'assurance générale souffre, selon lui, de la pression
sur les primes. La rentabilité est également insuffisante dans certains segments
en Europe. ZFS tente d'y pallier en augmentant les primes.

   ZFS informera sur ses priorités stratégiques le 2 décembre 2010.

   RECOMMANDATIONS D'ANALYSTES selon AWP-Analyser:

acheter:   16
 conserver:  5
 vendre:     2

 Objectif de cours moyen: 283,32 CHF

   Prévisions détaillées des analystes:

Normes IFRS

 en mio USD             9 mois 10E     9 mois 09     analystes
                                           +/-%
 Bénéfice opérat. (BOP):                  4'066
 Vontobel                  3'752                     Schürmann
 JPMorgan                  3'717                     Huttner
 Kepler                    3'732                     Croce
 Merrill Lynch             3'698                     Shea
 Jefferies                 3'687                     Shuck
 Exane BNP Paribas         3'679                     Jacquet
 UBS                       3'676                     Thiele
 KBW                       3'599                     Hawkins
 Helvea                    3'590                     Effgen
 Deutsche Bank             3'585                     Horgan
 ZKB                       3'456                     Marti

 Consensus AWP:            3'652          -10,2

 Bénéfice net:                            2'163
 Vontobel                  2'610
 ZKB                       2'595
 Merrill Lynch             2'533
 Jefferies                 2'454
 UBS                       2'451
 Kepler                    2'449
 Helvea                    2'447
 Exane BNP Paribas         2'420
 KBW                       2'363
 Deutsche Bank             2'330

 Consensus AWP:            2'465         +14,0%

 Combined ratio (%):                       96,9
 Vontobel                   97,8
 ZKB                        97,8
 Deutsche Bank              97,7
 KBW                        97,6
 Kepler                     97,4
 Merrill Lynch              96,9

 Consensus AWP:             97,5           n.m.

 en mio USD            30.09.2010E    30.06.2010
 Fonds propres:                          28'469
 Merrill Lynch            32'698
 Kepler                   30'841
 UBS                      30'700
 KBW                      30'598
 Vontobel                 30'561
 Helvea                   29'260
 ZKB                      29'100

 Consensus AWP:           30'537          +7,3%

   Commentaires d'analystes (texte original):

   Exane BNP Paribas (Thomas Jacquet): The quarter was finally exempt of
hurricanes in the US, which is good news for Zurich. However, figures from
Allstate suggest that other weather related events had a significant impact. The
burden from natural catastrophes at Allstate was 6.7ppt for the quarter which
seems to be the sign of a rather active quarter. We expect combined ratio at
97.3% for Zurich including a modest 2.4% reserve release benefit. UNDERPERFORM

   DEUTSCHE BANK (Spencer Horgan): Operating trends should remain robust in Q3,
but with the previously flagged settlement for the Farmers class action, and low
interest rates continuing to depress economic capital, we think it unlikely the
numbers will act as a catalyst. The December investor day could offer more
enticing newsflow, as new divisional heads set out strategic priorities,
hopefully accompanied by some aspirational targets. Given a successful track
record of delivery in the past, any such ambitions are likely to be given a high
degree of credibility by the market, in our view. BUY

   JEFFERIES (James Shuck): We reiterate our Buy recommendation ahead of the Q3
results despite the shares underperforming the sector by 3% in the last 3
months. We believe the next leg up is supported by a strong underlying combined
ratio, and the potential for share buybacks to support the already attractive
dividend yield. The shares trade at 1.06x EV vs the sector on 1x EV for a stable
15-16% ROEV. Our CHF279 PT is derived from our discounted sum of the parts
cashflow analysis. Key risks are competitive non-life pressures, deterioration
in sovereign risk and Nat Cats. BUY

   Internet: www.zurich.com

UPDATE: 6 Novembre 2010


                          FOCUS - 772 of 881 DOCUMENTS

            Copyright 2010 AWP AG für Wirtschaftspublikationen, Alle
                               Rechte Vorbehalten

                             AWP Financial Analysis

                          Zurich Financial Services AG

                                3. November 2010

WDH/AUSBLICK/ZFS 9M: Reingewinn zwischen 2'330 Mio und 2'610 Mio USD erwartet



   Zürich (awp) - Die Zurich Financial Services (ZFS) wird am Donnerstag, 4.
November, die Zahlen zu den ersten neun Monaten 2010 publizieren. Elf Analysten
haben dazu folgende Prognosen:

9M 2010E
 In Mio USD              AWP-Konsens
Bandbreite
       9M 2009A    Schätzungen

Betriebsgewinn
 (BOP)      3'652       3'456 - 3'752         4'066       11

Reingewinn
                2'465       2'33 2'610         2'163       10
 Combined Ratio (%)         97,5        96,9 - 97,8           96,9        6

 Per 30.09.10E
 In Mio USD              AWP-Konsens
Bandbreite
     30.06.2009A    Schätzungen

Eigenkapital
              30'537    29'10 32'698        28'469        7

   FOKUS: Die meisten Analysten erwarten von der ZFS für die ersten neun Monate
2010 ein solides Zahlenset ohne Überraschungen. Allerdings dürfte der
Zwischenbericht weiterhin vom schwierigen Finanzmarktumfeld geprägt sein, der
vor allem auf den Erfolg aus den Finanzanlagen und im Lebengeschäft gedrückt
haben dürfte. Im Nichtleben-Geschäft sollte sich die Schadenquote und damit die
Combined Ratio im Vergleich zum ersten Halbjahr verbessert haben, da in der
Berichtsperiode weniger Grossschäden zu verzeichnen waren. Zudem wird erwartet,
dass sich das US-Nichtleben-Geschäft zu stabilisieren begonnen hat. Auch Farmers
sollte sich gut entwickelt haben, wobei allerdings der Vergleich zur Sammelklage
aus dem Jahr 2003 belastet.

   ZIELE: Über die gesamte Gruppe hinweg strebt die ZFS eine Eigenkapitalrendite
auf dem operativen Ergebnis (BOP) von 16% an. Dieser Wert soll über den
Versicherungszyklus erreicht werden. Kurzfristig seien aber Schwankungen
möglich, vor allem in Berichtsperioden mit hohen Schadenbelastungen im
Nichtlebengeschäft, hiess es anlässlich der Präsentation der Semester-Zahlen
Anfang August.

   Bestätigt wurden damals auch die Zielsetzungen für das
Effizienzsteigerungsprogramm "The Zurich Way". So sollen in den Jahren 2010 und
2011 Ergebnisverbesserungen von jeweils rund 900 Mio USD realisiert werden.

   PRO MEMORIA: Der Vergleich in den Rechtsstreitigkeiten der ZFS in den USA im
Zusammenhang mit dem Geschäftsmodell der Tochter Farmers Group belastet die
Rechnung des dritten Quartals nach Abzug von Rückstellungen mit 295 Mio USD,
teilte der Versicherer Anfang Oktober mit.

   Die Integration von 21st Century verläuft gemäss CFO Dieter Wemmer besser als
ursprünglich geplant und die Gesellschaft habe bereits im ersten Jahr einen
Gewinnbeitrag geleistet.

   Der CFO sah anlässlich der Präsentation des Halbjahres-Ergebnisses im Leben-
und Farmers-Geschäft "grosses organisches Wachstumspotenzial". Entsprechend
seien Akquisitionen "wohl weniger ein Thema", Gelegenheiten würden aber dennoch
laufend geprüft, hiess es weiter. Der Bereich General Insurance leidet gemäss
dem CFO in den USA unter einem Druck auf den Prämien. Auch in Europa sei die
Profitabilität in einigen Sparten ungenügend und es werde versucht höhere
Prämien durchzusetzen.

   Der Versicherer will an einem Investor Day am 2. Dezember über die
strategischen Prioritäten informieren.

   AKTIENEINSTUFUNG: Gemäss AWP-Analyser bewerten Analysten den Titel
folgendermassen:

Kaufen:    16
 Halten:     5
 Verkaufen:  2

 Durchschnittliches Kursziel: 283,32 CHF

   Nachfolgend die detaillierten Schätzungen:

Rechnungslegung nach IFRS

 In Mio USD             9M 2010E       9M 2009A      Analyst
                                           +/-%

Betriebsgewinn
 (BOP):                    4'066
 Vontobel                  3'752                     Schürmann
 JPMorgan                  3'717                     Huttner
 Kepler                    3'732                     Croce
 Merrill Lynch             3'698                     Shea
 Jefferies                 3'687                     Shuck
 Exane BNP Paribas         3'679                     Jacquet
 UBS                       3'676                     Thiele
 KBW                       3'599                     Hawkins
 Helvea                    3'590                     Effgen
 Deutsche Bank             3'585                     Horgan
 ZKB                       3'456                     Marti

 AWP-Konsens               3'652          -10,2


Reingewinn
:                              2'163
 Vontobel                  2'610
 ZKB                       2'595
 Merrill Lynch             2'533
 Jefferies                 2'454
 UBS                       2'451
 Kepler                    2'449
 Helvea                    2'447
 Exane BNP Paribas         2'420
 KBW                       2'363
 Deutsche Bank             2'330

 AWP-Konsens               2'465         +14,0%

 Combined Ratio (%):                       96,9
 Vontobel                   97,8
 ZKB                        97,8
 Deutsche Bank              97,7
 KBW                        97,6
 Kepler                     97,4
 Merrill Lynch              96,9

 AWP-Konsens                97,5           n.m.

 In Mio USD            30.09.2010E    30.06.2010A

Eigenkapital
:                           28'469
 Merrill Lynch            32'698
 Kepler                   30'841
 UBS                      30'700
 KBW                      30'598
 Vontobel                 30'561
 Helvea                   29'260
 ZKB                      29'100

 AWP-Konsens              30'537          +7,3%

   Ausgewählte Analystenkommentare zu ZFS (im Originalwortlaut):

   Exane BNP Paribas (Thomas Jacquet): The quarter was finally exempt of
hurricanes in the US, which is good news for Zurich. However, figures from
Allstate suggest that other weather related events had a significant impact. The
burden from natural catastrophes at Allstate was 6.7ppt for the quarter which
seems to be the sign of a rather active quarter. We expect combined ratio at
97.3% for Zurich including a modest 2.4% reserve release benefit. UNDERPERFORM

   DEUTSCHE BANK (Spencer Horgan): Operating trends should remain robust in Q3,
but with the previously flagged settlement for the Farmers class action, and low
interest rates continuing to depress economic capital, we think it unlikely the
numbers will act as a catalyst. The December investor day could offer more
enticing newsflow, as new divisional heads set out strategic priorities,
hopefully accompanied by some aspirational targets. Given a successful track
record of delivery in the past, any such ambitions are likely to be given a high
degree of credibility by the market, in our view. BUY

   JEFFERIES (James Shuck): We reiterate our Buy recommendation ahead of the Q3
results despite the shares underperforming the sector by 3% in the last 3
months. We believe the next leg up is supported by a strong underlying combined
ratio, and the potential for share buybacks to support the already attractive
dividend yield. The shares trade at 1.06x EV vs the sector on 1x EV for a stable
15-16% ROEV. Our CHF279 PT is derived from our discounted sum of the parts
cashflow analysis. Key risks are competitive non-life pressures, deterioration
in sovereign risk and Nat Cats. BUY

   Homepage: www.zurich.com

UPDATE: 7. November 2010


                          FOCUS - 773 of 881 DOCUMENTS

            Copyright 2010 AWP AG für Wirtschaftspublikationen, Tous
                                droits réservés

                             AWP Financial Analysis

                          Zurich Financial Services AG

                                3 Novembre 2010

RPT/PRÉVISIONS/ZFS 9 mois: bénéfice net attendu entre 2330 et 2610 mio USD



   répétition de la veille

   Zurich (awp) - Zurich Financial Services (ZFS) publie jeudi 4 novembre ses
résultats des neuf premiers mois 2010. Onze analystes ont établi les prévisions
suivantes:

9 mois 2010E
 en mio USD              consensus AWP   fourchette       9 mois 09   nombre de


prévisions
 Bénéfice opérat. BOP)     3'652       3'456 - 3'752         4'066       11
 Bénéfice net              2'465       2'33 2'610         2'163       10
 Combined ratio (%)         97,5        96,9 - 97,8           96,9        6

 au 30.09.10E
 en mio USD              consensus AWP  fourchette     30.06.2009     nombre de


prévisions
 Fonds propres             30'537    29'10 32'698        28'469        7

   FOCUS: la plupart des analystes prévoient que ZFS publiera de solides
résultats, sans surprise, sur les neuf premiers mois de 2010. Le rapport
intermédiaire devrait toutefois être marqué par un environnement de marché
difficile. On devrait en constater les effets notamment dans les revenus
financiers et les activités vie. Dans le secteur non vie, le faible taux de
dommages et le ratio combiné qui y est corelé devraient par contre s'être
améliorés, compte tenu du plus faible nombre de gros évènements sur la période.
Aux USA, ZFS devrait avoir de plus enregistré une certaine stabilisation de ses
activités dans le secteur non vie. Les analystes prévoient que Farmers a connu
un bon développement, même si la base de comparaison est affectée par la plainte
collective de 2003.

   OBJECTIFS: ZFS vise un rendement des fonds propres sur résultat opérationnel
(BOP) de 16% au niveau du groupe. Ce taux devrait être atteint au cours du cycle
d'assurance. A court terme, des variations sont possibles, tout particulièrement
sur les périodes de résultats marquées par des taux de dommages élevés dans le
secteur non vie, avait indiqué ZFS au mois d'août dans la documentation remise à
l'occasion de la publication des résultats S1.

   La compagnie zurichoise avait également confirmé à cette occasion ses
objectifs de programme d'efficience "The Zurich Way", avec une amélioration des
résultats 2010 et 2011 de respectivement 900 mio USD.

   POUR MÉMOIRE: L'accord dans l'affaire US avec le modèle d'affaires de la
filiale Farmers Group pèsera sur les comptes du troisième trimestre. Un montant
de 295 mio USD, après retrait d'impôts et amortissements antérieurs, sera porté
au bilan, avait indiqué ZFS tout début octobre.

   L'intégration de 21st Century se déroule mieux que prévu, a précisé le CFO
Dieter Wemmer. La société a déjà apporté sa contribution aux bénéfices la
première année.

   Le CFO a estimé lors de la présentation des résultats que le potentiel de
croissance organique est important dans le secteur vie et chez Farmers. Les
acquisitions figurent moins à l'ordre du jour, mais les opportunités sont
étudiées. Le secteur de l'assurance générale souffre, selon lui, de la pression
sur les primes. La rentabilité est également insuffisante dans certains segments
en Europe. ZFS tente d'y pallier en augmentant les primes.

   ZFS informera sur ses priorités stratégiques le 2 décembre 2010.

   RECOMMANDATIONS D'ANALYSTES selon AWP-Analyser:

acheter:   16
 conserver:  5
 vendre:     2

 Objectif de cours moyen: 283,32 CHF

   Prévisions détaillées des analystes:

Normes IFRS

 en mio USD             9 mois 10E     9 mois 09     analystes
                                           +/-%
 Bénéfice opérat. (BOP):                  4'066
 Vontobel                  3'752                     Schürmann
 JPMorgan                  3'717                     Huttner
 Kepler                    3'732                     Croce
 Merrill Lynch             3'698                     Shea
 Jefferies                 3'687                     Shuck
 Exane BNP Paribas         3'679                     Jacquet
 UBS                       3'676                     Thiele
 KBW                       3'599                     Hawkins
 Helvea                    3'590                     Effgen
 Deutsche Bank             3'585                     Horgan
 ZKB                       3'456                     Marti

 Consensus AWP:            3'652          -10,2

 Bénéfice net:                            2'163
 Vontobel                  2'610
 ZKB                       2'595
 Merrill Lynch             2'533
 Jefferies                 2'454
 UBS                       2'451
 Kepler                    2'449
 Helvea                    2'447
 Exane BNP Paribas         2'420
 KBW                       2'363
 Deutsche Bank             2'330

 Consensus AWP:            2'465         +14,0%

 Combined ratio (%):                       96,9
 Vontobel                   97,8
 ZKB                        97,8
 Deutsche Bank              97,7
 KBW                        97,6
 Kepler                     97,4
 Merrill Lynch              96,9

 Consensus AWP:             97,5           n.m.

 en mio USD            30.09.2010E    30.06.2010
 Fonds propres:                          28'469
 Merrill Lynch            32'698
 Kepler                   30'841
 UBS                      30'700
 KBW                      30'598
 Vontobel                 30'561
 Helvea                   29'260
 ZKB                      29'100

 Consensus AWP:           30'537          +7,3%

   Commentaires d'analystes (texte original):

   Exane BNP Paribas (Thomas Jacquet): The quarter was finally exempt of
hurricanes in the US, which is good news for Zurich. However, figures from
Allstate suggest that other weather related events had a significant impact. The
burden from natural catastrophes at Allstate was 6.7ppt for the quarter which
seems to be the sign of a rather active quarter. We expect combined ratio at
97.3% for Zurich including a modest 2.4% reserve release benefit. UNDERPERFORM

   DEUTSCHE BANK (Spencer Horgan): Operating trends should remain robust in Q3,
but with the previously flagged settlement for the Farmers class action, and low
interest rates continuing to depress economic capital, we think it unlikely the
numbers will act as a catalyst. The December investor day could offer more
enticing newsflow, as new divisional heads set out strategic priorities,
hopefully accompanied by some aspirational targets. Given a successful track
record of delivery in the past, any such ambitions are likely to be given a high
degree of credibility by the market, in our view. BUY

   JEFFERIES (James Shuck): We reiterate our Buy recommendation ahead of the Q3
results despite the shares underperforming the sector by 3% in the last 3
months. We believe the next leg up is supported by a strong underlying combined
ratio, and the potential for share buybacks to support the already attractive
dividend yield. The shares trade at 1.06x EV vs the sector on 1x EV for a stable
15-16% ROEV. Our CHF279 PT is derived from our discounted sum of the parts
cashflow analysis. Key risks are competitive non-life pressures, deterioration
in sovereign risk and Nat Cats. BUY

   Internet: www.zurich.com

UPDATE: 7 Novembre 2010


                          FOCUS - 774 of 881 DOCUMENTS

            Copyright 2010 AWP AG für Wirtschaftspublikationen, Alle
                               Rechte Vorbehalten

                             AWP Financial Analysis

                          Zurich Financial Services AG

                                4. November 2010

WDH/AUSBLICK/ZFS 9M: Reingewinn zwischen 2'330 Mio und 2'610 Mio USD erwartet



   Zürich (awp) - Die Zurich Financial Services (ZFS) wird am Donnerstag, 4.
November, die Zahlen zu den ersten neun Monaten 2010 publizieren. Elf Analysten
haben dazu folgende Prognosen:

9M 2010E
 In Mio USD              AWP-Konsens
Bandbreite
       9M 2009A    Schätzungen

Betriebsgewinn
 (BOP)      3'652       3'456 - 3'752         4'066       11

Reingewinn
                2'465       2'33 2'610         2'163       10
 Combined Ratio (%)         97,5        96,9 - 97,8           96,9        6

 Per 30.09.10E
 In Mio USD              AWP-Konsens
Bandbreite
     30.06.2009A    Schätzungen

Eigenkapital
              30'537    29'10 32'698        28'469        7

   FOKUS: Die meisten Analysten erwarten von der ZFS für die ersten neun Monate
2010 ein solides Zahlenset ohne Überraschungen. Allerdings dürfte der
Zwischenbericht weiterhin vom schwierigen Finanzmarktumfeld geprägt sein, der
vor allem auf den Erfolg aus den Finanzanlagen und im Lebengeschäft gedrückt
haben dürfte. Im Nichtleben-Geschäft sollte sich die Schadenquote und damit die
Combined Ratio im Vergleich zum ersten Halbjahr verbessert haben, da in der
Berichtsperiode weniger Grossschäden zu verzeichnen waren. Zudem wird erwartet,
dass sich das US-Nichtleben-Geschäft zu stabilisieren begonnen hat. Auch Farmers
sollte sich gut entwickelt haben, wobei allerdings der Vergleich zur Sammelklage
aus dem Jahr 2003 belastet.

   ZIELE: Über die gesamte Gruppe hinweg strebt die ZFS eine Eigenkapitalrendite
auf dem operativen Ergebnis (BOP) von 16% an. Dieser Wert soll über den
Versicherungszyklus erreicht werden. Kurzfristig seien aber Schwankungen
möglich, vor allem in Berichtsperioden mit hohen Schadenbelastungen im
Nichtlebengeschäft, hiess es anlässlich der Präsentation der Semester-Zahlen
Anfang August.

   Bestätigt wurden damals auch die Zielsetzungen für das
Effizienzsteigerungsprogramm "The Zurich Way". So sollen in den Jahren 2010 und
2011 Ergebnisverbesserungen von jeweils rund 900 Mio USD realisiert werden.

   PRO MEMORIA: Der Vergleich in den Rechtsstreitigkeiten der ZFS in den USA im
Zusammenhang mit dem Geschäftsmodell der Tochter Farmers Group belastet die
Rechnung des dritten Quartals nach Abzug von Rückstellungen mit 295 Mio USD,
teilte der Versicherer Anfang Oktober mit.

   Die Integration von 21st Century verläuft gemäss CFO Dieter Wemmer besser als
ursprünglich geplant und die Gesellschaft habe bereits im ersten Jahr einen
Gewinnbeitrag geleistet.

   Der CFO sah anlässlich der Präsentation des Halbjahres-Ergebnisses im Leben-
und Farmers-Geschäft "grosses organisches Wachstumspotenzial". Entsprechend
seien Akquisitionen "wohl weniger ein Thema", Gelegenheiten würden aber dennoch
laufend geprüft, hiess es weiter. Der Bereich General Insurance leidet gemäss
dem CFO in den USA unter einem Druck auf den Prämien. Auch in Europa sei die
Profitabilität in einigen Sparten ungenügend und es werde versucht höhere
Prämien durchzusetzen.

   Der Versicherer will an einem Investor Day am 2. Dezember über die
strategischen Prioritäten informieren.

   AKTIENEINSTUFUNG: Gemäss AWP-Analyser bewerten Analysten den Titel
folgendermassen:

Kaufen:    16
 Halten:     5
 Verkaufen:  2

 Durchschnittliches Kursziel: 283,32 CHF

   Nachfolgend die detaillierten Schätzungen:

Rechnungslegung nach IFRS

 In Mio USD             9M 2010E       9M 2009A      Analyst
                                           +/-%

Betriebsgewinn
 (BOP):                    4'066
 Vontobel                  3'752                     Schürmann
 JPMorgan                  3'717                     Huttner
 Kepler                    3'732                     Croce
 Merrill Lynch             3'698                     Shea
 Jefferies                 3'687                     Shuck
 Exane BNP Paribas         3'679                     Jacquet
 UBS                       3'676                     Thiele
 KBW                       3'599                     Hawkins
 Helvea                    3'590                     Effgen
 Deutsche Bank             3'585                     Horgan
 ZKB                       3'456                     Marti

 AWP-Konsens               3'652          -10,2


Reingewinn
:                              2'163
 Vontobel                  2'610
 ZKB                       2'595
 Merrill Lynch             2'533
 Jefferies                 2'454
 UBS                       2'451
 Kepler                    2'449
 Helvea                    2'447
 Exane BNP Paribas         2'420
 KBW                       2'363
 Deutsche Bank             2'330

 AWP-Konsens               2'465         +14,0%

 Combined Ratio (%):                       96,9
 Vontobel                   97,8
 ZKB                        97,8
 Deutsche Bank              97,7
 KBW                        97,6
 Kepler                     97,4
 Merrill Lynch              96,9

 AWP-Konsens                97,5           n.m.

 In Mio USD            30.09.2010E    30.06.2010A

Eigenkapital
:                           28'469
 Merrill Lynch            32'698
 Kepler                   30'841
 UBS                      30'700
 KBW                      30'598
 Vontobel                 30'561
 Helvea                   29'260
 ZKB                      29'100

 AWP-Konsens              30'537          +7,3%

   Ausgewählte Analystenkommentare zu ZFS (im Originalwortlaut):

   Exane BNP Paribas (Thomas Jacquet): The quarter was finally exempt of
hurricanes in the US, which is good news for Zurich. However, figures from
Allstate suggest that other weather related events had a significant impact. The
burden from natural catastrophes at Allstate was 6.7ppt for the quarter which
seems to be the sign of a rather active quarter. We expect combined ratio at
97.3% for Zurich including a modest 2.4% reserve release benefit. UNDERPERFORM

   DEUTSCHE BANK (Spencer Horgan): Operating trends should remain robust in Q3,
but with the previously flagged settlement for the Farmers class action, and low
interest rates continuing to depress economic capital, we think it unlikely the
numbers will act as a catalyst. The December investor day could offer more
enticing newsflow, as new divisional heads set out strategic priorities,
hopefully accompanied by some aspirational targets. Given a successful track
record of delivery in the past, any such ambitions are likely to be given a high
degree of credibility by the market, in our view. BUY

   JEFFERIES (James Shuck): We reiterate our Buy recommendation ahead of the Q3
results despite the shares underperforming the sector by 3% in the last 3
months. We believe the next leg up is supported by a strong underlying combined
ratio, and the potential for share buybacks to support the already attractive
dividend yield. The shares trade at 1.06x EV vs the sector on 1x EV for a stable
15-16% ROEV. Our CHF279 PT is derived from our discounted sum of the parts
cashflow analysis. Key risks are competitive non-life pressures, deterioration
in sovereign risk and Nat Cats. BUY

   Homepage: www.zurich.com

UPDATE: 8. November 2010


                          FOCUS - 775 of 881 DOCUMENTS

            Copyright 2010 AWP AG für Wirtschaftspublikationen, Tous
                                droits réservés

                             AWP Financial Analysis

                          Zurich Financial Services AG

                                4 Novembre 2010

RPT/PRÉVISIONS/ZFS 9 mois: bénéfice net attendu entre 2330 et 2610 mio USD



   répétition de la veille

   Zurich (awp) - Zurich Financial Services (ZFS) publie jeudi 4 novembre ses
résultats des neuf premiers mois 2010. Onze analystes ont établi les prévisions
suivantes:

9 mois 2010E
 en mio USD              consensus AWP   fourchette       9 mois 09   nombre de


prévisions
 Bénéfice opérat. BOP)     3'652       3'456 - 3'752         4'066       11
 Bénéfice net              2'465       2'33 2'610         2'163       10
 Combined ratio (%)         97,5        96,9 - 97,8           96,9        6

 au 30.09.10E
 en mio USD              consensus AWP  fourchette     30.06.2009     nombre de


prévisions
 Fonds propres             30'537    29'10 32'698        28'469        7

   FOCUS: la plupart des analystes prévoient que ZFS publiera de solides
résultats, sans surprise, sur les neuf premiers mois de 2010. Le rapport
intermédiaire devrait toutefois être marqué par un environnement de marché
difficile. On devrait en constater les effets notamment dans les revenus
financiers et les activités vie. Dans le secteur non vie, le faible taux de
dommages et le ratio combiné qui y est corelé devraient par contre s'être
améliorés, compte tenu du plus faible nombre de gros évènements sur la période.
Aux USA, ZFS devrait avoir de plus enregistré une certaine stabilisation de ses
activités dans le secteur non vie. Les analystes prévoient que Farmers a connu
un bon développement, même si la base de comparaison est affectée par la plainte
collective de 2003.

   OBJECTIFS: ZFS vise un rendement des fonds propres sur résultat opérationnel
(BOP) de 16% au niveau du groupe. Ce taux devrait être atteint au cours du cycle
d'assurance. A court terme, des variations sont possibles, tout particulièrement
sur les périodes de résultats marquées par des taux de dommages élevés dans le
secteur non vie, avait indiqué ZFS au mois d'août dans la documentation remise à
l'occasion de la publication des résultats S1.

   La compagnie zurichoise avait également confirmé à cette occasion ses
objectifs de programme d'efficience "The Zurich Way", avec une amélioration des
résultats 2010 et 2011 de respectivement 900 mio USD.

   POUR MÉMOIRE: L'accord dans l'affaire US avec le modèle d'affaires de la
filiale Farmers Group pèsera sur les comptes du troisième trimestre. Un montant
de 295 mio USD, après retrait d'impôts et amortissements antérieurs, sera porté
au bilan, avait indiqué ZFS tout début octobre.

   L'intégration de 21st Century se déroule mieux que prévu, a précisé le CFO
Dieter Wemmer. La société a déjà apporté sa contribution aux bénéfices la
première année.

   Le CFO a estimé lors de la présentation des résultats que le potentiel de
croissance organique est important dans le secteur vie et chez Farmers. Les
acquisitions figurent moins à l'ordre du jour, mais les opportunités sont
étudiées. Le secteur de l'assurance générale souffre, selon lui, de la pression
sur les primes. La rentabilité est également insuffisante dans certains segments
en Europe. ZFS tente d'y pallier en augmentant les primes.

   ZFS informera sur ses priorités stratégiques le 2 décembre 2010.

   RECOMMANDATIONS D'ANALYSTES selon AWP-Analyser:

acheter:   16
 conserver:  5
 vendre:     2

 Objectif de cours moyen: 283,32 CHF

   Prévisions détaillées des analystes:

Normes IFRS

 en mio USD             9 mois 10E     9 mois 09     analystes
                                           +/-%
 Bénéfice opérat. (BOP):                  4'066
 Vontobel                  3'752                     Schürmann
 JPMorgan                  3'717                     Huttner
 Kepler                    3'732                     Croce
 Merrill Lynch             3'698                     Shea
 Jefferies                 3'687                     Shuck
 Exane BNP Paribas         3'679                     Jacquet
 UBS                       3'676                     Thiele
 KBW                       3'599                     Hawkins
 Helvea                    3'590                     Effgen
 Deutsche Bank             3'585                     Horgan
 ZKB                       3'456                     Marti

 Consensus AWP:            3'652          -10,2

 Bénéfice net:                            2'163
 Vontobel                  2'610
 ZKB                       2'595
 Merrill Lynch             2'533
 Jefferies                 2'454
 UBS                       2'451
 Kepler                    2'449
 Helvea                    2'447
 Exane BNP Paribas         2'420
 KBW                       2'363
 Deutsche Bank             2'330

 Consensus AWP:            2'465         +14,0%

 Combined ratio (%):                       96,9
 Vontobel                   97,8
 ZKB                        97,8
 Deutsche Bank              97,7
 KBW                        97,6
 Kepler                     97,4
 Merrill Lynch              96,9

 Consensus AWP:             97,5           n.m.

 en mio USD            30.09.2010E    30.06.2010
 Fonds propres:                          28'469
 Merrill Lynch            32'698
 Kepler                   30'841
 UBS                      30'700
 KBW                      30'598
 Vontobel                 30'561
 Helvea                   29'260
 ZKB                      29'100

 Consensus AWP:           30'537          +7,3%

   Commentaires d'analystes (texte original):

   Exane BNP Paribas (Thomas Jacquet): The quarter was finally exempt of
hurricanes in the US, which is good news for Zurich. However, figures from
Allstate suggest that other weather related events had a significant impact. The
burden from natural catastrophes at Allstate was 6.7ppt for the quarter which
seems to be the sign of a rather active quarter. We expect combined ratio at
97.3% for Zurich including a modest 2.4% reserve release benefit. UNDERPERFORM

   DEUTSCHE BANK (Spencer Horgan): Operating trends should remain robust in Q3,
but with the previously flagged settlement for the Farmers class action, and low
interest rates continuing to depress economic capital, we think it unlikely the
numbers will act as a catalyst. The December investor day could offer more
enticing newsflow, as new divisional heads set out strategic priorities,
hopefully accompanied by some aspirational targets. Given a successful track
record of delivery in the past, any such ambitions are likely to be given a high
degree of credibility by the market, in our view. BUY

   JEFFERIES (James Shuck): We reiterate our Buy recommendation ahead of the Q3
results despite the shares underperforming the sector by 3% in the last 3
months. We believe the next leg up is supported by a strong underlying combined
ratio, and the potential for share buybacks to support the already attractive
dividend yield. The shares trade at 1.06x EV vs the sector on 1x EV for a stable
15-16% ROEV. Our CHF279 PT is derived from our discounted sum of the parts
cashflow analysis. Key risks are competitive non-life pressures, deterioration
in sovereign risk and Nat Cats. BUY

   Internet: www.zurich.com

UPDATE: 8 Novembre 2010


                          FOCUS - 776 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                             May 23, 2013 Thursday

Officials: Prepare for 'extremely active' hurricane season

BYLINE: Dinah Voyles Pulver, Dinah Voyles Pulver ENVIRONMENT WRITER

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 830  words


Emergency officials in Volusia and Flagler counties and around the state ran
through hurricane response drills this week, preparing for what NOAA said
Thursday could be yet another "extremely active" hurricane season.

Facts

Cane predictions

NOAA predictions for 2013 hurricane season:

Named storms: 13-20

Hurricanes: 7-11

Major hurricanes: 2-6

2012 storms:

Named storms: 19

Hurricanes: 10

Major hurricanes: 2

SOURCE: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

A team of climate and hurricane specialists with NOAA say the Atlantic hurricane
region could experience 13-20 named storms, with winds of 39 mph or greater, in
the six-month season that begins June 1.

At least seven to 11 of those storms could become hurricanes, having top winds
of 74 mph or greater, said acting NOAA Administrator Kathryn Sullivan. And those
hurricanes could produce two to six major hurricanes, with winds of more than
111 mph.

In the Atlantic, conditions are similar to last year, which produced 19 named
storms, including 10 hurricanes. At least four of those storms affected Florida,
including deadly Hurricane Sandy, which brushed the coast of Florida with rough
waves and erosion as it hit New Jersey and New York. Volusia and Flagler
counties also saw rain during Tropical Storms Beryl and Debby.

"There are no mitigating factors that we would see that would suppress the
activity," said Gerry Bell, lead hurricane season forecaster at NOAA's Climate
Prediction Center.

Though they're preparing for a busy season, which could increase the probability
of seeing a storm locally, emergency management folks in Flagler and Volusia
counties said Thursday the actual number of storms predicted doesn't really
matter a lot.

"Whether they predict 2 or 22, if one storm hits Flagler County, all those
predictions don't matter," said Troy Harper, emergency services chief for
Flagler. "It's good to know what the predictions are, but for folks in Flagler
County, it really shouldn't carry a lot of weight."

Speaking during the NOAA news conference Thursday, Sullivan echoed that
sentiment, saying the news really isn't about "percentages and ranges."

"The important news is about preparedness," she said. "Prepare for this
hurricane season starting today."

And preparing is exactly what officials from across Volusia County were doing
Thursday. Nearly 100 representatives of the county and city governments, as well
as state and federal agencies, gathered in the county's new emergency operations
center.

Given the scenario of a hurricane that had caused minor impacts in the area, but
also resulted in an oil tanker accident off the coast of Cuba that was moving a
plume of oil toward Volusia beaches, the representatives discussed how their
respective agencies would respond.

"Preparation gets you ahead of the curve," said Ryan Williams, operations
coordinator for Volusia emergency management. "You respond faster and you
recover faster."

Much of the discussion focused on the information that would need to flow
constantly between federal, state and local governments.

"It's all about collaborative communication," Williams said.

During Flagler's hurricane drills on Monday and Tuesday, Harper said about 15
people gathered to focus on some of the response areas which the emergency
operations center hasn't activated in a while. For example, he said they
rehearsed setting up a full-scale public information response, including a call
center.

Federal officials also emphasized preparedness on Thursday.

Individuals and families need to have resources to sustain themselves for up to
72 hours, "to allow responders time to get to you with additional resources and
commodities," said Joseph Nimmich, an associate administrator for response and
recovery for the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Nimmich also emphasized the need for residents living in the path of a
land-falling hurricane to take precautions and follow the counsel of local
emergency officials.

The No. 1 cause of deaths during hurricanes comes from not evacuating, Nimmich
said during the NOAA news conference. His words were underscored by a release
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Thursday regarding the
117 deaths related to Sandy as a hurricane and post-tropical storm.

The most common cause of death during Sandy was drowning, and 45 percent of
those occurred in flooded homes in mandatory evacuation zones, said the CDC,
based on statistics from the American Red Cross.

"Not evacuating is where we lose the most people," Nimmich said. "If you're not
prepared, you're likely to be a statistic or you're going to be dependent on
other people."

Cane predictions

NOAA predictions for 2013 hurricane season:

Named storms: 13-20

Hurricanes: 7-11

Major hurricanes: 2-6

2012 storms:

Named storms: 19

Hurricanes: 10

Major hurricanes: 2

SOURCE: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

2013 Atlantic hurricane names

Andrea

Barry

Chantal

Dorian

Erin

Fernand

Gabrielle

Humberto

Ingrid

Jerry

Karen

Lorenzo

Melissa

Nestor

Olga

Pablo

Rebekah

Sebastien

Tanya

Van

Wendy

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2013 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2013 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 777 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                              April 6, 2018 Friday

For local residents like Diane Melvin and Cassandra Montanez

BYLINE: Dinah Voyles Pulver dinah.pulver@newsjrnl.com

SECTION: FL NEWS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 780  words


For local residents like Diane Melvin and Cassandra Montanez, the latest
forecast for the 2018 Atlantic hurricane season has little good news.

The homes of both women suffered damage during Hurricane Irma last September and
they're still waiting to complete repairs. Many residents across the area are in
the same situation, still recovering from Irma and even from Hurricane Matthew
in October 2016. Melvin, who lives in DeBary, and Montanez, who lives in
Deltona, don't even want to think about the arrival of another hurricane season,
much less a season forecast to be busier than normal.

The tropical meteorology team at Colorado State University, where Bill Gray
pioneered hurricane season forecasting, released its April forecast Thursday,
calling for a slightly above-average hurricane season.

Now led by research scientist Phil Klotzbach in the university's Department of
Atmospheric Science, the team calls for 14 named storms during the season that
starts June 1 and ends Nov. 30. The long-term average is 12. Of the 14 storms,
the tropical meteorology project team expects seven to become hurricanes and
three to reach major hurricane strength, which means winds in excess of 110 mph.

No one knows just where those hurricanes will go, but Montanez hopes they don't
head toward Florida.

"My roof is gone. I have my roof completely covered with blue tarp," she said.
"I'm scared."

Melvin hadn't even thought about hurricane season until asked about it on
Thursday. "I'm still dealing with last year," she said. "I'm not looking forward
to hurricane season. Normally it doesn't bother me but with the house still not
fixed, it's bothering me."

The Colorado State forecast, based on more than 60 years of historical data,
cited a low likelihood of a significant El Nino this summer. When an El Nino
brings warmer than normal waters to the equatorial Pacific off the coast of
South America it can stir up wind patterns that create a strong shear in the
Atlantic Ocean and tear storms apart, reducing the risks of strong hurricanes.

However, sea surface temperatures in the tropical Atlantic are near their
long-term average, so that's considered a neutral factor this year, unlike last
year, when the ocean was much warmer than normal. The ocean is slightly warmer
than normal in the western Atlantic, but cooler than normal in the eastern
Atlantic, where many of the most massive and powerful hurricanes form. Cooler
sea surface temperatures provide less fuel for tropical cyclone formation and
intensification, stated the news release from Colorado State. They're also
associated with a more stable atmosphere and drier air, which can both suppress
the thunderstorm activity that contributes to developing hurricanes.

So far, the 2018 hurricane season is exhibiting characteristics similar to the
seasons of 1960, 1967, 1996, 2006 and 2011, Klotzbach reported.   "The years
1960, 1967 and 2006 had near-average Atlantic hurricane activity, while 1996 and
2011 were both above-normal hurricane seasons."

The team predicts that 2018 hurricane activity will be about 135 percent of the
average season. By comparison, hurricane activity in 2017, which included Harvey
and Maria, was about 245 percent of the average season.

Across the region, local residents and governments are still working to recover
from Hurricane Irma which roared through Sept. 10-11, and in some cases from
Hurricane Matthew on Oct. 7, 2016.

Both Montanez and Melvin have experienced delays in trying to get their repairs
completed.

Montanez did not have insurance and said she does not have the money to make the
repairs to her leaking roof. She received $1,500 from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and she applied for a low-cost loan, but said she was denied.
She has appealed and is waiting to hear.

Now, she's also working with a non-profit that might be able to make the needed
repairs.

Melvin and her husband, James, have insurance but experienced delays in getting
the money from her insurance company to cover all the damages. Her neighbor's
tree fell into her home during the middle of the night during Hurricane Irma
damaging the walls and/or roof in at least three rooms and possibly one of the
trusses.

"It's been forever to get a check," she said. "Now we've finally got the check
and we're waiting on a contractor. I hope we'll be finished by the end of next
month."

Local contractors are having to wait on subcontractors and fencing contractors
are scheduling four to five weeks out, she said. "Everyone is so busy."

Along the beaches, erosion has continued in many locations along the coast,
including in Flagler Beach, where city officials had a meeting about erosion on
Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2018 News-Journal Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 778 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 1, 2014 Monday

Another hurricane season, minus the hurricanes

LENGTH: 360  words

DATELINE: Fort Collins


Colorado State University has issued the following news release:

Florida beat the odds again, extending a hurricane-free stretch that climate
experts describe as remarkable.
Facts
NAMED STORMS IN 2014

This season's named storms, strength at peak

June-July

o Arthur, Category 2 hurricane

July

o Tropical Depression Two

August

o Bertha, Category 1 hurricane

o Cristobal, Category 1 hurricane

September

o Dolly, tropical storm

o Edouard, Category 3 hurricane

October

o Fay, Category 1 hurricane

o Gonzalo, Category 4 hurricane

o Hanna, tropical storm

Source: National Hurricane Center

It has now been nine years since a hurricane made landfall in the Sunshine
State, nearly double the previous record run without a strike.

As this hurricane season ends on Nov. 30, experts say there is no simple
explanation for this extended run of good fortune.

"Florida has been very, very lucky," said Phil Klotzbach, a research scientist
with Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project. "Hopefully that
luck will continue."

The state has dodged catastrophe during epic hurricane years and not-so-busy
ones. There have been fewer storms to worry about lately. The 2014 season lived
up to predictions, generating an average number of hurricanes and below-average
tropical cyclone activity overall.

A typical hurricane season produces 12 named storms -- but only eight formed
this year, with six becoming hurricanes. The accumulated cyclone energy -- the
measurement takes into account the total number of storms, their duration and
their intensity -- was 30 percent below average, Klotzbach said.

It was the second relatively quiet hurricane season in a row, leading to chatter
that a long period of above-average hurricane activity in the Atlantic Ocean may
come to a close.

But Klotzbach is not so sure.

Water temperatures in the Atlantic remain unusually warm, he said, and warmer
water tends to be the dominant factor in hurricane formation.

"It's something we're looking at, but at this point I would say I don't think
so, just because of the water temperatures," he said.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 779 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            September 9, 2016 Friday

Atlantic Hurricane Season is Seeing More Major Storms

LENGTH: 668  words

DATELINE: New York



 Princeton: Climate Central. has issued the following news release



 While the U.S. has been in a major hurricane drought since 2005, those top
level storms have actually become more common in the Atlantic basin. The reason
could be linked to rising sea surface temperatures -- fueled in part by global
warming -- as seen in ocean buoy data collected along the U.S. coast.





 Hurricane Wilma -- which at one point was the strongest tropical cyclone ever
recorded in the Atlantic basin -- was the last major hurricane to pummel the
U.S., roaring ashore in Florida as a Category 3 storm on Oct. 24, 2005. Since
that date, no Category 3 or higher storm -- what the National Hurricane Center
defines as major hurricanes -- has hit anywhere in the U.S.
 But that streak is deceiving. The incidence of major hurricanes has essentially
doubled across the Atlantic basin since 1970, potentially linked to rising sea
surface temperatures there. It just happens that fewer of those storms hit the
U.S.



 Of course, in the decade since Wilma struck, plenty of other storms have had a
major impact. Hurricane Ike and Superstorm Sandy were among the costliest storms
on record, but neither was technically categorized a major hurricane. And
Hurricane Hermine, though only a Category 1 when it recently hit Florida, caused
significant damage. It also ended the state's nearly 11-year streak without any
hurricane making landfall.



 In addition to the rise in major hurricanes in the Atlantic basin, the average
number of named hurricanes each year has increased to about seven storms from
five storms, though the exact reasons for this rise are still the subject of
research.



 Other ocean basins have also seen changes to their seasons. Landfalling
typhoons have become more intense in the northwest Pacific while Hawaii has seen
a string of hurricanes and tropical storms swing dangerously close to the island
in recent years.



 One notable quirk in the Atlantic basin is the lack of Category 5 storms. The
Atlantic basin hasn't had a Category 5 storm form since Hurricane Felix in
September 2007. That's not to say storms haven't gotten close to Category 5
status, though. Last year's Hurricane Joaquin had winds peak at 155 mph, just 2
mph shy of the threshold for being labeled a Category 5.



 Natural changes like the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation as well as more
familiar shifts like El Niño are responsible for some of the year-to-year
fluctuations in the number of hurricanes. Other factors like dust from the
Sahara that serve to limit the formation of storms can also have a major impact
on an individual hurricane season.





 Warming Atlantic coastal waters



 But the background signal of climate change could be playing a role. Climate
models suggest that hurricane intensity should increase as the world warms, and
that the most intense storms will become a bigger proportion of the total. The
relatively short time period of quality hurricane records makes detecting such
trends difficult, though. There is also research that suggests that aerosols in
the atmosphere could be having an opposite effect to warming, effectively
masking any trend to date.



 Most of the heat being trapped at the Earth's surface by human greenhouse gas
emissions is absorbed by  the oceans. Large swaths of the seas have warmed 1-3°F
over the past 100 years. In the Gulf of Mexico, buoy data from the peak of
hurricane season -- August through October -- shows waters have warmed 1-2°F in
the past 40 years alone.



 In the Atlantic, temperatures have warmed as much as 4°F over that period.
While at single buoys the water may have warmed faster or slower than other
locations, globally, there is a clear trend toward higher sea surface
temperatures. That trend is likely to continue and scientists project that it
could help increase the number of intense hurricanes while possibly reducing the
overall number of all storms.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 780 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 15, 2016 Monday

Washington: Atlantic hurricane season still expected to be strongest since 2012

LENGTH: 403  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has issued the
following news release:



 In its updated 2016 Atlantic Hurricane Season Outlook, NOAA calls for a higher
likelihood of a near-normal or above-normal season, and decreases the chance of
a below-normal season to only 15 percent, from the initial outlook issued in
May. The season is still expected to be the most active since 2012.



 Forecasters now expect a 70-percent chance of 12-17 named storms, of which 5-8
are expected to become hurricanes, including 2-4 major hurricanes. The initial
outlook called for 10-16 named storms, 4-8 hurricanes, and 1-4 major hurricanes.
The seasonal averages are 12 named storms, 6 hurricanes and 3 major
hurricanes."We've raised the numbers because some conditions now in place are
indicative of a more active hurricane season, such as El Niño ending, weaker
vertical wind shear and weaker trade winds over the central tropical Atlantic,
and a stronger west African monsoon," said Gerry Bell, Ph.D., lead seasonal
hurricane forecaster at NOAA's Climate Prediction Center. "However, less
conducive ocean temperature patterns in both the Atlantic and eastern
subtropical North Pacific, combined with stronger wind shear and sinking motion
in the atmosphere over the Caribbean Sea, are expected to prevent the season
from becoming extremely active."



 "Given these competing conditions, La Niña, if it develops, will most likely be
weak and have little impact on the hurricane season," added Bell. NOAA announced
today that La Niña is slightly favored to develop during the hurricane season.



 To date, there have been five named storms, including two hurricanes (Alex and
Earl). Four made landfall: Bonnie (in South Carolina), Colin (in western
Florida), Danielle (in eastern Mexico), and Earl (in Belize and Mexico).As we
move into the peak of hurricane season, when hurricanes are most frequent and
often at their strongest, NOAA urges coastal residents to make sure they have
their hurricane preparedness plans in place and to monitor the latest forecasts.
Learn how NOAA forecasts hurricanes.



 NOAA's mission is to understand and predict changes in the Earth's environment,
from the depths of the ocean to the surface of the sun, and to conserve and
manage our coastal and marine resources.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 781 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          September 15, 1988 Thursday

Rain clouds over tropical seas become cradle of killer winds

BYLINE: STEPHEN STRAUSS; GAM

LENGTH: 802 words


BY  STEPHEN STRAUSS
 The Globe and Mail
  The mightiest of windstorms begins as a small circle of heat and rain
over a patch of warm ocean water.

It is not clear exactly what begins the formation of a hurricane -
indeed, one of the major theoretical questions is why are there so few of
them - but all start as tropical thunderstorms that need hot, humid ocean
air to grow.

In the classic model, the storm that later becomes a hurricane is born
because the hot air spirals upward, cools and condenses. The condensed air
forms rain clouds. As the water vapor turns into rain, it releases energy,
which warms the air and increases the updraft. A competing view sees the
energy father and mother of hurricanes as winds slightly stronger than
normal and the release of heat during evaporation from the ocean's
surface.

In any case, the updraft creates a low-pressure area into which moist
air is drawn in a spiral, a result of the earth's rotation. The spiralling
process - clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere, counter-clockwise in the
Northern Hemisphere - gives hurricanes their characteristic "cyclonic"
shape.

In the North Atlantic these disturbances, which are not yet full-
fledged hurricanes, generally move eastward at first.

Once the disturbance is formed, feedback mechanisms strengthen the
storm. As the spiral spins faster, centrifugal force creates a partial
vacuum that draws cold air from the upper atmosphere into the core. As
this air descends, it is warmed by compression, further increasing the
pool of heat in the centre of the storm. The heat is then transformed into
wind and rain - an energy transfer that has led to the description of
hurricanes as heat engines.

The centrifugal force and the partial vacuum combine to create the calm
centre or eye of the hurricane.

When the winds reach speeds of 120 kilometres an hour, the storm is
officially reclassified from a tropical storm to a hurricane. This happens
on average about eight times a year in the North Atlantic.

At some point the storm starts to move, much like a spinning top, at
speeds generally ranging from eight to 24 kilometres an hour. In the
Northern Hemisphere, prevailing wind patterns over the ocean cause many
hurricanes to drift westward for a few days and then curve north. This is
the pattern Hurricane Gilbert is following.

Although North Atlantic hurricanes may form at any time of year, warm
ocean conditions make them most common from June through October, with
September the peak.

The average lifespan of an Atlantic hurricane is nine days, in which
time it will have travelled about 5,000 kilometres.

The size and power of a hurricane, which may be known as a typhoon or a
cyclone in other parts of the world, are awe-inspiring. The average eye of
a hurricane can be surrounded by clouds reaching 10,000 to 12,000 metres
into the sky.

It has been estimated that a full-fledged hurricane is 100 times larger
than a thunderstorm and 1,000 times more powerful than a tornado. The
periphery of the storm can stretch 1,000 kilometres, although its most
deadly effects are generally restricted to a 100-kilometre area near the
eye.

The highest recorded wind speed associated with a hurricane was a gust
of 295 kilometres an hour in a 1938 hurricane nicknamed the Long Island
Express. However, unofficial estimates put winds in Hurricane Camille,
which devastated the U.S. Gulf Coast in 1969, at 347 kilometres an hour.
At sea, hurricane winds have generated waves as tall as a six-story
building, and a U.S. Navy ship in 1933 reported encountering a 34-metre
high wave.

When Camille came inland, its force translated into 7.5-metre-high
tides. It has been estimated that on exposed beaches the wind and tides
can remove as much as 35 cubic metres of sand from every square metre of
oceanfront.

An average hurricane can drop 200 trillion tons of water a day. It has
been calculated that this requires the energy equivalent of 500,000 atomic
bombs the size of that dropped on Nagasaki.

A hurricane's approach to land is generally signaled by large slow
waves, high cirrus clouds trailing off in one direction, a fall in the
barometer and intermittent rain and bursts of wind that eventually become
continuous. The calm eye of the hurricane is often associated with odd
natural phenoma, including circling birds trapped inside and a bloody
taste in people's mouths caused by the unusually low pressure.

One question in many meteorologists' minds is what effect the predicted
future warming of the earth known as the greenhouse effect will have on
the number and intensity of hurricanes. In 1987, a Massachussetts
Institute of Technology meteorology professor, Kerry Emanuel, showed that
the intensity of tropical storms could increase slightly if ocean surface
temperature rose. Other work indicates that an ocean threshold temperature
of about 26 degrees must be reached before a hurricane can form.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1988 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 782 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                           Investor's Business Daily

                           September 16, 2005 Friday

Gore In The Balance

SECTION: SECTION ISSUES & INSIGHTS; EDITORIALS; NATIONAL EDITION; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 604 words


Atmospherics: In 1900, before hurricanes had names, a Category 4 slammed into
Galveston, Texas, killing about 8,000 people. And neither global warming nor
George W. Bush was to blame. But try telling that to Al Gore.

Hurricanes are unpredictable. In other words, unlike Bush critics who blame his
policies for virtually everything except the common cold and original sin.
Former Vice President Gore, author of "Earth in the Balance," which proclaimed
that the internal combustion engine was the greatest threat mankind ever faced,
is no exception.

After a noble deed, personally helping airlift some 270 Katrina evacuees on two
private charters from New Orleans to Tennessee on Sept. 3 and 4, he journeyed to
San Francisco on Sept. 9 to address a convention of the National Sierra Club.
There, he delivered a speech he'd been scheduled to give in New Orleans, one
literally blaming Bush for Hurricane Katrina and its consequences.

After repeating the charge that Bush ignored warnings in August 2001 of an
imminent al-Qaida attack, Gore declared "there are scientific warnings now of
another onrushing catastrophe" that Bush is also ignoring -- "that the average
hurricane will continue to get stronger because of global warming."

"We will face a string of terrible catastrophes unless we act to prepare
ourselves and deal with the underlying causes of global warming," Gore warned.

Hurricanes the size of Katrina are rare, but they are not new, and they are not
caused by George Bush or global warming. But don't take our word for it. Listen
to Stanley Goldenberg, a meteorologist at the Hurricane Research Division of the
National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration, when he states: "I speak for many
hurricane climate researchers in saying such claims are nonsense."

"Katrina is part of a well-documented, multidecadal scale fluctuation in
hurricane activity," Goldenberg observes, noting that "this cycle was described
in a heavily cited article printed in the journal Science in 2001."

His colleague at the NOAA, Chris Landsea, concurs: "If you look at the raw
hurricane data itself, there is no global warming signal. What we see instead is
a strong cycling of activity. There are periods of 25 to 40 years where it's
very busy and then periods of 25 to 40 years when it's very quiet."

At the 27th annual National Hurricane Conference, William Gray, an atmospheric
scientist at the University of Colorado, explained that nature, not man, is
responsible for hurricane cycles, and that periodically changing
ocean-circulation patterns influence these cycles.

A recent paper, "Hurricanes and Global Warming," written by six noted tropical
cyclone experts and published in the Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society, concluded that no connection has been established between greenhouse
gas emissions and hurricane activity, and that the scientific consensus was that
changes in hurricane intensity would be small and with historical patterns.

If Gore had gone to the Web site of the National Hurricane Center, he'd have
discovered that the peak for major hurricanes (Categories 3, 4, 5) came in the
1930s, 1940s and 1950s, when such storms averaged nine per year. From 2001 to
2004, the average was three.

Nor are hurricanes intensifying in strength. According to the United Nations
Environment Program of the World Meteorological Organization: "Reliable data . .
. since the 1940s indicate that the peak strength of the strongest hurricanes
has not changed, and the mean maximum intensity of all hurricanes has
decreased."

Now, if we could only have a cycle where Al Gore would keep quiet.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2005 Investor's Business Daily, Inc.
                                www.investors.com


                          FOCUS - 783 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                           October 20, 2005 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Weary Floridians ask: 'Why us?': Sunshine State braces as seventh hurricane in
15 months nears

BYLINE: Sheldon Alberts, CanWest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 621  words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON - As hurricane Wilma whipped itself into a Category 5 frenzy over the
Caribbean Sea, an exasperated Jeb Bush summed up the mood of storm-battered
Americans in two short words.

"Why us?" asked the governor of Florida, a state hit by seven hurricanes in the
last 15 months.

Wilma morphed rapidly from a mildly menacing tropical storm into the most
intense Atlantic hurricane on record Wednesday as it churned toward the tip of
Mexico's Yucatan peninsula.

Most forecast models suggest that Wilma will weaken somewhat before making a
sharp northeastward turn towards Florida this weekend, and may even miss the
U.S. coast entirely.

Still, the storm seems likely to put an exclamation point on a record-tying
Atlantic hurricane season that has already destroyed one major U.S. city and
left dozens of other communities in rubble and confusion.

"We likely will have a major hurricane in the southeastern Gulf of Mexico, and
we're going to have to deal with it, like it or not," said Max Mayfield,
director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami.

"We had well over 1,000 lives lost in Katrina. If Wilma comes to the Florida
coast as a Category 3 or 4 hurricane, that potential for large loss of life is
with us here with this hurricane."

Mayfield's prediction was a bitter pill to swallow for residents along the
vulnerable U.S. Gulf Coast, who have been in a near-perpetual state of hurricane
alert since early June.

Wilma is the 21st named storm in a season that opened with tropical storm Arlene
that struck the Florida panhandle on June 13 with 100 km/h winds.

Since then, the misery has grown with each new hurricane milestone. In July
alone, there were five named storms, the most ever recorded.

Dennis, the first hurricane of the season, became the strongest storm ever
formed before August. It reached Category 4 status and struck Pensacola, Fla.,
with 190 km/h winds, killing 71 people in the U.S. and the Caribbean.

Then came Katrina, which reached Category 5 status and ranked as the third most
intense hurricane ever to make landfall in the United States. It flooded New
Orleans, laid waste to Biloxi and Gulfport, Miss., and prompted estimates of a
$250-billion repair bill to rebuild the region.

Katrina killed at least 1,281 people, according to the latest tally on
Wednesday, making it the third deadliest in American history.

Hurricane Rita, which hit the Texas/Louisiana border last month, was less deadly
than Katrina but set its own record as the second most intense Atlantic
hurricane on record.

It prompted an exodus of 2.8 million people from the Gulf Coast and wiped out
several small towns in southwestern Louisiana.

In all, there have been 11 Atlantic hurricanes this year and six "major" storms
of Category 3 or stronger. The number is more than double the average in a
hurricane season that extends from June 1 to Nov. 30.

The National Hurricane Centre has now exhausted its list of 21 alphabetical
names planned for 2005. If more tropical storms form in the upcoming weeks,
officials will use names from the Greek alphabet, beginning with Alpha.

But Mayfield said he wasn't looking beyond Wilma, which is moving so slowly it
is confounding efforts to make an accurate prediction about its path.

"If this were the only hurricane of the season, this would be the event of the
year," Mayfield said.

On Wednesday evening, Wilma's winds had dropped to 255 km/h from 280 km/h as it
wobbled across the Caribbean more than 450 kilometres southeast of Cozumel,
Mexico.

Early Wednesday, an air force reconnaissance plane recorded a minimum pressure
of 882 millibars in Wilma's eye, the lowest ever for an Atlantic storm.

The current path of the storm put Cozumel and its resort twin, Cancun, under
threat of a direct hit.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Associated Press; A message to hurricane Wilma is displayed
outside an insurance company office in Palm City, Fla., Wednesday. ;
Photo: Marco Ugartes, Associated Press; A family buys food in Playa Del Carmen
in the Yucatan peninsula, Mexico, Wednesday. Hurricane Wilma rapidly
strengthened into one of the most intense storms ever.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 784 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                   New Orleans CityBusiness (New Orleans, LA)

                              July 4, 2005 Monday

Commentary : Editor's Notes: Coastal restoration work threatened by Congress

BYLINE: Terry O'Connor

SECTION: COMMENTARY

LENGTH: 885 words


It only seems as if we are threatened by hurricanes every year.

Since 1901, Louisiana has only been hit by seven severe hurricanes, according to
researchers at Louisiana State University. The last severe hurricane strike
rating Category 3 for wind speeds in excess of 115 mph was 13 years ago when
Hurricane Andrew drilled the Gulf Coast.

LSU researchers examining Louisiana's hurricane history during the period of
1901-2004 show the Pelican State was pelted by 55 tropical storms, 21 Category 1
or 2 hurricanes and seven severe Category 3 hurricanes or higher.

The seven severe hurricanes were an unnamed hurricane in 1909, Audrey in 1957,
Hilda in 1964, Betsy in 1965, Camille in 1969, Carmen in 1974 and Andrew in
1992. Other close calls include Georges in 1998, which grazed New Orleans; Lili
in 2002, which wound down right before landfall; and Ivan, which veered away
from the state last year and demolished parts of the Alabama and Florida
coastlines.

Researchers say the western part of the state from Lafayette to the Texas border
has almost received a free pass with Hurricane Audrey the only severe hurricane
hit in 103 years. Folks in New Iberia will tell LSU researchers Andrew took a
pretty good chunk out of their homes but even two such hurricanes make the
western part of Louisiana much luckier than the New Orleans region. Researchers
are stumped as to the reason.

From 1957 to 1974, Louisiana experienced five of its seven severe hurricane
strikes in just 18 years.

The researchers counted 31 tropical storm strikes in the first half of the 20th
century but only 19 in the second half. However, there were six severe hurricane
strikes in the second half of the century compared with only one in the first
half.

During the past three hurricane seasons, Louisiana has been hit by five tropical
storms and only one Category 2 hurricane. But projected "hyperactive" hurricane
seasons combined with extensive land loss in coastal Louisiana means heightened
vulnerability for Louisiana infrastructure and residents, researchers say.

Researchers also say implications for large-scale damage and the potential loss
of life are profound for large cities such as New Orleans.

Why does all this matter?

We've dodged the bullet for more than a century but New Orleans needs coastal
restoration now. That's why it was terrific news to see Sens. Mary Landrieu,
D-New Orleans, and David Vitter, R-Metairie, help pass House Resolution 6 last
week, which includes a comprehensive assessment of the nation's offshore energy
resources and $1 billion in coastal impact assistance to coastal oil- and
gas-producing states.

The direct funding is not subject to the annual appropriations process and would
be allocated based on each state's share of energy production on the Outer
Continental Shelf. Louisiana stands to receive about $135 million per year,
which would pay for a lot of restoration.

"This funding is the next step in implementing the Louisiana Coastal Area
program and truly restoring our coast," Vitter said.

Now it's up to the House, which tends to strip out coastal erosion funding
because the six Gulf states apparently don't have the clout to keep it in among
the representatives. The heat is in our congressional delegation to get this
done in July. Our senators have already done their job.

Believe it or not: Back when houses had thatched roofs made of thick straw piled
high with no wood underneath, animals snuggled in overhead to stay warm. Cats
and other small animals such as mice and bugs lived in the roof.

But the roof grew slippery when it rained and sometimes some of the menagerie
would slip off. Hence the saying: "It's raining cats and dogs."

Last word: I take humble pride in being one of the 42 graduating members of the
New Orleans Regional Leadership Institute class this year. In order to live up
to our adopted nickname - "the Class with class" - many of our number hope to
improve upon the NORLI experience, which fails to plug energized members into a
community activity or need. NORLI does not choose a project or task for the
class to complete as do many other leadership classes nationwide.

It's a missed opportunity, really, that NORLI has so little political will it
fears adopting a project would turn off members from parishes outside the direct
sphere of any project taken on. NORLI draws members from 10 parishes so its
concern is understandable but too timid to really exemplify leadership.

NORLI also needs to retire one of its mottos - "What happens at NORLI, stays at
NORLI." This isn't Las Vegas, guys. NORLI should be about bringing leaders and
their talents to bear on solving pressing community problems, not just about
perpetuating enrollment.

What should happen at NORLI is leaders should be unleashed on the concerns we
all have about the declining quality of life in the New Orleans region.

In order to effect some of these changes in NORLI, I and a few of my classmates
have offered to join its Board of Directors and work on improving a great
experience. We hope to have the opportunity to help.

I highly recommend undergoing the NORLI training. It's largely positive and the
networking is superlative. I've made fast friends and allies through NORLI.
Let's hope we can be allowed to make a difference, too.

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Opinion

                      Copyright 2005 Dolan Media Newswires
                                All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 785 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 27, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Atlantic Storm Could Grow, Forecasters Say

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 210 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Aug. 26


The fifth tropical storm of the Atlantic hurricane season, Ernesto, could become
a dangerously powerful hurricane in the Gulf of Mexico next week, forecasters
said Saturday.

As with any storm, the National Hurricane Center said the forecast for Tropical
Storm Ernesto was highly uncertain.

But warm waters in its path as it approached the Gulf could lead to significant
strengthening.

If it does become a hurricane, it will be the first of the six-month hurricane
season, which began June 1.

Tropical Storm Ernesto was located on Saturday about 125 miles south-southwest
of Port-au-Prince, the capital of Haiti. The hurricane center said the storm
could be near hurricane strength as it passed Jamaica and Haiti on Sunday.
Jamaica, the Cayman Islands and Cuba issued hurricane watches on Saturday,
meaning that hurricane conditions were expected within 36 hours.

By Thursday, the storm was projected to be swirling in the middle of the Gulf as
a possible Category 3 hurricane, with sustained winds of at least 111 miles an
hour.

Hurricane Katrina was a Category 3 storm when it went ashore in Louisiana last
Aug. 29.

Tropical Storm Ernesto's eventual target zone ranged anywhere from the Florida
Panhandle to New Orleans and down to the border with Mexico.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 786 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 27, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Where Have the Hurricanes Gone?

BYLINE: By MATTHEW ERICSON

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; The Basics; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 285 words


Nearly three months into the hurricane season, no hurricanes have developed in
the Atlantic Ocean. Only five tropical storms have formed -- an unexpected start
to a season that has been forecast to be one of the worst in years.

But while 2006 may seem uneventful in light of the active 2004 and 2005 seasons,
the number of storms so far is fairly typical. In 10 of the last 16 years, five
or fewer tropical storms or hurricanes had formed by late August.

That none of this season's tropical storms have become hurricanes is somewhat
unusual, said Christopher Landsea of the National Hurricane Center. The average
by this point is 1.5 to 2 hurricanes.

While sea surface temperatures are higher than normal, wind patterns have
resulted in more wind shear, disrupting storms and preventing them from
strengthening. But the season doesn't end for three months, so the East and Gulf
Coasts aren't off the hook yet. ''You can catch up in a hurry,'' Dr. Landsea
said.

The director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, R. David Paulison,
warned earlier this month that coastal residents should still make preparations
for possible storms. ''It only takes one hurricane to give you a very bad day,''
he said.   MATTHEW ERICSON


  TROPICAL STORMS: 9
STRUCK THE U.S.: 4

2004
BEFORE AUG. 26
TROPICAL STORM: 2
HURRICANE: 4

AFTER AUG. 26
TROPICAL STORM: 3
HURRICANE: 5

SEASON TOTALS
HURRICANES: 9
TROPICAL STORMS: 5
STRUCK THE U.S.: 9

2005
BEFORE AUG. 26
TROPICAL STORM: 6
HURRICANE: 5

AFTER AUG. 26
TROPICAL STORM: 6
HURRICANE: 10

SEASON TOTALS
HURRICANES : 15
TROPICAL STORMS: 12
STRUCK THE U.S.: 7

2006
BEFORE AUG. 26
TROPICAL STORM: 5
HURRICANE:

AFTER AUG. 26
TROPICAL STORM:
HURRICANE:

SEASON TOTALS
HURRICANES:

TROPICAL STORMS:
STRUCK THE U.S.:


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: ''Number of hurricanes and tropical storms''1990BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 5HURRICANE: 3AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 1HURRICANE: 5SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 8TROPICAL STORMS: 6STRUCK THE U.S.: 11991BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 1HURRICANE: 1AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 3HURRICANE: 3SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 4TROPICAL STORMS: 4STRUCK THE U.S.: 11992BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 0HURRICANE: 1AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 3SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 4TROPICAL STORMS: 2STRUCK THE U.S.: 21993BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 4HURRICANE: 1AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 0HURRICANE: 3SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 4TROPICAL STORMS: 4STRUCK THE U.S.: 21994BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 1AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 2SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 3TROPICAL STORMS: 4STRUCK THE U.S.: 31995BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 6HURRICANE: 5AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 6SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 11TROPICAL STORMS: 8STRUCK THE U.S.: 51996BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 5AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 4SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 9TROPICAL STORMS: 4STRUCK THE U.S.: 41997BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 2AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 1HURRICANE: 2SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 3TROPICAL STORMS: 4STRUCK THE U.S.: 11998BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 2AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 8SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 10TROPICAL STORMS: 4STRUCK THE U.S.: 71999BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 3AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 5SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 8TROPICAL STORMS: 4STRUCK THE U.S.: 52000BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 2AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 4HURRICANE: 6SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 8TROPICAL STORMS: 6STRUCK THE U.S.: 22001BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 4HURRICANE: 0AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 9SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 9TROPICAL STORMS: 6STRUCK THE U.S.: 32002BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 3HURRICANE: 0AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 5HURRICANE: 4SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 4TROPICAL STORMS: 8STRUCK THE U.S.: 82003BEFORE AUG.
26TROPICAL STORM: 2HURRICANE: 3AFTER AUG. 26TROPICAL STORM: 7HURRICANE: 4SEASON
TOTALSHURRICANES: 7

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 787 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 3, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Drones Expected to Be New Eye Into Little-Seen Part of Hurricanes

BYLINE: Peter Whoriskey, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A Section; A15

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: BOCA CHICA KEY, Fla.


Drones are better known for their role in pursuing military targets, but
scientists here are poised to launch them into the raging vortexes of
hurricanes.

The small, unmanned aircraft will explore the storms at low levels that are too
dangerous for "hurricane hunter" aircraft to probe. Meteorologists hope the
information gathered will provide new details about wind speeds at the Earth's
surface and how a hurricane feeds itself on the warmth of the ocean.

"It's impossible for manned flights to fly at the levels we'd like because of
the safety risks," said Joseph Cione, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's lead scientist on the pilot project. "This is the portion of
the hurricane that we really don't know that much about."

The drones, known as Aerosondes, have a wingspan of 10 feet and can be launched
from an  automobile with the aid of a rooftop launcher. The car, with a launcher
strapped to the roof, reaches about 60 mph, at which point the aircraft is
released by a latch.

The planes are remarkably light, but also remarkably sturdy. An Aerosonde flew
into Tropical Storm Ophelia last year, recording temperature, humidity and wind
speeds.

Now the aim is for similar measurements from hurricanes. Five Aerosondes are
waiting here for a hurricane to form. The $300,000 for the project comes from
NOAA and NASA.

"If we lose the aircraft, that is part of the process," said Peter Bale, an
Aerosonde representative.

Despite all the satellite and radar imagery available to scientists, what
happens in the portion of the hurricane nearest the ocean is relatively
undocumented.

The piloted hurricane hunter airplanes typically fly into hurricanes at 10,000
feet up, nearly two miles above the surface, sometimes dropping to as low as
5,000 feet. The risks rise as the planes descend.

The Aerosonde, by contrast, is expected to be able to drop to 500 feet or less
over the ocean. The data collected are expected to provide immediate help for
meteorologists trying to estimate a hurricane's wind speeds at the Earth's
surface.

In the longer term, the information is also expected to help scientists better
understand the air-sea connection in hurricanes and to make  more accurate
predictions of their intensity, one of the most urgent challenges facing
meteorologists today.

While scientists have dramatically improved their understanding of the movement
of hurricanes  --  their storm-track forecasts have  improved substantially  --
predictions about intensity have lagged.

This season, Tropical Storm Ernesto was forecast to become a hurricane in
Florida. Airports closed. Students in South Florida had two days off. But
Ernesto's predicted fury never materialized  --  the feared storm proved to be a
meteorological dud.

The predictions have underestimated storms, too. In 2004, Hurricane Charley
startled scientists when it blossomed from Category 2 to Category 4 in a very
short time.

"Why did that happen? Scientifically, we really don't know," Cione said.

While scientists know that hurricanes derive their power from the warmth of the
ocean, what's far less clear are the conditions at the point where the hurricane
touches the ocean, which is where the energy transfer takes place.

For example, scientists had long assumed that the difference between air
temperatures and ocean temperatures were small  --  less than 1 degree Celsius.
But recent research by Cione and others, based on ocean buoys that just happened
to be under a hurricane, showed that the temperature difference has been two or
three times that.

The significance of the temperature difference is "huge," Cione said, because
the amount of energy flowing from the water into the hurricane partly depends on
it. The drones, he hopes, will render more clues about this portion of the
hurricane.

While scientists have reams of satellite and other data collected from storms,
little of it provides even basic information about the nexus of the air and
ocean.

The Aerosondes can stay aloft for as long as 20 hours. Sensors on the wing will
transmit basic meteorological information to the National Hurricane Center and
NOAA's Hurricane Research Division about what is happening at the stormy
surface.

According to a NOAA statement: "Continuous observation of temperature, moisture,
and wind structure of the near-surface hurricane environment has never been
documented in a hurricane."

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 788 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 19, 2003 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Here's a Rain Check;
Hey, Isabel, Don't Go Off Willy-Willy

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C12

LENGTH: 499 words


The winds blew, the rains came, trees toppled and lights flickered (and
sometimes more than flickered). But the worst of Hurricane Isabel came to the
Washington area in the night, while most of you slept (or tried to sleep).

Now it's the cleaning up and mopping up and chopping up that's left to do. But
Isabel's power and all the attention that was paid to her made us at KidsPost
want to check up on hurricane facts and folklore. So here's some hopefully fun
reading for you. (We hope you don't have to read it by flashlight.)

A hurricane by any other name: Storms that form in the Atlantic Ocean are called
hurricanes. Storms that form in the western Pacific Ocean are typhoons. And
storms that form near Australia are called willy-willies. Hurricanes, typhoons
and willy-willies -- say it out loud three times and try not to giggle -- are
all types of cyclones. (Australians also call their huge dust storms
willy-willies.)

Now, that's a big storm: Hurricanes can be as small as 50 miles wide (about the
distance from Fairfax to Baltimore) or as big as 500 miles wide (that's wider
than the state of Texas).

A hurricane by any other name, Part 2: The idea of naming storms so that
forecasters could keep better track of them dates to the 1940s, when only
women's names were used. In 1978, men's names were added. Names for Atlantic
hurricanes can be English, Spanish or French, the languages spoken in countries
most likely to be affected by an Atlantic hurricane.

Even the president moved in the lawn furniture: Groundskeepers at the White
House took patio furniture inside. President Bush decided to go to Camp David,
in the Maryland mountains, to wait out the storm. Even Air Force One, the
president's plane, got moved from its usual place at Andrews Air Force Base in
Maryland to Georgia.

Isabel, you picked the right month: Hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 1,
but September is typically the month when most hurricanes form.

A hurricane by any other name, Part 3: Pro athletes who are stars get their
jersey numbers retired. Hurricanes that are "stars" (that is, cause huge amounts
of damage or even deaths) have their names retired. Is your name on the list? Go
to the Web site at hurricanes.noaa.gov and click on Storm Names.

Protecting the ponies: The ponies of Chincoteague Island in Virginia were riding
out the storm in a pasture on high ground. Firefighters led about 150 of the
ponies made famous in the book "Misty of Chincoteague" to a spot about 20 feet
higher than their normal grazing grounds.

Hurricane history: The word hurricane comes from the Carib Indian god of storms
and thunderbolts, Huracan.

A hurricane by any other name, Part 4: Now that Isabel is gone, what would be
the name of the next hurricane? Juan. But let's all hope that we don't get to
know him as well as we got to know Isabel.

-- Tracy Grant

Sources: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, staff and wire
reports, National Hurricane Center, "How Stuff Works," National Geographic.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 789 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                      Bladen Journal, Elizabethtown, N.C.

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                          September 20, 2017 Wednesday

2017 hurricane season expected to make list of busiest ever

BYLINE: Chrysta Carroll, Bladen Journal, Elizabethtown, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 623 words


Sept. 20--As residents living near the Atlantic keep a watchful eye on Hurricane
Maria, the recent onslaught of storms this year has East Coast residents
wondering if there's an end.

"For reelz?" said Timothy Strickland on social media, after posting the National
Hurricane Center's predicted path for Maria. His comment prompted responses
ranging from "I know, right?" to "Every year, man, every year." This year,
however, Strickland and his fellow doomsday criers are right.

Normally, the Atlantic sees 12 named storms, six of which become hurricanes. Two
of those six are typically Category 3, 4, or 5. This year, however, with roughly
10 weeks left in the season, 13 named storms have already been produced, seven
of which have become hurricanes. Four of them -- Harvey, Irma, José, and Maria
-- have been Category 3 or higher.

By Sept. 21 in a normal year, the Atlantic would have seen only four hurricanes,
one of which would have been a Category 3 or higher. Only four other seasons
since 1995 have had as many by this date as 2017 has.

This year's active season was predicted by climatologists, thanks in part to a
weak El Niño system. When El Niño is strong, the wind shear typically serves to
suppress the development of Atlantic hurricanes, so a weak system favors
increased storm production. That situation, combined with normal or above-normal
water surface temperatures -- hurricanes need water temperatures above 79ºF to
"feed" their output -- had the National Hurricane Center sending out reports in
May to prepare for a rough season.

Despite the warning, the season has taken many off guard. While it may not be
unheard of to see six storms during the most active portion of the season --
such as what the Atlantic has experienced between Aug. 21 and Sept. 21 -- it is
unusual for two Category 4 hurricanes and two Category 5 storms to form within
30 days. Equally unlikely is the chance for three major hurricanes to pass
through the same region within a month, as have Irma, José, and Maria in the
Caribbean.

The U.S. will pay, literally, for the increase in storms. Thus far, Harvey and
Irma alone have cost upwards of $290 billion, already double the Atlantic's most
expensive season for the U.S. The previous record-holder was 2005, when Katrina
and three other storms resulted in $141 billion in damage, according to National
Hurricane Center data.

While this year's hurricane season probably won't be the most active -- a
distinction that belongs to 2005, which saw 28 named storms, 15 of them
hurricanes -- the possibility of climbing near the top of list of busiest
hurricane seasons exists. One more major hurricane would add the year to the
National Hurricane Center list of 18 seasons with the most major hurricanes, and
one more named storm would put this year in the top 17 of the busiest tropical
storm seasons. Five more hurricanes would be needed to make the list of the top
19 busiest hurricane seasons.

North Carolina sees her fair share of those storms. According to the North
Carolina State Climatology Office, the Tar Heel State is hit by a tropical
storm, on average, about every four years. The state ranks fourth in the nation
-- behind Florida, Louisiana, and Texas -- in number of storms, which
climatologists attribute to the state's topography and shape.

Chrysta Carroll can be reached by calling 910-862-4163 or emailing
ccarroll@bladenjournal.com

RECOMMENDED FOR YOU

1:11 pm       |

0

Devane, daughter of slave, Civil War soldier, dies at 111

10:19 am       |

0

Water advisory rescinded

1:30 pm

Updated: 10:24 am.  |

1

Peanut Festival finale?

___ (c)2017 the Bladen Journal (Elizabethtown, N.C.) Visit the Bladen Journal
(Elizabethtown, N.C.) at www.bladenjournal.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20170920-1BL-2017-hurricane-season-expected-to-make-list-of-busiest-ever-0920-20
170920

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1BL


               Copyright 2017 Bladen Journal, Elizabethtown, N.C.


                          FOCUS - 790 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The Economic Times

                            November 4, 2012 Sunday

Post Sandy and Nilam: Find out about earlier deadly storms & the history behind
their names

BYLINE: Yusuf Begg

SECTION: ET CETERA

LENGTH: 787 words


Storm Scales

A storm in the Atlantic is called a hurricane, in the Indian Ocean it is a
cyclone, while around the Philippines and the Pacific Ocean it is known as a
typhoon. While these three form over water, tornadoes (or twisters) form over
land and are smaller in size and intensity. Though similar in many ways,
hurricanes, cyclones and typhoons are measured on different scales.

For hurricanes there is the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. Depending upon wind
speed, hurricanes are classified under Categories 1-5. For a storm to be called
a Category 1 hurricane it has to have wind speeds ranging 119-153 kmph; 252 kmph
and above are slotted under Category 5. India's Regional Specialised
Meteorological Centre's classification of cyclone ranges from depression (51
kmph) to super cyclones (222 kmph).

Some That Made Waves

Great Hurricane of 1780

Though exact figures are unavailable, it is considered to be the deadliest
Atlantic hurricane. Between October 10 and 16, over 22,000 lives were lost in
eastern Caribbean. Experts conjecture that it was a Category 5 hurricane with
speed touching 320 kmph.

Galveston Hurricane

Now forgotten, this Category 4 hurricane nearly wiped out Galveston, Texas'
biggest city then. With wind speed touching 233 kmph, it slammed southern US on
September 8, 1900. The toll is estimated to be 8,000 fatalities. It is
considered to be the most deadly hurricane to strike the US.

Cyclone Bhola

Probably the worst tropical cyclone ever, with reports of nearly half a million
deaths in Bangladesh. With wind speed crossing 200 kmph and storm surges of 30
feet, the cyclone caused extensive flooding. It came after five earlier storms
had hit the country that year, 1970.

Andhra Pradesh Cyclone

One of the worst cyclones to hit the Indian coast. Touched the Andhra shore line
on November 19, 1977 and left in its wake nearly 15,000 dead and damages worth
$500 million.

Hurricane Mitch

One of the strongest to hit Honduras and Nicaragua, Mitch brought along
torrential rain that caused flooding and mudslides. For over 10 days in
October-November 1998, it caused havoc, leaving over 10,000 dead, many thousands
missing. Damage was estimated at $6 billion.

Hurricane Katrina

The deadliest and most destructive storm in the 2005 hurricane season. It is
also the costliest natural disaster in the US. Over a million people were
displaced and 1,800 killed as the Category 5 hurricane hit Louisiana and
Mississippi on August 25.

Cyclone Nargis

Hit Myanmar on May 2, 2008. Considered to be the country's worst natural
disaster; caused damages worth $10 billion and nearly 150,000 deaths.



Hurricane Ike

In 14 days (September 1-14, 2008), this Category 4 hurricane left large swathes
in Cuba, Haiti, Bahamas and US devastated. Close to 200 people died and damages
have been estimated to be close to $40 billion. It is considered to be the
second costliest hurricane to hit the US.

The Naming Game

Until 1978, storms were only given women's names! But then US weathermen decided
to become politically correct and so now we have men's names too attached to
hurricanes. It's "Sandy season" now but watch out for Tony, Valerie and William.
And next year the hurricane season will start with Andrea, Barry and Chantal.

In days gone by, hurricanes were named after saints. Then latitude and longitude
positions were used and during World War II the US military named them after
their wives and girl friends. Now it is the job of the World Meteorological
Organization, based in Geneva, to get out an alphabetical list of names at its
annual meeting. The lists are rotated every six years. Some names from the
previous years are "retired", if they have been devastating.

The Tempest and Other Stories

Storms and imagination go hand in hand. Krishna fights storms sent by Indra. So
does Odysseus in Homer's Odyssey. Shakespeare's plays are full of storms.
Remember that wonderful scene in King Lear? Edgar Allan Poe ("A Descent into the
Maelstrom") and Joseph Conrad (Typhoon) continue the tradition. The Perfect
Storm by Sebastian Junger is a nuanced thriller.

But then storms are all about drama and devastation. And what better medium than
films? John Ford filmed lashing waves and swaying palms for the climax of The
Hurricane in a Hollywood sound stage. More effective were the billowing curtains
and shattering windows in John Huston's classic noir Key Largo. Trouble the
Water is a documentary worth repeated viewing.

Musicians weren't far behind. Check out Vivaldi's "Summer" (from The Four
Seasons). For the black tee-and-distressed-jeans lot there is, of course, the
Scorpions' "Rock you like a hurricane". And jholawallahs and meaning-seekers can
tune into Bob Dylan and his "Hurricane".

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 791 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The Economic Times

                            November 5, 2012 Monday

Post Sandy and Nilam: Find out about earlier deadly storms & the history behind
their names

BYLINE: Yusuf Begg

SECTION: ET CETERA

LENGTH: 787 words


Storm Scales

A storm in the Atlantic is called a hurricane, in the Indian Ocean it is a
cyclone, while around the Philippines and the Pacific Ocean it is known as a
typhoon. While these three form over water, tornadoes (or twisters) form over
land and are smaller in size and intensity. Though similar in many ways,
hurricanes, cyclones and typhoons are measured on different scales.

For hurricanes there is the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. Depending upon wind
speed, hurricanes are classified under Categories 1-5. For a storm to be called
a Category 1 hurricane it has to have wind speeds ranging 119-153 kmph; 252 kmph
and above are slotted under Category 5. India's Regional Specialised
Meteorological Centre's classification of cyclone ranges from depression (51
kmph) to super cyclones (222 kmph).

Some That Made Waves

Great Hurricane of 1780

Though exact figures are unavailable, it is considered to be the deadliest
Atlantic hurricane. Between October 10 and 16, over 22,000 lives were lost in
eastern Caribbean. Experts conjecture that it was a Category 5 hurricane with
speed touching 320 kmph.

Galveston Hurricane

Now forgotten, this Category 4 hurricane nearly wiped out Galveston, Texas'
biggest city then. With wind speed touching 233 kmph, it slammed southern US on
September 8, 1900. The toll is estimated to be 8,000 fatalities. It is
considered to be the most deadly hurricane to strike the US.

Cyclone Bhola

Probably the worst tropical cyclone ever, with reports of nearly half a million
deaths in Bangladesh. With wind speed crossing 200 kmph and storm surges of 30
feet, the cyclone caused extensive flooding. It came after five earlier storms
had hit the country that year, 1970.

Andhra Pradesh Cyclone

One of the worst cyclones to hit the Indian coast. Touched the Andhra shore line
on November 19, 1977 and left in its wake nearly 15,000 dead and damages worth
$500 million.

Hurricane Mitch

One of the strongest to hit Honduras and Nicaragua, Mitch brought along
torrential rain that caused flooding and mudslides. For over 10 days in
October-November 1998, it caused havoc, leaving over 10,000 dead, many thousands
missing. Damage was estimated at $6 billion.

Hurricane Katrina

The deadliest and most destructive storm in the 2005 hurricane season. It is
also the costliest natural disaster in the US. Over a million people were
displaced and 1,800 killed as the Category 5 hurricane hit Louisiana and
Mississippi on August 25.

Cyclone Nargis

Hit Myanmar on May 2, 2008. Considered to be the country's worst natural
disaster; caused damages worth $10 billion and nearly 150,000 deaths.



Hurricane Ike

In 14 days (September 1-14, 2008), this Category 4 hurricane left large swathes
in Cuba, Haiti, Bahamas and US devastated. Close to 200 people died and damages
have been estimated to be close to $40 billion. It is considered to be the
second costliest hurricane to hit the US.

The Naming Game

Until 1978, storms were only given women's names! But then US weathermen decided
to become politically correct and so now we have men's names too attached to
hurricanes. It's "Sandy season" now but watch out for Tony, Valerie and William.
And next year the hurricane season will start with Andrea, Barry and Chantal.

In days gone by, hurricanes were named after saints. Then latitude and longitude
positions were used and during World War II the US military named them after
their wives and girl friends. Now it is the job of the World Meteorological
Organization, based in Geneva, to get out an alphabetical list of names at its
annual meeting. The lists are rotated every six years. Some names from the
previous years are "retired", if they have been devastating.

The Tempest and Other Stories

Storms and imagination go hand in hand. Krishna fights storms sent by Indra. So
does Odysseus in Homer's Odyssey. Shakespeare's plays are full of storms.
Remember that wonderful scene in King Lear? Edgar Allan Poe ("A Descent into the
Maelstrom") and Joseph Conrad (Typhoon) continue the tradition. The Perfect
Storm by Sebastian Junger is a nuanced thriller.

But then storms are all about drama and devastation. And what better medium than
films? John Ford filmed lashing waves and swaying palms for the climax of The
Hurricane in a Hollywood sound stage. More effective were the billowing curtains
and shattering windows in John Huston's classic noir Key Largo. Trouble the
Water is a documentary worth repeated viewing.

Musicians weren't far behind. Check out Vivaldi's "Summer" (from The Four
Seasons). For the black tee-and-distressed-jeans lot there is, of course, the
Scorpions' "Rock you like a hurricane". And jholawallahs and meaning-seekers can
tune into Bob Dylan and his "Hurricane".

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 792 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             Daily News (Sri Lanka)

                              May 2, 2013 Thursday

NASA captures monster hurricane from space

LENGTH: 328 words

DATELINE: US


US, May 2 -- NASA's spacecraft Cassini took this amazing colourful picture of a
Saturn storm that resembles a hurricane on Earth. The centre eye of the storm on
Saturn is about 1,250 miles wide. That's 20 times larger than the average
hurricane eye on Earth, that's the distance between Dallas and Washington, DC.
Usually, hurricanes on Earth have a small eye and much larger outer bands. But
incredibly on Saturn 1,250 miles is the distance of the centre eye only. The
entire storm could be several thousand miles more.

As for the wind speed in the storm, usually in hurricanes the strongest wind is
in the centre of the storm around what is called "the eye wall" of the
hurricane, and tends to get weaker as you get to the edge of the hurricane. The
wind speed on the outer edge of the cloud band of Saturn's hurricane is 330 mph
and the winds in the centre eye are four times faster than some of the strongest
hurricanes on Earth. To compare Saturn's storm to hurricanes that affected the
U.S., the strongest hurricane to hit the U.S. was Camille in 1969 with winds of
190 mph.

One of the interesting facts is that usual hurricanes on Earth feed off the
water vapour from the warm ocean water. That gives it the needed energy for the
hurricane to develop. But on Saturn there is no body of water nearby for this
storm to feed off. Instead it is feeding off of small amounts of water vapour in
Saturn's hydrogen atmosphere.

Another interesting fact: Hurricanes on Earth form usually in the tropical
latitudes and move north due to the forces acting on them. But Saturn's storm is
located at the planet's north pole that has made it stationary with nowhere
further north to go. Because of this discovery, NASA scientists believe that it
could have been there for years. Published by HT Syndication with permission
from Daily News Sri Lanka. For any query with respect to this article or any
other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2013 The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 793 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Star-News (Wilmington, NC)

                            January 15, 2016 Friday
                             NC Wilmington Edition

January hurricane forms in Atlantic

BYLINE: NC Vance Merton; Sun Sentinel

SECTION: 1,A; GateHouse Media GM9; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 205 words


A rare January hurricane formed Thursday in the Atlantic, the first one to form
in that month in 78 years.

Hurricane Alex, with maximum sustained winds of 85 miles per hour, is projected
to head almost straight north, a track that would pose no threat to the United
States. At 11 a.m. Thursday, the storm was about 1,100 miles off the coast of
Morocco, a position that put it closer to Africa than North America, according
to the National Hurricane Center.

A hurricane warning was issued for the central Azores, a cluster of islands
about 900 miles west of Portugal

Alex formed six weeks after the end of the official hurricane season, a period
from June 1 to Nov. 30 that sees the vast majority of hurricanes.

The last time a hurricane formed in January was in 1938, when a tropical storm
in the middle of the Atlantic briefly achieved hurricane strength. Hurricane
Alice, a 1955 storm, existed in January but had formed in December, according to
the National Hurricane Center.

Remarkably, Alex has undergone the transformation into a hurricane,  National
Hurricane Center forecaster Richard Pasch wrote in the advisory issued Thursday
morning.

Meteorologists expect Alex to produce 3 to 5 inches of rain over the Azores
through Friday.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2016 Star-News, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 794 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                  May 26, 2002 Sunday 0 South Pinellas Edition

Hurricane preparedness starts at home

BYLINE: STEPHEN HEGARTY

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 926 words


Craig Fugate has a ready retort when someone asks him if emergency officials are
ready for a hurricane.

"I throw it back at them and ask, "Are you?' " said Fugate, director of
Florida's Division of Emergency Management. "This is a team sport. It's not just
about government."

From the governor to the local emergency management worker, officials across the
state are preparing for another hurricane season, which begins Saturday.

Part of the preparation is urging residents to think about what they can do for
themselves.

"The people we serve have to be a part of the answer," Gov. Jeb Bush said. "This
is a local response first and foremost."

Persuading Florida residents to take responsibility for themselves and their
neighbors when a storm threatens can be a tough sell.

State and national agencies have an impressive collection of planes that fly in
and around the storms. Gee-whiz computer programs anticipate storms before they
form and monitor them after they start. Up and down the state, well-stocked
shelters are a few phone calls away from becoming operational. Scientists devote
entire careers to studying all manner of storm minutia.

Still, state and local organizations struggle each year to get Floridians to
give hurricanes just a few minutes of thought.

"No matter how well-prepared we are, if a million people don't know what to do
or they don't listen to what we say, all that preparation isn't going to work
very well," said David Bilodeau, Pinellas County's director of emergency
management.

"It's hard to get people's attention unless you have a major hurricane," said
Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center.

As Tropical Storm Gabrielle proved last year, even a storm that is not quite a
hurricane can cause problems.

+++

If a hurricane churning in the Gulf of Mexico starts bearing down on the Tampa
Bay area, Peggy Rhodes knows exactly what to do:

Get on the phone. Call fellow parishioners.

As a member of the disaster preparedness committee at St. Cecelia's Catholic
Church in Clearwater, Rhodes sets off the telephone equivalent of dominoes. She
calls other committee members, who call parishioners, who call others. Before
long, frail or elderly parishioners, or those living in evacuation areas, will
be headed for safety - most likely a "host home" of a fellow parishioner.

"We have some in our parish who live on the water and some who live in mobile
home parks," Rhodes said. "We have some who are alone and just shouldn't be
alone in a storm.

"Sometimes people are reluctant to go to a shelter. But if they're going to the
home of a friend, it's easier."

Fugate, the state's top disaster preparedness official, loves to hear about
programs like that.

"That's the sort of thing people used to do a lot in the old days," Fugate said.
"Today, we have all these elaborate emergency response systems. I call them
"government-centric.'

"But the best, most effective responses are neighborhoods, community groups and
churches looking out for each other."

Fugate and other emergency management officials want to tap into the good
Samaritan response that was so heartening after Sept. 11 and after Hurricane
Andrew a decade ago. At those times government had a clear role in the cleanup,
but regular citizens desperately wanted to pitch in and help.

"Since Andrew, we spent a lot of time making the government response better,"
Fugate said. "What about the other "unofficial' response? How do we harness that
spontaneous response?"

It is especially hard to harness that energy before the emergency and to funnel
it into preparation. Fugate fears that the highly localized, "looking after your
neighbor" programs are not as plentiful as they need to be.

One of the reasons is that people might rely too much on technology and
government. That contributes to one of the great dangers during the hurricane
season: complacency.

"We do a better job with forecasting," Fugate said. "We have a lot more
knowledge, a lot more technology. But I hate to tell you, we don't have the
technology to stop a hurricane."

Another reason for the inattention is that many Floridians have never seen
firsthand what a real hurricane can do.

"Some people think we don't have a hurricane problem," Fugate said. "We have an
amnesia problem."

Most of the people now living in the Sunshine State have never lived through a
direct hit from a powerful hurricane. In many areas of the state, populations
boomed after the last hurricane.

For instance, Pinellas has had a few bad storms in recent years. Hurricane
Gordon in September 2000 caused some damage. Tropical Storm Barry in August 2001
and Gabrielle in September 2001 caused some flooding.

But not since the 1940s have direct-hit hurricanes visited the Pinellas coast.
And those were Category 1 hurricanes, the mildest category of hurricane.

"You always have people who get complacent because they think they've been
through a hurricane and it wasn't that bad," said Mary Hickey, administrator
with the Sanibel Fire District.

"Gabrielle was like a trial run for us," Hickey said. "But Gabrielle wasn't that
bad. I hope people know that."

Hurricanes and population growth

Most Tampa Bay area residents have not experienced a severe hurricane, as these
bar charts demonstrate. They show population increases by decade for five
counties, with lines showing when hurricanes hit. A Category 1 hurricane is the
mildest, Category 5 the most severe. Hurricane Andrew, which struck South
Florida in 1992, was Category 4.

Source: NOAA

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, (2); GRAPH; (1995) Traffic backs up on Interstate 10 as cars
crawl out of the Pensacola area ahead of Hurricane Opal.; The cover of the 2002
Hurricane Guide.; Bar graphs show population figures each decade for five
counties in the Tampa Bay area. Indicates; category of hurricanes that hit each
area.

                    Copyright 2002 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 795 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

               August 21, 2004 Saturday 0 South Pinellas Edition

Names lay claim to hurricane force

BYLINE: SCOTT BARANCIK

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 661 words


Hurricane Landscaping of Tampa doesn't uproot trees, turn daisies into deadly
missiles or heave sod into neighboring ZIP codes. Wilberto Velez said he chose
the name to give his company a Florida feel, not to suggest it would do violence
with lawn implements.

But if the name he chose for his sparring club on E Seventh Avenue, Hurricane
Boxing Gym, evokes menace, it's entirely intentional.

"We're like a hurricane when we step in the ring," Velez said.

Hundreds of Florida companies that sell shutters or other storm-proofing gear
logically include the word "hurricane" in their name. But others employ the word
as metaphor, to attract attention, or sometimes for less obvious reasons.

Deb Cole, a Satellite Beach woman who tidies up million-dollar homes for a
living, named her business Hurricane Deb Whirlwind Cleaning Service to let
people know she works fast. She said the name conjures a benign wind that whips
through a messy house "and then, in a couple hours, everything is shiny and
beautiful."

Hurricane Hydro, a Tampa company that uses high-power water-blasting equipment
to clean pipes and remove concrete, draws instead on the word's association with
brute hydrological force.

Similarly, masonry contractor Hurricane Houses & Structures of Melbourne chose
the word to play up its use of solid-pour, reinforced-concrete walls rather than
wood or concrete block. "We build basements above ground," president Gerald
Paradis said.

Some business owners aim to capitalize on the popularity of the University of
Miami Hurricanes football and basketball teams. "Basically, everybody got
together and we sort of had like a meeting to come up with a name," said Bill
Frazer, vice president of Hurricane Pest Services in Plantation. "We picked
"hurricane' because of the Miami Hurricane (football) team. I got a lot of guys
that call me just because they're fans."

Jeff Gonzalez, who named his Tampa used-car lot Hurricane Motors, said he's
simply indulging a personal fascination with cyclones. Gonzalez and his fiancee
chased Hurricane Charley to Punta Gorda last week in an H2 Hummer equipped with
video equipment and a wind-speed detector. "You could feel the car lifting up,"
he said.

At Hurricane Motors, Gonzalez said, "a lot of people ask, "Have these cars
actually been in a hurricane?' They are concerned. So sometimes that has a
negative effect."

And, sometimes the name sows confusion.

"After hurricanes happened, every single insurance agent and contractor in the
world came to the store looking for maps," said Kristen Lalumiere, former owner
of Hurricane Books in Gulf Breeze. "It was so cute . . . as if there were one
(book) store that was dedicated completely to hurricanes."

In fact, the store was called Herron-King Books when Lalumiere bought it in
1989. So many publishers and other callers misheard the name as "Hurricane"
Books that she eventually renamed it just that.

JoAnn Kirkpatrick, who distributes third-party products such as latex gloves and
ball bearings from a 30,000-square-foot depot in Fort Lauderdale, said she and
her husband named the company Hurricane Distribution and Warehouse to draw
curiosity-seekers and, they hope, extra business. To some extent it has worked,
she said.

"It isn't very nice to use the intensity of a hurricane to benefit from," she
said, "but it does draw attention."

Though not all of it is welcome. "It also generates a lot of people calling for
shutters when they get panicky," Kirkpatrick said. "When Hurricane Andrew was
coming (in 1992), they were banging on our doors to see if they could get
plywood."

The same year, a Utah charity mistakenly sent the company a 53-foot-trailer
filled with clothing and other goods for hurricane victims.

A company driver delivered the material to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, no charge.

Times researcher Kitty Bennett contributed to this report. Scott Barancik can be
reached at barancik@sptimes.com or (727) 893-8751.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 796 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                           September 16, 2005 Friday
                                 Final Edition

More hurricanes turning into monster storms: Twice as many in strongest
categories as in '70s

BYLINE: Tom Spears, CanWest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A40

LENGTH: 456  words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


OTTAWA -- Hurricanes are becoming more violent worldwide, with twice as many
Category 4 and 5 hurricanes -- the strongest types -- as there were 35 years
ago, scientists are warning.

And while they won't blame the ferocity of Hurricane Katrina on this trend, they
say warmer oceans are making the recent natural disaster the face of the future.

The number of hurricanes has not necessarily increased over the past decades,
but a greater proportion are growing into monsters like Katrina, Andrew and
Hugo, says a study by the Georgia Institute of Technology and the U.S. National
Center for Atmospheric Research to be published today in the journal Science.

"What we found was rather astonishing," said lead scientist Peter Webster of
Georgia Tech. "In the 1970s, there was an average of about 10 Category 4 and 5
hurricanes per year globally. Since 1990, the number of Category 4 and 5
hurricanes has almost doubled, averaging 18 per year globally."

He said warmer sea temperatures are feeding hurricanes, making them stronger.
Whether this is due to global warming caused by humans or whether there's also a
natural cycle involved, he won't say.

The study also found that Category 4 and 5 storms are making up a larger share
of the total number of hurricanes.

"Category 4 and 5 hurricanes made up about 20 per cent of all hurricanes in the
1970s, but over the last decade they account for about 35 per cent of these
storms," said Judith Curry, also of Georgia Tech.

Many environmentalists and hurricane victims have pointed to Katrina as evidence
that global warming is causing stronger storms. But scientists agree it's
impossible to read a trend in one single storm.

"If you look at Katrina you can say, 'Was that climate change or not?' I don't
know. It's an argument we could debate for a long time," says Canadian climate
scientist

Gordon McBean of the University of Western Ontario.

"But in the aftermath of Katrina, the redevelopment strategy for that part of
the U.S. should factor in, in my view, the expectation that the hurricane
intensities of the future will be greater than those of the recent past."

Katrina was a Category 5 storm over the Gulf of Mexico, dropping slightly to
Category 4 just before reaching land. Category 4 hurricanes have sustained winds
of at least 210 km/h at sea level. Category 5 winds are at least 250 km/h.

The North American insurance industry needs no convincing about the trend to
more violent hurricanes, said Paul Kovacs, executive director of the
Toronto-based Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction.

"There's no question . . . all of our research -- and I've got a team on the
Gulf Coast now -- is based on the belief that there may not be more hurricanes
but there will be more big ones," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: The Associated Press; Satellite image shows Hurricane Katrina over
the U.S. Gulf Coast on Aug. 29.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 797 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           January 14, 2016 Thursday

Hurricane Hunters to welcome community before heading home

BYLINE: The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 341 words


Jan. 14--ST. CROIX -- If you've ever wanted to see the inside of one of the
Hurricane Hunter aircraft, Saturday morning may be your chance.

The U.S. Air Force Reserve's 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron -- the
Hurricane Hunters -- and some other members of the 403rd Wing of the Air Force
Reserve are on St. Croix this week for their annual "roll up," when they pack
equipment and tools to take back to home base at Keesler Air Force Base in
Mississippi during the off-season.

The Hurricane Hunter typically returns in May for a "roll out" to get ready for
the new Atlantic hurricane season that starts June 1.

As part of the roll-up, one of the Hurricane Hunter aircraft, a WC-130J, will be
open for the public to tour Saturday morning, according to Master Sgt. Brian
Lamar, a spokesman for the Hurricane Hunters.

The tours will be available starting at 9:30 a.m. Saturday at Rohlsen Airport,
and the doors will close about 11 a.m. to get everyone who is there through the
tour, Lamar said.

He anticipates the tours will finish by 11:30 a.m., and he said those who are
interested in a tour should not be late.

During hurricane season, when they are assigned to investigate storms in certain
parts of the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean, the Hurricane Hunters are forward
deployed to St. Croix, a temporary base from which they fly their missions.

They may be deployed to St. Croix multiple times during an active hurricane
season.

Although the Atlantic hurricane season was fairly quiet in 2015, the Hurricane
Hunters also flew missions into storms in the Pacific, Lamar said.

They investigated a number of storms there, including Hurricane Patricia, the
strongest hurricane ever reported, Lamar said.

Saturday morning's tours of the Hurricane Hunter WC-130J aircraft will be at
Rohlsen Airport, at the hangar the Hurricane Hunters use to the east of the main
airport.

___ (c)2016 The Virgin Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) Visit The Virgin
Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) at www.virginislandsdailynews.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20160114-1VI-Hurricane-Hunters-to-welcome-community-before-heading-home-0114-201
60114

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2016 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 798 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Port Arthur News (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 24, 2013 Friday

Be prepared; active hurricane season predicted

BYLINE: Mary Meaux, The Port Arthur News, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 480 words


May 24--It's time to get prepared -- an active hurricane season is being
predicted.

The prediction released on Thursday calls for 13 to 20 named Atlantic storms,
seven to 11 that strengthen into hurricanes and three to six that become major
hurricanes.

The Atlantic Hurricane Season officially begins June 1 and Jefferson County
Emergency Management Coordinator Greg Fountain is hoping the predictions will
spur conversation and preparedness.

"What I like about the predictions is that people begin to talk about it and
when they talk about it they are more likely to talk about insurance and plans
and all that goes into being prepared for hurricane season," Fountain said.

Fountain said hurricanes and hurricane season are unpredictable so being
prepared is the best choice.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said there is a 70 percent
chance that this year will be more active than an average hurricane season,
according to the Associated Press.

"This is your warning," acting NOAA administrator Kathryn Sullivan said
regarding those who live in hurricane prone areas along the Atlantic Ocean or
Gulf of Mexico coasts.

A normal hurricane season has 12 named storms, six hurricanes and three major
storms with winds over 110 mph.

Last year was the third-busiest on record with 19 named storms. Ten became
hurricanes and were two major storms. That included Sandy, which caused $50
billion in damage even though it lost hurricane status when it made landfall in
New Jersey.

All the factors that go into hurricane forecasts are pointing to an active
season, or extremely active one, lead forecaster Gerry Bell of the Climate
Prediction Center, said.

Those factors include: warmer than average ocean waters that provide fuel for
storms, a multi-decade pattern of increased hurricane activity, the lack of an
El Nino warming of the central Pacific Ocean, and an active pattern of storm
systems coming off west Africa.

The Atlantic hurricane season goes through about 25 to 40 year cycles of high
activity and low activity. The high activity period started around 1995,
Sullivan said.

The forecasts don't include where storms might land, if any place. Despite the
formation of more hurricanes recently, the last time a major hurricane made
landfall in the United States was Wilma in 2005. That seven-year stretch is the
longest on record.

The six-month season starts June 1. Forecasters name tropical storms when their
top winds reach 39 mph; hurricanes have maximum winds of at least 74 mph.

This year's names: Andrea, Barry, Chantal, Dorian, Erin, Fernand, Gabrielle,
Humberto, Ingrid, Jerry, Karen, Lorenzo, Melissa, Nestor, Olga, Pablo, Rebekah,
Sebastien, Tanya, Van and Wendy.

The Associated Press contributed to this story.

___ (c)2013 The Port Arthur News (Port Arthur, Texas) Visit The Port Arthur News
(Port Arthur, Texas) at panews.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130524-ZH-Be-prepared-active-hurricane-season-predicted-20130524

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZH


                      Copyright 2013 The Port Arthur News


                          FOCUS - 799 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         LaGrange Daily News (Georgia)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          November 13, 2013 Wednesday

Hurricanes sweep to title

BYLINE: Kevin Eckleberry, LaGrange Daily News, Ga.

SECTION: SPORTS

LENGTH: 413 words


Nov. 13--A hurricane swept through Callaway Stadium Tuesday night.

Actually, it was a whole bunch of Hurricanes.

The Dr. John Vollenweider Hurricanes capped off a perfect season in the Troup
County Parks and Recreation Commission 11-12-year-old football league with a
19-0 win over the Titans in the Textile Bowl on a frigid night.

"We haven't played in these kind of conditions, but they did a great job,"
Hurricanes' head coach Kinney Clark said, referring to the windy, cold weather.
"And the coaches did a great job, too. I've got a good staff. We've got good
parents, and good players again."

This is familiar territory for Clark and his coaches.

The group of coaches has now coached four straight teams, all called the
Hurricanes, to a Textile Bowl championship.

"That's four years in a row. That's outstanding," Clark said. "We've been able
to get their attention, that's for sure."

After the two teams traded punts, a fumble by the Titans set up the Hurricanes'
first score.

The fumble gave the Hurricanes the ball at the 5-yard line, and Eric Ford's
touchdown run put the first points on the board with 1:44 left in the quarter.

Clark said getting a fumble is one thing, but "you have to be able to do
something with the turnovers," and the Hurricanes did that.

Early in the second quarter, it was a special-teams play that allowed the
Hurricanes to add to their lead.

Tavion Harton fielded a punt near his own 30-yard line, and he took it the
distance for the touchdown, and the Hurricanes led 12-0 with 5:23 left in the
half.

The Titans, spurred by a long run from Antanious Hutchinson, made it to the
Hurricanes' 30-yard line on their next possession.

A sack resulted in a fumble, though, and the Hurricanes got the ball back, and
they picked up a couple of first downs before the clock ran out, and it was a
12-0 game at the half.

After the teams swapped fumbles in the third quarter, the Hurricanes put the
game out of reach in the fourth quarter.

A 13-yard scoring run by Harton and quarterback Andraka Martin's conversion run
gave the Hurricanes a 19-0 lead with 3:24 left in the game.

Clark said the Hurricanes are losing some key players, but he hopes the team
will be right back in the championship picture next year.

"We'll lose about seven, so we'll have to pick up some more people," Clark said.
"But we'll be back."

___ (c)2013 the LaGrange Daily News (LaGrange, Ga.) Visit the LaGrange Daily
News (LaGrange, Ga.) at www.lagrangenews.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131113-GV-Hurricanes-sweep-to-title-1113-20131113

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GV


                       Copyright 2013 LaGrange Daily News


                          FOCUS - 800 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Coaldale Sunny South News

                           September 19, 2017 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Journalistic "High-Pur-Buh-Lee"

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 560  words


Graham Thomson and the Calgary Herald (Sept 12) say that Alberta's coal-fired
electrical plants played a role in the recent hurricanes in the United States.
They claim: "Climate change is... making hurricanes like Irma more powerful and
more destructive." The paper also affirms: "There is a connection between
burning coal in Alberta... and [Hurricane] Irma."

Where is the Herald's evidence to support such claims? Hurricane Harvey's Texas
landfall broke a U.S. 4,323-day (142-month, 12-year) major hurricane drought
record. And the reality is that comparing hurricanes century to century is
pretty difficult because many of the most famous hurricanes were never
scientifically measured. We do know there have been some doozies.

In 1559, Spain sent a fleet to establish the first European settlement in the
continental U.S. (near Pensacola, Florida). A hurricane destroyed the settlement
and the fleet.

In 1635, 15 years after Plymouth Colony was established and long before
coal-fired electrical plants were invented, a massive hurricane caused a
twenty-two-foot storm tide in Massachusetts.

In 1715, eleven of twelve ships of the Spanish Treasure Fleet were lost in a
Florida hurricane, killing 1,000 sailors and passengers. In 1749, a hurricane
literally reshaped Virginia's shoreline.

During that century, which was one of the worst storm seasons in the
pre-recordkeeping era, a single Atlantic hurricane claimed 22,000 lives.

In 1886, a hurricane dumped nearly two feet of rain on Louisiana, and decimated
Indianola, Texas.

Indianola had been destroyed a few years earlier by a hurricane, then rebuilt,
only to be destroyed a second time.

In 1893-years before Alberta became a province-four hurricanes occurred at
exactly the same time. Shortly thereafter, the longest-lasting hurricane in
history went on for 28 days. Caused by coal plants? Hardly.

Hurricane Irma made land as a Category 4 hurricane and soon dissipated over the
southeastern United States.

The recent Hurricane Harvey was also Category 4, making landfall in Texas and
then weakening to a tropical storm bringing enormous amounts of rain. Irma and
Harvey had landfall wind speeds of 115 knots (kt) and barometric pressure of 929
and 938 millibars (mb) respectively. (The lower the mb the more intense the
storm.)

Many past hurricanes have been more severe than Irma and Harvey. For example,
the 1935 Labor Day Hurricane had wind speeds of 160 kt at 892 mb, and the 1886
Indianola hurricane was 130 kt at 925 mb. Since 1850, Florida has had more than
100 hurricanes, yet according to Graham Thomson and the Calgary Herald, the
severity of this last storm (Irma) is due to coalfired electrical plants.
Nonsense.

Where is the Herald's evidence that coal-fired electricity has anything to do
with hurricanes? Former NASA scientist and climatologist Roy Spencer (whose
Ph.D. was on the structure of these storms, and who published a satellite method
for monitoring their strength) said the data indicates that major hurricanes
occur when sea surface temperature over the Gulf of Mexico is below average and
above average.

Graham Thomson and the Calgary Herald are engaging in alarmist fantasy. In
future, perhaps the paper will better serve the public if it pays more attention
to the facts and less attention to journalistic hyperbole.

KEVIN AVRAM Director of the non-profit Grassroots Alberta Initiative.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 Coaldale Sunny South News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 801 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                  Prairie Post

                            October 13, 2017 Friday

[Provincial journalistic 'high-pur-buh-lee" in full force ÊEditor: Graham
Thomson and the Calgary ]

SECTION: A; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 565  words


Provincial journalistic 'high-pur-buh-lee" in full force

ÊEditor:

Graham Thomson and the Calgary Herald (Sept 12) say that Alberta's coal-fired
electrical plants played a role in the recent hurricanes in the United States.
They claim: "Climate change isÉ making hurricanes like Irma more powerful and
more destructive." The paper also affirms: "There is a connection between
burning coal in AlbertaÉ and [Hurricane] Irma."

Where is the Herald's evidence to support such claims? Hurricane Harvey's Texas
landfall broke a U.S. 4,323-day (142-month, 12-year) major hurricane drought
record. And the reality is that comparing hurricanes century to century is
pretty difficult because many of the most famous hurricanes were never
scientifically measured. We do know there have been some doozies.

In 1559, Spain sent a fleet to establish the first European settlement in the
continental U.S. (near Pensacola, Florida). A hurricane destroyed the settlement
and the fleet. In 1635, 15 years after Plymouth Colony was established and long
before coal-fired electrical plants were invented, a massive hurricane caused a
twenty-two-foot storm tide in Massachusetts.

In 1715, eleven of twelve ships of the Spanish Treasure Fleet were lost in a
Florida hurricane, killing 1,000 sailors and passengers. In 1749, a hurricane
literally reshaped Virginia's shoreline. During that century, which was one of
the worst storm seasons in the pre-recordkeeping era, a single Atlantic
hurricane claimed 22,000 lives.

In 1886, a hurricane dumped nearly two feet of rain on Louisiana, and decimated
Indianola, Texas. Indianola had been destroyed a few years earlier by a
hurricane, then rebuilt, only to be destroyed a second time. In 1893Ñyears
before Alberta became a provinceÑfour hurricanes occurred at exactly the same
time. Shortly thereafter, the longest-lasting hurricane in history went on for
28 days. Caused by coal plants? Hardly.

Hurricane Irma made land as a Category 4 hurricane and soon dissipated over the
southeastern United States. The recent Hurricane Harvey was also Category 4,
making landfall in Texas and then weakening to a tropical storm bringing
enormous amounts of rain. Irma and Harvey had landfall wind speeds of 115 knots
(kt) and barometric pressure of 929 and 938 millibars (mb) respectively. (The
lower the mb the more intense the storm.)

Many past hurricanes have been more severe than Irma and Harvey. For example,
the 1935 Labor Day Hurricane had wind speeds of 160 kt at 892 mb, and the 1886
Indianola hurricane was 130 kt at 925 mb. Since 1850, Florida has had more than
100 hurricanes, yet according to Graham Thomson and the Calgary Herald, the
severity of this last storm (Irma) is due to coal-fired electrical plants.
Nonsense. Where is the Herald's evidence that coal-fired electricity has
anything to do with hurricanes?

Former NASA scientist and climatologist Roy Spencer (whose Ph.D. was on the
structure of these storms, and who published a satellite method for monitoring
their strength) said the data indicates that major hurricanes occur when sea
surface temperature over the Gulf of Mexico is below average and above average.

Graham Thomson and the Calgary Herald are engaging in alarmist fantasy. In
future, perhaps the paper will better serve the public if it pays more attention
to the facts and less attention to journalistic hyperbole.

Kevin Avram

admin@GrasstrootsAlberta.ca

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2017 Prairie Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 802 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2018 Zoom Information Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                            Zoom Company Information

                                   April 2018

                                Hurricane Alley

                              1490 Missouri Avenue
                             Las Cruces,  NM 88001
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: (575) 532-9358
URL: www.hurricanealley.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EMPLOYEES: 12

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

   Hurricane Alley .com is the authoritative source for hurricane information,
including hurricane preparedness, the latest hurricane information, and national
weather service updates. Useful emergency preparedness product information can
be found here on emergency kits, storm shutters, hurricane insurance, sandbags,
emergency power, emergency foods, emergency kits, the best flashlights, etc. In
addition, detailed hurricane information can be found here on the hurricane
surge, hurricane winds, hurricane damage, and past major hurricanes such as
Hurricane Andrew, Hurricane Katrina, Hurricane Hugo,Hurricane Dora, as well as
major cyclones.  Below is the latest Atlantic and Caribbean information from the
National Hurricane Center. It is updated in real time, so you can stay on top of
the storm, minute to minute, from Hurricane Alley .com.

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *

REVENUE: USD 2,400,000

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2018


                          FOCUS - 803 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         West County Times (California)

                     December 8, 2000 Friday FINAL EDITION

FORECASTERS PREDICT QUIETER HURRICANE SEASON THIS YEAR

BYLINE: Steve Stone

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A 20

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: NORFOLK, Va.


NORFOLK, Va. The 2001 hurricane season should be quieter than this year's, with
fewer storms than normal. But the chances for a storm to make landfall will be
higher, the nation's leading hurricane forecaster said this week.

Several "climate indicators" point to "a significant reduction in next year's
Atlantic Basin storms," said Bill Gray, a professor of atmospheric sciences at
Colorado State University.

Gray and his team of researchers study a wide variety of climate signals,
everything from the path and speed of winds in the upper atmosphere to deep sea
currents, water temperature and salinity. They then compare and contrast those
measures with the historical record to reach a prediction on hurricane activity
and storm intensity.

For 2001, Gray's group expects nine named storms, with sustained winds in excess
of 39 mph.

On average, there are 9.3 such storms annually. Of those, five should become
hurricanes with winds above 74 mph. Typically, there are 5.8 hurricanes
annually. Finally, two of the hurricanes are expected to grow into major storms
with winds of 111 mph or greater. There are normally 2.2 severe hurricanes each
year.

"We're not as confident about this forecast as we were about last year's," Gray
said.

Gray and his colleagues came very close to the mark with their forecasts for the
recently concluded season and for 1998.

In December 1999, Gray and his colleagues predicted 11 named storms, seven
hurricanes and three intense hurricanes for the season. The season ended with 14
named storms, eight hurricanes and three intense hurricanes.

"This was an active year, in keeping with our predictions of a new era of
increased hurricane activity," Gray said. "We think the forecast was a good one
and, following on last year's accurate forecast that incorporated some new
techniques, we believe that our predictive abilities are continuing to improve."

In 1998, Gray's team predicted 14 named storms, 9 hurricanes and 4 intense
hurricanes; there were 13 named storms, 8 hurricanes and 5 intense hurricanes.

Gray's outlook for 2001 relies heavily on expectations that "a weak to moderate
El Nio event should be anticipated" in the Pacific Ocean. With such a warming of
Pacific waters, wind patterns aloft will shift into a less-favorable phase for
hurricane formation in the Atlantic.

At the same time, however, relatively warm sea surface temperatures in the North
Atlantic raise the likelihood that any hurricanes in the Atlantic could make it
ashore in the United States.

Gray is forecasting a 63 percent probability contrasted with a historical 52
percent likelihood that a hurricane will make landfall somewhere on the coast
from Maine to Texas. There's a 43 percent probability that a hurricane will hit
the East Coast or Florida's peninsula, he said. The historical average is 31
percent. As for the Gulf Coast, the chance of landfall is set at almost normal:
36 percent versus 30 percent.

This year, Gray's team had called for a 72 percent chance of landfall along the
entire U.S. coastline and 54 percent for the East Coast and the Florida
Peninsula. Only two tropical storms hit the mainland, both in north Florida. It
was the first time since 1994 that no hurricanes made landfall in the United
States.

"Our estimate of U.S. landfall by an intense hurricane did not prove correct,
but landfall predictions don't work well in any individual year," Gray said. He
began issuing the landfall forecasts three years ago and has cautioned that the
outlook technique is a formula in progress.

Gray said coastal residents appear to have been very lucky in recent years.

Although the last six years have been the busiest period for Atlantic storms on
record, with 23 major hurricanes since 1995, only three have come ashore.
Looking at the historical record, with 218 severe Atlantic storms since 1900 of
which 73, about a third, came ashore, the number of landfalls in the past six
years is well below normal. Statistically, seven or eight storms would have been
expected to have hit the shoreline.

"Climatology will eventually right itself," Gray warned, "and we must expect a
substantial increase in landfalling major hurricanes in the coming few decades."
And given the extensive, largely unchecked development of coastal areas, "we
should expect to see hurricane damage at levels never before experienced."

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Virginian-Pilot

                       Copyright 2000 Contra Costa Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 804 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                     December 8, 2000 Friday FINAL EDITION

FORECASTERS PREDICT A QUIETER HURRICANE SEASON IN 2001

BYLINE: Steve Stone

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: NORFOLK, Va.


NORFOLK, Va. The 2001 hurricane season should be quieter than this year's, with
fewer storms than normal. But the chances for a storm to make landfall will be
higher, the nation's leading hurricane forecaster said this week.

Several "climate indicators" point to "a significant reduction in next year's
Atlantic Basin storms," said Bill Gray, a professor of atmospheric sciences at
Colorado State University.

Gray and his team of researchers study a wide variety of climate signals,
everything from the path and speed of winds in the upper atmosphere to deep sea
currents, water temperature and salinity. They then compare and contrast those
measures with the historical record to reach a prediction on hurricane activity
and storm intensity.

For 2001, Gray's group expects nine named storms, with sustained winds in excess
of 39 mph.

On average, there are 9.3 such storms annually. Of those, five should become
hurricanes with winds above 74 mph. Typically, there are 5.8 hurricanes
annually. Finally, two of the hurricanes are expected to grow into major storms
with winds of 111 mph or greater. There are normally 2.2 severe hurricanes each
year.

"We're not as confident about this forecast as we were about last year's," Gray
said.

Gray and his colleagues came very close to the mark with their forecasts for the
recently concluded season and for 1998.

In December 1999, Gray and his colleagues predicted 11 named storms, seven
hurricanes and three intense hurricanes for the season. The season ended with 14
named storms, eight hurricanes and three intense hurricanes.

"This was an active year, in keeping with our predictions of a new era of
increased hurricane activity," Gray said. "We think the forecast was a good one
and, following on last year's accurate forecast that incorporated some new
techniques, we believe that our predictive abilities are continuing to improve."

In 1998, Gray's team predicted 14 named storms, 9 hurricanes and 4 intense
hurricanes; there were 13 named storms, 8 hurricanes and 5 intense hurricanes.

Gray's outlook for 2001 relies heavily on expectations that "a weak to moderate
El Nio event should be anticipated" in the Pacific Ocean. With such a warming of
Pacific waters, wind patterns aloft will shift into a less-favorable phase for
hurricane formation in the Atlantic.

At the same time, however, relatively warm sea surface temperatures in the North
Atlantic raise the likelihood that any hurricanes in the Atlantic could make it
ashore in the United States.

Gray is forecasting a 63 percent probability contrasted with a historical 52
percent likelihood that a hurricane will make landfall somewhere on the coast
from Maine to Texas. There's a 43 percent probability that a hurricane will hit
the East Coast or Florida's peninsula, he said. The historical average is 31
percent. As for the Gulf Coast, the chance of landfall is set at almost normal:
36 percent versus 30 percent.

This year, Gray's team had called for a 72 percent chance of landfall along the
entire U.S. coastline and 54 percent for the East Coast and the Florida
Peninsula. Only two tropical storms hit the mainland, both in north Florida. It
was the first time since 1994 that no hurricanes made landfall in the United
States.

"Our estimate of U.S. landfall by an intense hurricane did not prove correct,
but landfall predictions don't work well in any individual year," Gray said. He
began issuing the landfall forecasts three years ago and has cautioned that the
outlook technique is a formula in progress.

Gray said coastal residents appear to have been very lucky in recent years.

Although the last six years have been the busiest period for Atlantic storms on
record, with 23 major hurricanes since 1995, only three have come ashore.
Looking at the historical record, with 218 severe Atlantic storms since 1900 of
which 73, about a third, came ashore, the number of landfalls in the past six
years is well below normal. Statistically, seven or eight storms would have been
expected to have hit the shoreline.

"Climatology will eventually right itself," Gray warned, "and we must expect a
substantial increase in landfalling major hurricanes in the coming few decades."
And given the extensive, largely unchecked development of coastal areas, "we
should expect to see hurricane damage at levels never before experienced."

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Virginian-Pilot

                       Copyright 2000 Contra Costa Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 805 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    September 10, 2004 Friday Final Edition

Rising number of hurricanes 'a taste' of what's coming; Florida bracing for
rough September after record deluge of named storms in August

SOURCE: The New York Times

BYLINE: Kenneth Chang

SECTION: CANADA/WORLD; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 708 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


Battered on the west three weeks ago by hurricane Charley and hammered last
weekend on the east by hurricane Frances, Florida is a victim of a climate
currently favourable for hurricanes and of simple bad luck.

In 1995, after three relatively unstormy decades, a naturally occurring
oscillation in the Atlantic Ocean started a new active era for hurricanes.

"The number of major hurricanes went up by a factor of two and a half," said
Stanley B. Goldenberg, a meteorologist with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's hurricane research division in Miami. "You have a lot of
arrows, and you have a lot of targets."

Some hurricane targets like the Caribbean have been hit several times since
then. Goldenberg and other experts said Florida and other parts of the U.S. were
fortunate that more disastrous storms had not struck in recent years.

Of the 35 major hurricanes -- Category 3 or stronger, with sustained winds of
more than 180 km/h -- that have formed in the Atlantic since August 1995, only
four, or less than one in eight, have hit the U.S. as major hurricanes.
Historically, the odds have been one in three.

That means most of Florida has been unscathed since the 1960s, when the last
active era of hurricanes ended. In the 38 years from 1966 through 2003, only one
major hurricane, Andrew in 1992, struck southern Florida. In the preceding
active period, the 40 years from 1926 to 1965, southern Florida was hit 14
times.

"I view this year as very unlucky for Florida," said Dr. William Gray, a
professor of atmospheric science at Colorado State University, "but this is
within the natural variation of storms." Each year, between August and November,
about 60 low-pressure systems form off the western coast of Africa and waft
westward. Warm waters and favourable winds strengthen some of them into tropical
storms; others dissipate and disappear.

Tropical storms acquire names when sustained winds exceed 63 km/h; hurricanes
are Atlantic tropical storms with winds of at least 120 km/h. An average
hurricane season has 9.6 named storms, of which 5.9 become hurricanes and 2.3 of
them turn into major hurricanes. But this year, eight named storms formed during
August alone -- a record, and twice as many as Gray had forecast. He has now
increased his forecast for this year's season to 16 named tropical storms (up
from 13), eight hurricanes (up from seven) and five major hurricanes (up from
three).

"We don't know why August was so active," Gray said. "I think what we did was
not account for sea surface temperatures in the eastern Atlantic."

He predicts September will remain active, but that hurricane activity will tail
off in October, because of warm water in the central tropical Pacific, possibly
the start of an El Nino climate pattern. It tends to suppress storms in the
Atlantic.

Gray, Goldenberg and other scientists reported in 2001 that the severity of a
hurricane season correlated strongly with a decades-long cycle of ocean
temperatures in the Atlantic. When water in the North Atlantic is cooler, wind
shear, which tears storms apart, is stronger, suppressing hurricanes.

Global warming is not a significant factor in this year's storminess, experts
say. While some climate models predict that warming might eventually mean
somewhat stronger hurricanes, that effect is expected to be very small compared
to the natural hurricane cycle.

Where a hurricane goes depends on the surrounding meteorological conditions. As
they spin like tops across the Atlantic, some barrel straight west, into Central
America or Mexico.

Others, after passing a semipermanent high-pressure system that sits over
Bermuda in the summer, take a sharp right to the north, missing land entirely.
Some veer into the U.S.

Although the number of hurricanes has been up for years, most have either headed
straight west, like Hurricane Mitch in 1998, which killed 10,000 people in
Honduras and Nicaragua, or turned north, harmlessly.

Because the active hurricane pattern for the Atlantic will most likely continue
for decades longer, Goldenberg said disaster planners need to prepare for years
like 2004.

"This is not just a spike," he said. "This is a taste of what we still have to
come."

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News

                    Copyright 2004 Metroland Media Group Ltd


                          FOCUS - 806 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 7, 2015 Monday

Below-average 2015 Atlantic hurricane season correctly predicted by CSU
forecasters

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Fort Collins: Colorado State University has issued the following news release:



  The 2015 hurricane season had below-average activity, although observed levels
of activity were slightly more than predicted by the Colorado State University
hurricane forecasting team.



 Hurricane Forecasters at Colorado State University



 CSU Hurricane forecasters Phil Klotzbach, foreground, and William Gray.



 &ldquo;The 2015 hurricane season had activity at levels slightly more than
predicted. The season had an approximately average number of named storms, but
most of the hurricanes that formed this year were very short-lived,&rdquo; said
Phil Klotzbach, lead author of the forecast. Seasonal Accumulated Cyclone Energy
(or ACE) was approximately 65 percent of the 1981-2010 median.



 The report summarizes all tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic basin
during the 2015 hurricane season and compares the team's seasonal and two-week
forecasts to what actually occurred.

 El Nino suppressed storm activity



 Several factors likely combined to make the season quiet. The primary reason
why tropical cyclone activity was limited was the strong presence of El Nino. El
Nino - warmer than normal water in the central and eastern tropical Pacific -
suppresses storm activity in the Atlantic due to increases in vertical wind
shear (the change in wind direction with height in the atmosphere).



 Vertical wind shear in the Caribbean was the strongest on record since at least
1979 for June-October. The tropical Atlantic, which began quite cold this year,
warmed up significantly over the course of the season, likely aiding in the
development of several weak tropical cyclones in the eastern part of the
Atlantic basin.



 The Colorado State team of Klotzbach and William Gray made their long-range
seasonal forecast, which called for a below-average hurricane season, on April 9
and June 1. Two additional updates during the hurricane season were issued on
July 1 and August 4. Each of these updates continued the call for a quiet
season.



 In their first forecast issued April 9, the team called for seven named storms,
three hurricanes and one major hurricane. The June 1 and July 1 forecasts called
for eight named storms, three hurricanes and one major hurricane. The August 4
update called for  eight named storms, two hurricanes and one major hurricane.
Observed activity was 11 named storms, four hurricanes and two major hurricanes.




 Below-average ACE was correctly predicted by all of CSU's seasonal forecasts;
however, the observed level (62 ACE) was slightly higher than forecast (40
predicted in April, June and July and 35 predicted in August). For comparison,
1981-2010 median ACE is 92.

 Sixty years of historical data



 The team bases its annual forecasts on 60 years of historical data and includes
factors such as Atlantic sea surface temperatures and sea level pressures,
levels of vertical wind shear (the change in wind direction and speed with
height), El Nino (an anomalous warming of waters in the central and eastern
tropical Pacific) and other factors. While these forecast factors generally work
well and explain approximately 50-60 percent of the year-to-year hurricane
variability in these 60 years of historical data, there still remains 40-50
percent of this variability which is not explained.



 Hurricane statistics for 2015 contained in the report include:



     Four hurricanes formed in 2015, which brings the combined 2013-2015 total
to 12 hurricanes. This is the lowest three-year total since 1992-1994 (11
hurricanes).



     Hurricane Joaquin was the first Category 4-5 hurricane to impact the
Bahamas during October since 1866.



     Florida has gone without a hurricane impact since 2005 (10 years). This is
the longest period on record, shattering the previous record of five years from
1980-1984.



     No major hurricanes made U.S. landfall in 2015. The last major hurricane to
make U.S. landfall was Wilma (2005), so the U.S&gt; has now gone 10 years
without a major hurricane landfall. Since 1878, the U.S. has never had a 10-year
period without a major hurricane landfall.



 Few major U.S. hurricanes in recent years



 Although the Atlantic has seen a large increase in major hurricanes during the
recent period of 1995-2015 (average 3.4 per year) in comparison with the prior
25-year period of 1970-1994 (average 1.5 per year), the U.S. has been fortunate
that few major hurricanes have made U.S. landfall (except for the two very
damaging years of 2004-2005). The Atlantic basin has had 27 major hurricanes
since Wilma, with no major hurricane landfalls. The 20th-century average is that
approximately 30 percent of all major hurricanes forming in the Atlantic make
U.S. landfall.



 Klotzbach and Gray attribute the upturn in major hurricane activity since 1995
as well as the earlier increase in major hurricane activity from the late 1940s
through the mid-1960s to natural multi-decadal variability in the strength of
the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) or Atlantic Thermohaline Circulation
(THC).



 A concomitant increase in a number of favorable hurricane-enhancing parameters
occur in the tropical Atlantic during the positive phase of this oscillation.
These same parameters tend to suppress hurricanes during the negative phase of
this oscillation.  Three quiet hurricane seasons in a row have raised the
question that the active AMO may be ending.



 Klotzbach and Gray think this may be the case, but it is too early to say for
sure at this point.



 The Tropical Meteorology Project has been issuing forecasts for the past 32
years. A brief qualitative outlook for the 2016 hurricane season will be issued
on Thursday, Dec. 10 with a first full forecast issued in early April 2016.



 Read the full verification report and a chart showing the predictions vs.
observed storms. The report includes an extensive discussion of the climate
features that caused the 2015 Atlantic basin hurricane season to have
below-average activity.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 807 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                Richmond County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 25, 2011 Thursday

'Major Disasters': Hurricanes in N.C.

BYLINE: Kelli Easterling, Richmond County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 266 words


Aug. 25--Hurricane season in the western Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico began
June 1 and lasts through November 30.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration advised that this year's
season will be above average, with as many as 10 hurricanes making their way
across that area.

Here's a look at past hurricanes, on record, that were declared "Major
Disasters" in North Carolina by FEMA:

October 1954 Hurricane Hazel

August 1955 Hurricane Connie

October 1958 Hurricane (unnamed)

September 1960 Hurricane Donna

September 1984 Hurricane Diana

September 1989 Hurricane Hugo

September 1993 Hurricane Emily

July 1996 Hurricane Bertha

September 1996 Hurricane Fran

August 1998 Hurricane Bonnie

September 1999 Hurricane Dennis

September 1999 Hurricanes Floyd & Irene

September 2003 Hurricane Isabel

September 2004 Tropical Storm Frances

September 2004 Hurricane Ivan

October 2005 Hurricane Ophelia

October 2008 Tropical Storm Hanna

Other hurricanes have battered North Carolina, but those listed are the ones
classified as "Major Disasters."

For an event to be classified as a "Major Disaster" by FEMA, it must be shown
that "the disaster is of such severity and magnitude that effective response is
beyond the capabilities of the State and the local governments and that Federal
assistance is necessary."

-- Staff writer Kelli Easterling can be reached at (910) 997-3111 ext. 18, or by
email at keasterling@heartlandpublications.com

___ (c)2011 Richmond County Daily Journal (Rockingham, N.C.) Visit Richmond
County Daily Journal (Rockingham, N.C.) at www.yourdailyjournal.com Distributed
by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110825-RU-Major-Disasters-Hurricanes-in-N-C-0825-20110825

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RU


                                 Copyright 2011


                          FOCUS - 808 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                   Iran Daily

                             June 1, 2016 Wednesday

NOAA releases hurricane forecast

LENGTH: 467  words


Hurricane season officially kicks off on June 1, and forecasters expect the
Atlantic Ocean will spawn a near-average number of hurricanes in 2016.

"Near-normal may sound relaxed and encouraging, but we could be in for more
activity than we've seen in recent years," warned Kathryn Sullivan, head of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

Officials with NOAA issued the forecast at a news conference  in Suitland,
Maryland, according to livescience.com.

NOAA has released a hurricane forecast each year since 2000.

The past three years have seen a hurricane drought in the Atlantic. There were
only four hurricanes and seven tropical storms in 2015.

The 2016 NOAA forecast calls for a total of 10 to 16 named storms, including
both tropical storms and hurricanes. This year's Hurricane Alex, a rare January
hurricane, counts as one of these named storms. Tropical Storm Bonnie, which
made landfall in South Carolina on Saturday (May 28), is the year's second named
storm.

The forecast predicts between four and eight named storms may become hurricanes
-- organized, rotating storms with sustained winds of 74 mph (119 km/h) or
faster. Between one and four could become major hurricanes, defined as Category
3 storms or above -- or those hurricanes with winds of at least 111 mph (179
km/h).

Unpredictable patterns

The 2016 hurricane forecast is NOAA's most accurate and reliable yet, Sullivan
said. However, two major climate factors could tweak the expected storm numbers,
NOAA forecasters said.

"This is a more challenging hurricane season outlook than most because it's
difficult to determine whether there will be reinforcing or competing climate
influences on tropical storm development," said Gerry Bell, lead seasonal
hurricane forecaster with NOAA's Climate Prediction Center.

There are two big climate influences on hurricanes -- the Pacific Ocean's El
Niño/La Niña cycle and the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO). Both are
natural climate patterns that influence ocean surface temperatures and wind
patterns, two critical ingredients in creating hurricanes.

An active El Niño favors more hurricanes in the eastern Pacific and fewer storms
in the Atlantic, Sullivan said. According to NOAA, the 2015-2016 El Niño is
fading and the pattern may flip over to its cooler La Niña phase sometime after
August, when hurricane season peaks. La Niña favors a more active Atlantic
hurricane season.

The Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation, which flips back and forth every 25 to 40
years, also shows hints of switching to a cool phase, Sullivan said. When the
AMO is in a cool phase, the Atlantic generally sees fewer hurricanes.

"If this shift proves to be more than short-lived, and not just a temporary
blip, then it could signal the arrival of lower activity," in the Atlantic,
Sullivan said.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1056


                 Copyright 2016 Iran Cultural & Press Institute
                Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.(Syndigate.info)
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 809 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                 EKantipur.com

                             August 28, 2011 Sunday

Attention all units

LENGTH: 1178  words

DATELINE: Nepal


Nepal, Aug. 28 -- As I write these lines, most places in the US east coast are
preparing for the worst. The worst comes in the form of Hurricane Irene, and it
could lash the huge cosmopolitan city called New York, including Manhattan
Island. The hurricane has already wreaked havoc along its path including the
Bahamas in the Caribbean, though so far there have been no known fatal human
causalities even as some have been reported injured.

As Hurricane Irene moves at around 20 to 25 km per hour from the Atlantic Ocean,
the US authorities including the state and town authorities were gearing up to
face the wrath of nature. The hurricane which, according to US media reports,
could bring in winds of up 184 km per hour with gusts of up to 224 km per hour,
poses a danger to the millions of people living along the eastern coast of the
US. The response to the slow moving but deadly hurricane had to be fast in order
to protect the people living near the coast line. And it was fast.

Several US states that were in the path of Hurricane Irene have declared a state
of emergency to meet the situation. Governors and mayors have issued "requests"
for voluntary evacuation while in some of the potentially more dangerous areas,
orders were issued for mandatory evacuation. One of the biggest worries has been
the havoc the hurricane could wreak on New York City, by far the largest city in
the US. All through last week, it was being predicted that the hurricane, which
was category 2 would develop into category 3, and may be even move up to
category 4, by the time it reaches New York City and the New England coast.

Category 3, 4 and 5 hurricanes bring in extreme storms with wind speeds of over
160 km per hour. Hurricane Irene was predicted at the start of last week to
attain category 4 as it makes its way north along the eastern coast of the US,
making its first landfall in North Carolina, then moving over the Atlantic and
hitting the coastal areas of Maryland, Virginia and New Jersey before hitting
New York and further up to the coastal areas of New England including Boston.

The hurricane did not affect Florida in any significant way as it made its way
east of the state over the Atlantic Ocean. US weathermen by Friday evening began
downgrading the hurricane, predicting it to come down to category 1 from
category 2 as it moves northward from North Carolina. All this goes to show just
how unpredictable nature is. No wonder that tens of thousands of Americans were
fleeing the east coast as a leading hurricane expert warned that Irene would
cause a "nightmare scenario" when it makes landfall Saturday. About 65 million
people are estimated to be along the path of Hurricane Irene.

But what is interesting about the hurricane is the manner in which the federal,
state and local governments are preparing to manage the looming disaster. US
President Barack Obama, who was on a vacation in Martha's Vineyard in
Massachusetts, said, "If you are on the projected path of the hurricane, you
have to take precautions now." But even before he spoke, preparations were well
underway. Utility companies, especially those supplying electricity, gathered up
their workers and vehicles from different parts of the country and assembled
them in areas where the hurricane's effects were likely to be the greatest.

Local and national media, especially television channels, were telling people to
be prepared for what has been described as one of the worst hurricanes to hit
the US eastern shores for a long time. People rushed to buy groceries and store
them if the worst should happen. The media was advising people to buy batteries
to prepare themselves in case of a power outage. Dealers ran out of generator
sets as people rushed to buy them. According to media reports, nuclear power
stations in the area were "keeping a close watch" on the hurricane and were
prepared to shut them down if it should prove dangerous to them.

The US Navy sent its battleships and other vessels far out to sea, away from the
path of the hurricane to avoid major damage. An expert on hurricanes warned that
unforeseen things could happen, but he said, "Even more than the hurricane I
fear the scant attention some people pay to the warnings and refuse to take the
necessary precautions." As of Friday night, New York City issued mandatory
evacuation orders in low-lying areas that could be affected by the hurricane and
the storm it brings.

According to the media, this is the first time that parts of New York City have
been issued such an order, and that this was also the first time in living
memory that the city faced such a huge threat. City Mayor Bloomberg said, "We've
never done a mandatory evacuation before in any part of this city. The sun is
shining, but don't be misled - there's a very dangerous storm headed in our
direction." Preparations are afoot to completely shut down the subway for the
first time in the city's history. Airports along the path of the hurricane are
also to close, and hundreds of flights have been cancelled already affecting
tens of thousands of people.

By the time this column appears, Hurricane Irene would have moved towards the
eastern Canadian coast and then headed northeast towards the Atlantic Ocean. The
ferocity of the hurricane would possibly have diminished.

The lesson the hurricane leaves behind is that it is much better to be prepared
than to be caught unawares and unprepared. Disaster does not always happen in a
predictable manner, as was the case with Hurricane Irene that gave the
authorities a lot of time to prepare.

Nepal, for instance, is said to be prone to earthquakes as the hills and
mountains are comparatively young. And no one so far has been able to accurately
predict earthquakes. There have been efforts in the country to warn people about
the possibility of quakes striking anytime and anywhere. People may have grown
tired of listening to the same old warnings time and again. But have the
authorities done enough to prepare the country and crowded urban areas, like the
capital, for such an eventuality?

The authorities had put in place building norms years ago, but have they been
implemented? If not, why not? Such norms are not merely for preserving the
city's unique identity, but also to ensure that people are protected in case a
high intensity quake should hit the city. The authorities cannot at any time be
as careless about the safety factors as most people tend to be. Those who enjoy
at the expense of the taxpayers must be able to discharge their duties properly
and not act like a common man in the street.

A woman in an area on the path of Hurricane Irene who refused to evacuate was
interviewed by a television channel. She said, "I am hoping and praying for the
best, but I won't leave this place." Can any responsible authority including
ours assume such an attitude without preparing for the worst? Published by HT
Syndication with permission from EKantipur.com. For any query with respect to
this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2011 Kantipur Publications Pvt. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 810 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           August 27, 2008 Wednesday

8 p.m. Update Gustav drenching Haiti

BYLINE: Valley Morning Star, Harlingen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 502 words


Aug. 27--The National Hurricane Center has issued the following update on
Hurricane Gustav:

GUSTAV STILL A HURRICANE OVER SOUTHERN HAITI...

...HEAVY RAINFALL CONTINUES ACROSS MOST OF HISPANIOLA...

AT 8 PM EDT THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CAYMAN ISLANDS HAS

ISSUED A HURRICANE WATCH FOR ALL OF THE CAYMAN ISLANDS.

AT 8 PM EDT...THE GOVERNMENT OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC HAS

DISCONTINUED THE HURRICANE WARNING FOR ALL OF THE DOMINICAN

REPUBLIC.

A HURRICANE WARNING REMAINS IN EFFECT FOR CUBA FOR THE PROVINCES OF

GUANTANAMO...SANTIAGO DE CUBA...AND GRANMA.  A HURRICANE WARNING

MEANS THAT HURRICANE CONDITIONS ARE EXPECTED WITHIN THE WARNING

AREA...GENERALLY WITHIN 24 HOURS.

A HURRICANE WATCH REMAINS IN EFFECT FOR HAITI FROM LE MOLE ST

NICHOLAS TO THE NORTHERN HAITI/DOMINICAN REPUBLIC BORDER.

A HURRICANE WATCH REMAINS IN EFFECT FOR THE CUBAN PROVINCES OF LAS

TUNAS AND HOLGUIN.  A HURRICANE WATCH IS ALSO IN EFFECT FOR JAMAICA.

A HURRICANE WATCH MEANS THAT HURRICANE CONDITIONS ARE POSSIBLE

WITHIN THE WATCH AREA...GENERALLY WITHIN 36 HOURS.

AT 800 PM EDT THE CENTER OF HURRICANE GUSTAV WAS

LOCATED...BASED ON IMAGES FROM THE RADAR AT GRAN PIEDRA CUBA...TO

BE NEAR LATITUDE 18.5 NORTH...LONGITUDE 73.3 WEST OR ABOUT 60

MILES WEST OF PORT AU PRINCE HAITI AND ABOUT 155

MILES SOUTHEAST OF GUANTANAMO CUBA.

GUSTAV IS MOVING TOWARD THE NORTHWEST NEAR 7 MPH. A TURN

TOWARD THE WEST-NORTHWEST IS EXPECTED LATER TONIGHT...AND A GENERAL

WEST-NORTHWESTWARD MOTION IS EXPECTED ON WEDNESDAY. ON THIS

TRACK...HURRICANE GUSTAV SHOULD PASS NEAR THE SOUTHWESTERN

PENINSULA OF HAITI TONIGHT AND MOVE NEAR OR JUST SOUTH OF EASTERN

CUBA ON WEDNESDAY.

MAXIMUM SUSTAINED WINDS REMAIN NEAR 75 MPH WITH HIGHER

GUSTS. GUSTAV IS MOVING BACK OVER WATER AND IS STILL A CATEGORY ONE

HURRICANE ON THE SAFFIR-SIMPSON SCALE. SOME FLUCTUATIONS IN

STRENGTH ARE POSSIBLE TONIGHT AS GUSTAV INTERACTS WITH LAND...BUT

RESTRENGTHENING IS FORECAST TO BEGIN WHEN THE CENTER EMERGES OVER

THE WINDWARD PASSAGE ON WEDNESDAY.

HURRICANE FORCE WINDS EXTEND OUTWARD UP TO 15 MILES FROM

THE CENTER...AND TROPICAL STORM FORCE WINDS EXTEND OUTWARD UP TO 70

MILES.

THE ESTIMATED MINIMUM CENTRAL PRESSURE IS 992 MB...29.29 INCHES.

GUSTAV IS EXPECTED TO PRODUCE TOTAL RAINFALL ACCUMULATIONS OF 4 TO 8

INCHES OVER HISPANIOLA...EASTERN CUBA...AND JAMAICA...WITH ISOLATED

MAXIMUM AMOUNTS OF UP TO 20 INCHES POSSIBLE.  THESE RAINS WILL

LIKELY PRODUCE LIFE-THREATENING FLASH FLOODS AND MUD SLIDES.

COASTAL STORM SURGE FLOODING OF 2 TO 4 FEET ABOVE NORMAL TIDE LEVELS

ALONG WITH LARGE AND DANGEROUS BATTERING WAVES CAN BE EXPECTED IN

AREAS OF ONSHORE WINDS IN THE HURRICANE WARNING AREA.

crv

To see more of the Valley Morning Star, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.valleystar.com. Copyright (c) 2008, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20080827-HR-8-p-m-Update-Gustav-drenching-Haiti-0827

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HR


                       Copyright 2008 Valley Morning Star


                          FOCUS - 811 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             June 13, 2005, Monday

Outlook is poor for insurers as hurricanes swell

BYLINE: By Yvette Essen

SECTION: City Pg. 025

LENGTH: 363 words

HURRICANES could batter insurers' profits again this year if expert forecasts
about the forthcoming hurricane season prove to be true. Professor Mark
Saunders, who last year correctly predicted there would be more tropical storms
and hurricanes than usual, said: "Activity will be about 60pc above average."

Warnings about the hurricane season come as Arlene, the first tropical storm of
the year, cut power to several thousand people as it doused Florida with heavy
rain and caused 20-foot waves over the weekend. The storm struck the same area
that was devastated by Hurricane Ivan nine months ago.

Last year, the insurance industry experienced one of its worst years for
hurricane claims, after four large storms in the US and 10 typhoons in Japan.
Lloyd's of London alone took a $1.2billion hit for the hurricanes. Estimates for
the total damages in 2004 in the US are as high as $45billion, with insurers
expected to pay out $23billion.

"At present, the hurricane season is unlikely to be as bad as last year," said
Professor Saunders, who is the lead scientist and project manager of website
Tropical Storm Risk, which tracks the development and path of hurricanes.

Since 1950 there have been on average six hurricanes a year at sea, while 1.5
hurricanes strike North America. Professor Saunders forecasts that there will be
eight hurricanes at sea during 2005, and two will hit America. Furthermore the
number of tropical storms at sea and on land will also increase.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) estimates there will
be 12 to 15 tropical storms, with seven to nine becoming hurricanes. Of these,
three to five may become major hurricanes.

Professor Saunders predicts that the cost of damage caused will also be higher
than average.

The hurricane season runs from June to November with 90pc of activity occurring
from August 1 to October 31.

Professor Saunders's predictions are based on factors such as the sea
temperature. "If it is warmer, it is more likely there will be a hurricane as
that is where they get their energy from," he said. "We anticipate it will be
half a degree warmer than usual this year."

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                     Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited


                          FOCUS - 812 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                              St. Petersburg Times

                           August 21, 2004, Saturday

Business names in Florida lay claim to hurricane force

BYLINE: By Scott Barancik

LENGTH: 685 words



Hurricane Landscaping of Tampa doesn't uproot trees, turn daisies into deadly
missiles or heave sod into neighboring ZIP codes. Wilberto Velez said he chose
the name to give his company a Florida feel, not to suggest it would do violence
with lawn implements.

But if the name he chose for his sparring club on E Seventh Avenue, Hurricane
Boxing Gym, evokes menace, it's entirely intentional.

"We're like a hurricane when we step in the ring," Velez said.

Hundreds of Florida companies that sell shutters or other storm-proofing gear
logically include the word "hurricane" in their name. But others employ the word
as metaphor, to attract attention, or sometimes for less obvious reasons.

Deb Cole, a Satellite Beach woman who tidies up million-dollar homes for a
living, named her business Hurricane Deb Whirlwind Cleaning Service to let
people know she works fast. She said the name conjures a benign wind that whips
through a messy house "and then, in a couple hours, everything is shiny and
beautiful."

Hurricane Hydro, a Tampa company that uses high-power water-blasting equipment
to clean pipes and remove concrete, draws instead on the word's association with
brute hydrological force.

Similarly, masonry contractor Hurricane Houses & Structures of Melbourne chose
the word to play up its use of solid-pour, reinforced-concrete walls rather than
wood or concrete block. "We build basements above ground," president Gerald
Paradis said.

Some business owners aim to capitalize on the popularity of the University of
Miami Hurricanes football and basketball teams.

"Basically, everybody got together and we sort of had like a meeting to come up
with a name," said Bill Frazer, vice president of Hurricane Pest Services in
Plantation. "We picked "hurricane' because of the Miami Hurricane (football)
team. I got a lot of guys that call me just because they're fans."

Jeff Gonzalez, who named his Tampa used-car lot Hurricane Motors, said he's
simply indulging a personal fascination with cyclones. Gonzalez and his fiancee
chased Hurricane Charley to Punta Gorda last week in an H2 Hummer equipped with
video equipment and a wind-speed detector. "You could feel the car lifting up,"
he said.

At Hurricane Motors, Gonzalez said, "a lot of people ask, "Have these cars
actually been in a hurricane?' They are concerned. So sometimes that has a
negative effect."

And, sometimes the name sows confusion.

"After hurricanes happened, every single insurance agent and contractor in the
world came to the store looking for maps," said Kristen Lalumiere, former owner
of Hurricane Books in Gulf Breeze. "It was so cute . . . as if there were one
(book) store that was dedicated completely to hurricanes."

In fact, the store was called Herron-King Books when Lalumiere bought it in
1989. So many publishers and other callers misheard the name as "Hurricane"
Books that she eventually renamed it just that.

JoAnn Kirkpatrick, who distributes third-party products such as latex gloves and
ball bearings from a 30,000-square-foot depot in Fort Lauderdale, said she and
her husband named the company Hurricane Distribution and Warehouse to draw
curiosity-seekers and, they hope, extra business. To some extent it has worked,
she said.

"It isn't very nice to use the intensity of a hurricane to benefit from," she
said, "but it does draw attention."

Though not all of it is welcome. "It also generates a lot of people calling for
shutters when they get panicky," Kirkpatrick said. "When Hurricane Andrew was
coming (in 1992), they were banging on our doors to see if they could get
plywood."

The same year, a Utah charity mistakenly sent the company a 53-foot-trailer
filled with clothing and other goods for hurricane victims.

A company driver delivered the material to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, no charge.


Times researcher Kitty Bennett contributed to this report.



-----

To see more of the St. Petersburg Times -- including its homes, jobs, cars and
other classified listings -- or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.sptimes.com.


LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

KR-ACC-NO: PT-HURRICANE-NAME-20040821

JOURNAL-CODE: PT

               Copyright 2004 Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News
                      Copyright 2004 St. Petersburg Times


                          FOCUS - 813 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 16, 2017 Monday

Washington: A whirlwind of an Atlantic hurricane season: What gives?

LENGTH: 653  words



Washington: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has issued the
following news release:

 This year's busy Atlantic hurricane season with back-to-back strong storms and
multiple landfalls has everyone asking: Why is this happening? Well, the season
is playing out as NOAA predicted in May and August. Let's dive into the science
behind this year's hurricane season with NOAA's lead hurricane season
forecaster, Dr. Gerry Bell.


Q: How does the season so far compare with your predictions?
A: We've had 15 named storms, of which 10 were hurricanes, including 5 major
hurricanes. Our August prediction increased the initial May outlook to 14-19
named storms, 5-9 hurricanes, and 2-5 major hurricanes after it became clear
that El Nino wouldn't form and weaken the season.
Q: Is this a typical hurricane season?
A: We've had 14 extremely active seasons since 1950, and this is the first since
2010. An average season produces 12 named storms, of which six become
hurricanes, including three major hurricanes.
Q: What climate patterns stoke and fuel hurricanes?
A: Three main climate patterns influence hurricane development:
    The Atlantic Multi-Decadal Oscillation, or AMO, is a climate pattern over
the Atlantic Ocean that lasts for decades at a time. When the AMO is in the warm
phase, like it has been since 1995, we are predisposed for more active seasons.

    El Nino and La Nina are season-to-season climate patterns marked by sea
surface temperature fluctuations in the tropical Pacific Ocean. El Nino tends to
suppress Atlantic hurricanes while La Nina fuels them.
    And finally, the Madden-Julian Oscillation, or the MJO, is a rainfall
pattern that propagates around the world. This pattern lasts 30-60 days and
produces within-season variability in hurricane activity.
Q: What conditions are present this year to promote such a strong hurricane
season?
A: The AMO is causing a set of interrelated conditions that work together to
help hurricanes develop, grow and persist. These conditions are typical of other
extremely active seasons that we have seen in the past.
    The Atlantic Ocean is 1-2 degrees F above average;
    The West African monsoon is stronger, which allows wind patterns coming off
Africa to more easily spin up storms;
    An extensive area of weak wind shear across the tropical Atlantic Ocean and
Caribbean sea, and weaker than average trade winds across tropical Atlantic, are
allowing storms to persist and gain strength; and
    More moisture and atmospheric instability in the tropical region where
storms form allow them to grow larger and stronger.
Q: How unusual is it to see such a fast succession of powerful storms in one
season, like we saw with Harvey, Irma, Jose, Lee, and Maria?
A: It's not unprecedented during an extremely active season to see a succession
of major storms, with more storms tracking further westward and threatening
land.
Q: What's driving so many storms to make landfall this year?
A: The same wind patterns that produce strong storms also steer them farther
westward. We've also had a strong and persistent ridge of high pressure in the
upper atmosphere over the western Atlantic causing extremely weak wind shear,
which is why so many major hurricanes lasted for so long.
Q: What's the influence of climate change on hurricanes?
A: Scientists are still studying the effects of climate change on hurricanes. We
know that a warmer climate is always running in the background, causing the
atmosphere to hold more moisture and contributing to higher ocean temperatures.
We also know that climate change contributes to more devastating impacts from
hurricanes, such as higher storm surge due to sea level rise.
Q: Any parting words?
A:  We're still in peak of a very active hurricane season. Everything is
secondary to people making sure that their hurricane preparations and planning
remain in place for the rest of season.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 814 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             July 5, 2008 Saturday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

STORM DEBATE RAGES ON

BYLINE: CURTIS KRUEGER, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1226 words



HIGHLIGHT: Global warming's effect on hurricanes divides scientists;
overdevelopment does not.


In Al Gore's Nobel-winning movie An Inconvenient Truth, hurricanes became
symbols of the danger of global warming.

The reality is more complicated.

Scientists are locked in debate about whether global warming is spiking the
intensity of hurricanes. Even those who agree that humans are causing global
warming disagree about whether it is making hurricanes worse.

Leading experts are changing their findings. Climatologists desperate for clues
are boring holes along Florida's coastline, trying to discern from grains of
sand how many tropical storms pounded our shores in past centuries.

Amid the whirlwind of debate, most scientists agree on the most urgent hurricane
threat. And it's not global warming.

'A real conundrum'

Kerry Emanuel, an MIT professor of atmospheric science, was named by Time
magazine in 2006 as one of "100 people who shape our world." The reason? Just
before Hurricane Katrina smashed into New Orleans in 2005, he published a
scientific paper in the journal Nature saying the power of hurricanes had nearly
doubled in recent decades.

His findings were based on heat.

Hurricanes are born in tropical heat, beginning with seas that are at least 80
degrees. Warm, moist air rises from the sea surface and gets caught in
converging winds, twisting upward. Moisture in the air condenses as it rises,
giving off more heat. This provides the energy that pumps vast quantities of air
from sea to sky and keeps storm winds whirling fiercely.

Emanuel charted the temperatures of the Atlantic's sea surface and hurricane
power, and showed in his paper that the two rise and fall together. He found
that hurricane power had increased, probably because of man-made global warming.

"While many researchers had been predicting an explosion of more powerful
storms, Emanuel, 51, offered evidence that it was actually happening," Time
wrote.

To test the theory, Emanuel and other scientists recently loaded tons of data
into computer models, hoping to learn how bad it could get if global warming
keeps pushing up sea temperatures.

The results were surprising: Hurricanes didn't increase dramatically in the
projections, even after decades of simulated global warming.

Emanuel was not disappointed that the research seemed to undercut his old
results. "One gets used to being mistaken, and we follow the evidence and
sometimes the evidence is contradictory and then we have to sort it out."

He's uncertain whether the recent results are correct or the outcome of faulty
models. "There is a real conundrum here."

Emanuel thinks a warming climate "will almost certainly have some palpable
effect on hurricanes," and he expects more intense hurricanes. "But the jury is
out on how it affects their frequency."

Emanuel is not the only top scientist to test the hurricane-global warming link.
Thomas Knutson, who works for a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
laboratory in Princeton, N.J., also loaded tons of data into computer models.

The results were even more stunning: After several decades of simulated global
warming, the number of Atlantic hurricanes slightly decreased.

"Our research has indicated that we don't think global warming is going to cause
really large increases in tropical storm or hurricane numbers," Knutson said.
"But it may cause the hurricanes that do occur to have greater intensity and
higher rainfall rates."

Some studies say sea surface temperatures have increased about 1 degree
Fahrenheit in the past 50 years. How could a barely perceptible change have such
a dramatic effect?

Because it takes a huge amount of energy to heat a vast ocean, says Jay
Gulledge, senior scientist with the Pew Center on Global Climate Change. That
extra energy wouldn't create hurricanes, but it could make them more intense.

That's bad news, he says, because studies show that a slight increase in wind
speed leads to an exponentially larger increase in a hurricane's destructive
power.

No increase, they say

All of this has deepened confusion about a complex and controversial topic. But
one hurricane guru who is not surprised is Chris Landsea, science and operations
officer for the National Hurricane Center.

Landsea, like Emanuel, Knutson and most other hurricane researchers, thinks the
Earth's climate is warming and that humans are contributing to it. But he
doesn't see evidence that this warming has affected hurricanes.

As a researcher, Landsea has spent much of his career deep in the data of past
hurricanes. To him, one thing is clear: That record is incomplete.

Tropical storms and hurricanes likely formed in the Atlantic during the first
half of the 20th century, when there were no satellites or Hurricane Hunter
aircraft to spot them. No wonder it looks like hurricanes increased in the
latter 20th century.

That's the position of Stanley Goldenberg, a hurricane researcher at NOAA's
Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory in Miami.

"There's not a single scientist that I know at AOML or at the National Hurricane
Center that feels that we have seen in any measurable increase in hurricane
activity because of global warming," he said.

Goldenberg was the lead author of a highly cited article in the journal Science
that said Atlantic hurricanes increase for periods of 10 to 40 years and then
decrease for similar periods. That's a natural cycle related to the rise and
fall of sea temperatures and to upper-level winds that can disrupt hurricanes,
he said. The underlying cause may be something called "thermohaline
circulation," a nearly global circulating stream that changes with the
temperature and salinity of the ocean water.

The ongoing cycle of greater and lesser hurricane activity is not attributable
to man-made global warming, Goldenberg says. In fact, he does not think humans
are causing global warming.

So what's the basis for warning that hurricane dangers are increasing? Besides
the possible global warming-hurricane link, there are at least two reasons.

Teeming shores

As seas warm, they expand. Levels rise slightly. Over 100 years, that could add
a foot or two to the storm surge of hurricanes, assuming the warming trend
continues.

Of course, none of this would matter much if the world's coastlines were long
undulating stretches of undeveloped sand.

Instead, coastal development has exploded. In Florida alone, the number of
coastal residents increased 10-million between 1950 and 2000, according to
historian Gary R. Mormino in the book Land of Sunshine, State of Dreams.

It's not just millionaires who are building along the sands, but increasing
populations of the poor. That was the greatest source of devastation recently in
the cyclone that struck the southeast Asian country of Myanmar, killing 130,000
people.

Leading and sometimes sparring researchers signed a statement in 2006 calling
for governments to adopt policies to slow this overdevelopment and to address
"the more urgent problem of our lemming-like march to the sea." The signers
included Landsea, Emanuel, Knutson and former National Hurricane Center director
Max Mayfield.

This is one point on which scientists agree.

Says Jeff Masters, director of meteorology at weatherunderground.com: "Pretty
much every hurricane scientist that you'll talk to will say that coastal
overdevelopment is probably the biggest issue affecting hurricane damages in the
coming century."

Curtis Krueger can be reached at ckrueger@sptimes.com or (727) 893-8232.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, CURTIS KRUEGER, STEVE MADDEN, Times: A swirling debate

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2008 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 815 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            August 21, 2008 Thursday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

TROPICAL ILL WINDS BLOW SOME GOOD

BYLINE: BILL MAXWELL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 791 words


Since Tropical Storm Fay did not leave us in the Tampa Bay area cleaning up
debris, repairing roofs, wading through water, crowding the interstate or trying
to contact our insurance agents, I thought this would be a dandy time to discuss
a topic most of us, including many old Florida natives, rarely think about: the
benefits of hurricanes.

Yes, despite their obvious destructiveness, hurricanes are highly beneficial -
benefits that never get big play in the news. In a word, the hurricane is also
"good."

The most essential benefit of a hurricane is water production. Many regions in
the tropics and subtropics, such as Florida, receive a large amount of their
yearly rainfall from hurricanes and tropical storms such as Fay.

Consider Lake Okeechobee, the second-largest freshwater lake wholly in the
United States. It always benefits from hurricanes. Without hurricane rainfall,
the lake might have been destroyed years ago by the negative impact of
agricultural practices, such as draining water for irrigation, dairy farming,
cattle ranching and the production of sugarcane, citrus, sod and winter
vegetables.

Regarding Everglades National Park, many scientists believe that hurricanes do
more good than harm. The storms' water and winds act as a "flushing-out
mechanism" in zones where sediment has built up on the bottom of waterways.
Ample evidence shows that hurricane winds help destroy invasive plants in the
park.

Without doubt, slow-moving hurricanes tend to bring flooding to human
communities near the Everglades. But before we curse, however, we should
remember that hurricanes do not create the conditions that cause flooding.
People create the conditions, and these conditions, ironically, prevent
hurricanes from doing their job effectively.

Throughout tropical and subtropical regions, most hurricanes break droughts and
replenish lakes and reservoirs. And tens of thousands of Floridians have counted
their blessings over the years because hurricanes bring relief from the threats
of wildfires.

A few years ago, I had the good fortune to be in the audience when Orrin H.
Pilkey, a professor at Duke University's Nicholas School of Earth and
OceanSciences, spoke on the vital benefits of hurricanes to barrier islands.

"The big changes that occur in barriers islands often occur during hurricanes,"
he said. "Barrier islands need hurricanes for their survival, especially at
times of rising sea levels. It's during hurricanes that islands get higher and
wider. From a purely natural standpoint, hurricanes are a blessing for islands,
even though they're a curse for people who live there."

Pilkey, author of the book, A Celebration of the World's Barrier Islands, sees
evidence that even as a hurricane's winds and surges are eroding some parts of
an island's shoreline, those same winds and waves are redistributing precious
sand elsewhere. If islands did not get the periodic battering of water and wind,
they would disappear over time.

The simple fact is that hurricanes warn people that they have no business living
on barrier islands.

Those who dive off Florida's coasts marvel at the beauty of our coral reefs.
Recent research, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, shows that the state's corals need hurricanes as a mitigating force to
remain healthy, especially to fight off "bleaching" by warm waters.

"While it seems like an unlikely phenomenon at first," according to the report,
"hurricanes are able to bring cooler waters to the surface, closer to where many
corals reside and counter the now worldwide bleaching problem that may be a sign
of global warming. ... The area affected by hurricane cooling is much larger
than the narrow bands where damage actually occurs to reefs.

"Clearly, hurricane cooling isn't expected to completely negate the effects of
climate change on coral reefs, but a well-timed hurricane ... has the potential
to mitigate the negative ecological consequences associated with severe
temperature disturbances."

As destructive as Katrina and Rita were to the people of Louisiana, the two
hurricanes helped the state's vanishing coastal wetlands, the nation's largest
wetlands system, by delivering silt and other inorganic sediment required to
keep the system healthy and sustainable.

According to the National Academy of Engineering, Louisiana's coastal wetlands
are vital, providing 1-billion pounds of seafood and a quarter of the nation's
oil and gas annually. Engineers also believe the wetlands protect inland
communities by buffering them against storm surges.

So here we are again, coping with another hurricane season. And the experts do
not know where Fay is going or what it will do. But whatever the storm does,
it's all part of the rhythm of nature, which is good.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2008 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 816 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                          November 12, 2008 Wednesday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

STATE ESCAPES '08 STORMS

BYLINE: CURTIS KRUEGER, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 529 words



HIGHLIGHT: It's been a busy hurricane season, but Florida didn't get much
action.


This has been the year of the perfect storm forecast - not the year of the
perfect storm.

Although Florida was battered and flooded by Tropical Storm Fay, the state
escaped the fierce hurricanes that smashed into Texas and the Caribbean.

And after some sloppy forecasting years, the federal government and noted
hurricane researchers William Gray and Philip Klotzbach were virtually dead-on
in their early-season predictions for 2008.

"I think Dr. Gray's going to nail it," said Bay News 9 chief meteorologist Mike
Clay.

The six-month hurricane season officially ends Nov. 30, but experts say
unofficially it's over.

Hurricanes sometimes form at the very end of the season - Hurricane Paloma
fizzled out less than a week ago. But the high the amount of wind shear -
crisscrossing winds at high altitudes - makes it unlikely another hurricane will
come ashore this year.

"I'd say you guys got lucky," said Jeff Masters of the Web site
wunderground.com.

How lucky? Masters said this was the fourth-busiest year for named storms in the
past 65 years. And it's the only year on record in which there were major
hurricanes - Category 3 (winds of 111-130 mph) or stronger - in five different
months (July through November).

Remember that Hurricane Ike was zooming across the Atlantic Ocean toward Miami
until it dropped farther south and smashed into Texas.

And Cuba - 90 miles south of Key West - was hit by hurricanes Gustav, Ike and
Paloma.

Even Tropical Storm Fay caused serious damage across Florida but mostly ignored
Tampa Bay.

People in the Tampa Bay area may have the impression that it was not a busy
year, but "just ask the people in Cuba or Haiti or Texas or Louisiana if it's
been a light year," Clay said.

The lack of hurricanes around Florida this year is just luck, experts say.

When researchers make their predictions for the coming hurricane season, they
generally focus on the number and intensity of storms, not where those storms
will actually hit.

This year's totals so far: 16 named storms, including eight hurricanes.

Gray and Klotzbach predicted in June that there would be 15 named storms,
including eight hurricanes.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which has a kind of
two-part forecasting style, said there was a 67 percent chance that 2008 would
produce 14 to 18 named storms and seven to 10 hurricanes.

Among the people who are likely to be happy about the end of the hurricane
season is billionaire investor Warren Buffett. State officials this year agreed
to pay his Berkshire Hathaway company $224-million.

In exchange, the company agreed to help the state out with cash-flow issues in
case of a bad hurricane. Berkshire would have provided up to $4-billion in bonds
if the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund had suffered more than $25-billion in
claims.

Buffett's company gets to keep the $224-million either way, hurricanes or no
hurricanes, but now it can be virtually certain it won't have to raise the
$4-billion in bonds either.

2008 U.S. storms

July 23: Hurricane Dolly, Texas.

Aug. 19: Tropical Storm Fay, Florida.

Aug. 15: Edouard, Texas.

Sept. 1: Hurricane Gustav, Louisiana.

Sept. 6: Hurricane Hanna, Carolinas.

Sept. 13: Hurricane Ike, Texas.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2008 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 817 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                          November 12, 2008 Wednesday
                                2 Tampa Edition

STATE LUCKY ON HOW FEW STORMS HIT

BYLINE: CURTIS KRUEGER, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 536 words



HIGHLIGHT: It's been a busy hurricane season, but Florida didn't get much
action.


This has been the year of the perfect storm forecast - not the year of the
perfect storm.

Although Florida was battered and flooded by Tropical Storm Fay, the state
escaped the fierce hurricanes that smashed into Texas and the Caribbean.

And after some sloppy forecasting years, the federal government and noted
hurricane researchers William Gray and Philip Klotzbach were virtually dead-on
in their early-season predictions for 2008.

"I think Dr. Gray's going to nail it," said Bay News 9 chief meteorologist Mike
Clay.

The six-month hurricane season officially ends Nov. 30, but experts say
unofficially it's over.

Hurricanes sometimes form at the very end of the season - Hurricane Paloma
fizzled out less than a week ago. But the high the amount of wind shear -
crisscrossing winds at high altitudes - makes it unlikely another hurricane will
come ashore this year.

"I'd say you guys got lucky," said Jeff Masters of the Web site
wunderground.com.

How lucky? Masters said this was the fourth-busiest year for named storms in the
past 65 years. And it's the only year on record in which there were major
hurricanes - Category 3 (winds of 111-130 mph) or stronger - in five different
months (July through November).

Remember that Hurricane Ike was zooming across the Atlantic Ocean toward Miami
until it dropped farther south and smashed into Texas.

And Cuba - 90 miles south of Key West - was hit by hurricanes Gustav, Ike and
Paloma.

Even Tropical Storm Fay caused serious damage across Florida but mostly ignored
Tampa Bay.

People in the Tampa Bay area may have the impression that it was not a busy
year, but "just ask the people in Cuba or Haiti or Texas or Louisiana if it's
been a light year," Clay said.

The lack of hurricanes around Florida this year is just luck, experts say.

When researchers make their predictions for the coming hurricane season, they
generally focus on the number and intensity of storms, not where those storms
will actually hit.

This year's totals so far: 16 named storms, including eight hurricanes.

Gray and Klotzbach predicted in June that there would be 15 named storms,
including eight hurricanes.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which has a kind of
two-part forecasting style, said there was a 67 percent chance that 2008 would
produce 14 to 18 named storms and seven to 10 hurricanes.

Among the people who are likely to be happy about the end of the hurricane
season is billionaire investor Warren Buffett. State officials this year agreed
to pay his Berkshire Hathaway company $224-million.

In exchange, the company agreed to help the state out with cash-flow issues in
case of a bad hurricane. Berkshire would have provided up to $4-billion in bonds
if the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund had suffered more than $25-billion in
claims.

Buffett's company gets to keep the $224-million either way, hurricanes or no
hurricanes, but now it can be virtually certain it won't have to raise the
$4-billion in bonds either.

FAST FACTS

Storms that hit the United States in 2008

July 23: Hurricane Dolly, Texas

Aug. 15: Tropical Storm Edouard, Texas

Aug. 19: Tropical Storm Fay, Florida

Sept. 1: Hurricane Gustav, Louisiana

Sept. 6: Hurricane Hanna, Carolinas

Sept. 13: Hurricane Ike, Texas

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2008 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 818 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                          November 12, 2008 Wednesday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

STORM SEASON PERFECT HERE

BYLINE: CURTIS KRUEGER, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 532 words



HIGHLIGHT: It's been a busy hurricane season, but Florida didn't get much
action.


This has been the year of the perfect storm forecast - not the year of the
perfect storm.

Although Florida was battered and flooded by Tropical Storm Fay, the state
escaped the fierce hurricanes that smashed into Texas and the Caribbean.

And after some sloppy forecasting years, the federal government and noted
hurricane researchers William Gray and Philip Klotzbach were virtually dead-on
in their early-season predictions for 2008.

"I think Dr. Gray's going to nail it," said Bay News 9 chief meteorologist Mike
Clay.

The six-month hurricane season officially ends Nov. 30, but experts say
unofficially it's over.

Hurricanes sometimes form at the very end of the season - Hurricane Paloma
fizzled out less than a week ago. But the high the amount of wind shear -
crisscrossing winds at high altitudes - makes it unlikely another hurricane will
come ashore this year.

"I'd say you guys got lucky," said Jeff Masters of the Web site
wunderground.com.

How lucky? Masters said this was the fourth-busiest year for named storms in the
past 65 years. And it's the only year on record in which there were major
hurricanes - Category 3 (winds of 111-130 mph) or stronger - in five different
months (July through November).

Remember that Hurricane Ike was zooming across the Atlantic Ocean toward Miami
until it dropped farther south and smashed into Texas.

And Cuba - 90 miles south of Key West - was hit by hurricanes Gustav, Ike and
Paloma.

Even Tropical Storm Fay caused serious damage across Florida but mostly ignored
Tampa Bay.

People in the Tampa Bay area may have the impression that it was not a busy
year, but "just ask the people in Cuba or Haiti or Texas or Louisiana if it's
been a light year," Clay said.

The lack of hurricanes around Florida this year is just luck, experts say.

When researchers make their predictions for the coming hurricane season, they
generally focus on the number and intensity of storms, not where those storms
will actually hit.

This year's totals so far: 16 named storms, including eight hurricanes.

Gray and Klotzbach predicted in June that there would be 15 named storms,
including eight hurricanes.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which has a kind of
two-part forecasting style, said there was a 67 percent chance that 2008 would
produce 14 to 18 named storms and seven to 10 hurricanes.

Among the people who are likely to be happy about the end of the hurricane
season is billionaire investor Warren Buffett. State officials this year agreed
to pay his Berkshire Hathaway company $224-million.

In exchange, the company agreed to help the state out with cash-flow issues in
case of a bad hurricane. Berkshire would have provided up to $4-billion in bonds
if the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund had suffered more than $25-billion in
claims.

Buffett's company gets to keep the $224-million either way, hurricanes or no
hurricanes, but now it can be virtually certain it won't have to raise the
$4-billion in bonds either.

Storms that hit the U.S. in 2008

July 23: Hurricane Dolly, Texas. Aug. 19: Tropical Storm Fay, Florida. Aug. 15:
Edouard, Texas. Sept. 1: Hurricane Gustav, Louisiana. Sept. 6: Hurricane Hanna,
Carolinas. Sept. 13: Hurricane Ike, Texas.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2008 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 819 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                              April 7, 2017 Friday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

HURRICANE OUTLOOK HOPEFUL

BYLINE: JOSH SOLOMON, TIMES STAFF WRITER

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 691 words



HIGHLIGHT: An El Nino is expected to keep the number of named storms below
average this season.


The first hurricane forecast of 2017 from Colorado State University's Department
of Atmospheric Science calls for a slightly below-average season and 11 named
storms this year.

Researchers believe the formation of storms will be suppressed by an impending
El Nino, the phenomenon of warmer-than-average water temperatures in the eastern
and central Pacific.

The warmer waters tend to strengthen high-altitude winds that swirl over the
tropical Atlantic Ocean, essentially blowing apart storms and making it harder
for them to condense into dangerous cyclones.

"El Ninos are good news for the Atlantic," said the forecast's lead author, Phil
Klotzbach, a research scientist at the university. "It's not 100 percent, but
it's looking more likely than not that El Nino will come."

The forecast will be updated June 1, the official start of hurricane season.
This year's forecast is slightly lower than the median of 12 storms between 1981
and 2010.

The report also predicts that there will be six hurricanes among those 11 named
storms, including two major hurricanes, which are Category 3 storms and above
with sustained wind speeds of at least 111 mph. The medians between 1981 and
2010 were 6.5 hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

The forecast also suggests a lower-than-normal chance of big storms making
landfall along the U.S. coastline.

Colorado State's initial forecast last year underestimated what turned into a
hyperactive storm season, which included Hurricane Hermine, the first hurricane
in 11 years to make landfall in Florida. Hermine, a Category 1 storm when it
came ashore in Apalachee Bay on Sept. 2, wreaked havoc on the Gulf Coast and
caused significant damage to shore towns like Cedar Key. In all, the storm
killed two people and caused an estimated $550 million in damage.

Weeks later, Hurricane Matthew tore through the Caribbean as a Category 5 storm
and skirted Florida's Atlantic coast on Oct. 7, weakened but still dangerous.
Even though it never made landfall, Matthew did an incredible amount of damage.
There were 585 deaths linked to the storm, more than 90 percent of which were in
Haiti.

In the U.S., there were 34 deaths, including two people who died in Florida as a
direct result of Matthew. The hurricane forced more than 3 million people to
evacuate from coastal regions in the southeastern and Middle Atlantic states. It
also caused about $10 billion in damage in the U.S. alone, making it the
10th-most-destructive hurricane to affect the nation.

During Florida's unprecedented hurricane drought, experts warned that millions
of people moved into the state who had never experienced hurricanes before and
were unfamiliar with the dangers. And they feared that longtime Floridians had
also grown complacent.

"The 2016 hurricane season showed the state of Florida that, yeah, we really are
vulnerable to hurricanes," said Dennis Feltgen, meteorologist and spokesman for
the National Hurricane Center. "This was an experience to people who had never
been through one and a wakeup call to those who had experience with them."

Will Floridians be more prepared this year?

"I would think so," he said. "Particularly those that were directly impacted by
the hurricanes, absolutely."

Another thing to keep in mind this year, Klotzbach said, is that there has been
a lot of late-season hurricane activity in recent years.

September, he said, is normally the peak of the season, "but last year was an
unusual season in that it was pretty quiet through September, and then October
was very active." Last year, Hurricane Nicole struck Bermuda in October and
Hurricane Otto formed in late November, making it the latest storm on record to
form in the Atlantic.

Even though Colorado State's forecast for this year calls for a less active
season and below-normal chances of a storm making landfall, Klotzbach said it's
important for residents up and down the coast to keep their guard up.

"Even if our forecasts are dead-on perfect, we can't predict where the storms
are going to go," he said, "and it only takes one for it to be an active season
for you."

Contact Josh Solomon at (813) 909-4613 or jsolomon@tampabay.com Follow
@josh_solomon15.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2017 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 820 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                              April 6, 2018 Friday
                                2 Tampa Edition

STORM OUTLOOK SEES NO LETUP

BYLINE: JOSH SOLOMON, TIMES STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 560 words



HIGHLIGHT: Forecasters expect an above-average season with three major
hurricanes this year.


Conditions are ripe for an above average number of hurricanes in 2018, a year
after one of the most devastating seasons on record.

Researchers at Colorado State University predict 14 named storms, seven
hurricanes and three major hurricanes, packing sustained winds of at least 111
mph. A typical season sees 12 named storms, 6.5 hurricanes and two majors.

An active season does not mean that any particular location will get hit, but it
raises the chances. Florida has suffered direct hits from hurricanes two years
in a row, and another strong season would suggest the Atlantic Ocean remains in
a period of hyperactivity.

The Colorado State Department of Atmospheric Science Tropical Meteorology
Project's forecast released Thursday also calls for 70 days during which a named
storm will be present, 30 hurricane days and seven major hurricane days. Median
seasons see about 60 named storm days, 21 hurricane days and four major
hurricane days.

Colorado State's April forecast is traditionally one of the first looks at the
upcoming Atlantic storm season. As the June 1 official start of hurricane season
draws closer, researchers will develop more detailed outlooks, which they also
update during the season.

The last few years, Atlantic waters have started the year colder than normal but
have significantly warmed in the spring and summer, said Colorado State research
scientist and forecast lead author Phil Klotzbach. If the trend continues this
year, the warm waters can help fuel another active season.

In addition, Pacific waters are cold and forecast to remain relatively cool,
which limits the possibility of a strong El Nino. El Ninos, and their
high-altitude winds, can rip apart storms before they can do much damage.

"If you look at how cold it is in the Pacific right now, there's just not enough
time to get a real strong El Nino," Klotzbach said.

Last year's season was a top 10 hurricane season by nearly every metric,
Klotzbach said. Hurricane Harvey, which hit Texas, killed 68 people and wreaked
an estimated $125 billion in damage, according to the National Hurricane Center.
Hurricane Irma, which hit the Caribbean before marching up Florida's spine,
killed 44 people and caused more than $50 billion in damage, the NHC said.
Government figures were not yet available for Hurricane Maria, which decimated
Puerto Rico, though some estimates put the death toll at more than 1,000.

Klotzbach warned Floridians not to get a false sense of security after Irma,
which was at one time the strongest storm ever recorded in the open Atlantic
Ocean but caused significantly less damage than experts feared. It hit Cuba
before Florida, which weakened the storm. The next storm might find a clear
path.

"All that water that got blown out of Tampa Bay, it came back at a nice sedate
pace" because the south side of the storm had weakened, Klotzbach said. "Don't
think that the next time it's necessarily going to do that."

Hurricane season ends Nov. 30.

Contact Josh Solomon at (813) 909-4613 or jsolomon@tampabay.com Follow
@ByJoshSolomon.

* * *

Hurricane season

June 1 Hurricane season begins

Nov. 30 Hurricane season ends

17 Named storms last season

10 Hurricanes last season

6 Major hurricanes last season

* * *

2018 hurricane season storm names

Alberto

Beryl

Chris

Debby

Ernesto

Florence

Gordon

Helene

Isaac

Joyce

Kirk

Leslie

Michael

Nadine

Oscar

Patty

Rafael

Sara

Tony

Valerie

William

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - New York Times: This satellite image shows Hurricane Irma, a
strong Category 4 storm, over Cuba on Sept. 8, 2017. PHOTO - EVE EDELHEIT -
Times: Debris left behind by Hurricane Irma is scattered Sept. 29 on a road in a
neighborhood called "the Avenues" in Big Pine Key, where 25 percent of the
structures were destroyed or heavily damaged, Monroe County officials said.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2018 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 821 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

NOAA Predicts as Many as 6 Major Hurricanes This Year

BYLINE: William Branigin, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A Section; A03

LENGTH: 489 words


The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted yesterday an
"above-normal hurricane season" this year, with as many as 16 named storms and
the prospect that four to six of them could become major hurricanes.

The prediction comes with the start of hurricane season on June 1 and as the
battered Gulf Coast region and New Orleans still struggle to rebuild after
Hurricane Katrina's floodwaters last August. This latest active period for major
hurricanes could continue for a decade or two, said meteorologists at the
National Hurricane Center.

In a news conference in Miami, federal and state officials warned people to
start making their own preparations and not to expect government help in the
first hours after a storm.

Although hurricane activity is not expected to reach last year's record level,
it is predicted to be greater than the 40-year average, said retired Vice Adm.
Conrad C. Lautenbacher Jr., NOAA administrator.

On average, he said, a hurricane season produces 11 named storms, of which six
become hurricanes, two of them major ones. But in 2005, there were a record 28
storms, including 15 hurricanes. Seven of these were considered "major," and a
record four hit the United States.

"Although NOAA is not forecasting a repeat of last year's season, the potential
for hurricanes striking the U.S. is high," Lautenbacher said. He said there is a
"troubling yet real possibility" that another major hurricane could hit the
ravaged Gulf Coast.

The prediction of an active hurricane season is based on high temperatures on
the sea surface and wind patterns that favor hurricanes.

"Warmer ocean water combined with lower wind shear, weaker easterly trade winds,
and a more favorable wind pattern in the mid-levels of the atmosphere are the
factors that collectively will favor the development of storms in greater
numbers and to greater intensity," NOAA said in a statement. "Warm water is the
energy source for storms, while favorable wind patterns limit the wind shear
that can tear apart a storm's building cloud structure."

R. David Paulison, acting director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
said the agency has tripled its stocks of supplies, signed agreements with the
Defense Logistics Agency and improved "situational awareness" by organizing its
own reconnaissance teams to document conditions as storms hit. But he cautioned,
"FEMA can't do it alone. It takes all of us."

Paulison said, "We have to be able to take care of ourselves for the first hours
after a storm. People need to prepare to take care of themselves."

Max Mayfield, director of NOAA's National Hurricane Center in Miami, echoed that
sentiment.

"Whether we face an active hurricane season, like this year, or a below-normal
season, the crucial message for every person is the same: prepare, prepare,
prepare," he said in a statement. "One hurricane hitting where you live is
enough to make it a bad season."

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 822 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                  MetroNews.ca

                             May 25, 2017 Thursday

Meteorologists predict "above average" 2017 hurricane season for Maritimes

BYLINE: Nicole Gnazdowsky - For Metro Halifax

SECTION: METRO NEWS | NEWS | HALIFAX; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 377 words


Meteorologists are warning the public to get prepared for a slightly above
average hurricane season.

With the 2017 season beginning June 1, prediction numbers were released
Thursday.

Warning Preparedness Meteorologist, Bob Robichaud said Canadians can expect
11-17 named storms, 5-9 reaching hurricane status, and 2-4 of those hurricanes
actually making it to major hurricane status.

In an average year, Robichaud said there are typically around 12 named storms, 6
hurricanes, and 3 major hurricanes.

Robichaud said there are a few variables that would cause this slight increase.

First, temperatures in the Atlantic Ocean are above average, and are increasing
fairly rapidly, he said.

Temperatures in the Pacific Ocean are also a factor, dictating whether we enter
an El Niño, or a La Nina, determining the level of severity of hurricane
activity in the Atlantic, said Robichaud.

"What we're dealing with now is a neutral situation, going towards El Niño but
there is a lot of uncertainty as to whether it will actually be an El Niño by
the time we reach the peak of hurricane season," he said.

"That's why we are expecting an above average season, because if we are in an El
Niño by then we will be in a fairly weak one."

Here is a list of the worst and most memorable hurricanes to hit Nova Scotia
since hurricane Juan in 2003:

1. Hurricane Matthew: Oct. 10, 2016

A low pressure system fueld by the hurricanes moisture brought winds of 100km/h
and a 24 hour rain fall high of 102mm in Halifax.

2. Hurricane Arthur: July 5, 2014

Although reduced to a post tropical storm by the time it hit the Maritimes,
Arthur brought winds of up to 110km/h, knocking out power to more than 290,000
homes and businesses.

3. Hurricane Sandy: Oct. 29-30, 2012

Extreme wind created waves up to eight meters high along the Nova Scotian coast.

4. Hurricane Earl: Sept. 3, 2010

Earl went from hurricane status, to tropical storm, and back to hit Nova Scotia
as a category 1 hurricane, bringing with it wind gusts of 120 km/h

5. Hurricane Bill: Aug. 23, 2009

Knocked out power to thousands across Nova Scotia, and flooded many roadways.

6. Hurricane Noel: Nov. 4, 2007

Bringing winds of up to 140 km/h, Noel brought down trees and powerlines causing
almost 200,000 Nova Scotians to be without power.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Free Daily News Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 823 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           The Advertiser (Australia)

                            August 30, 2011 Tuesday
                               1 - State Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 74

LENGTH: 461  words


Irene repeat offender in hurricane stakes

There was a minor bout of confusion in the house the other day when we were
talking about this year's Hurricane Irene. Apparently there have been several
more storms with the same name. Can you list these and tell me a few details
about each of them? - T.C. (St Agnes)

Hurricane Irene, which hit the US over the weekend, is the ninth named storm and
both the first hurricane and major hurricane of the 2011 Atlantic hurricane
season.

Irene is significant because for the first time since reliable records began in
1851, none of the first eight named storms of the season attained hurricane
strength.

The US National Hurricane Centre issued warnings for the 2011 Hurricane Irene
from August 20.

In the Atlantic, there have been several more hurricanes or tropical storms with
the same name.

The 2005 Hurricane Irene was category two and did not affect land.

The 1999 Hurricane Irene was also a category two, passed over Cuba and struck
Florida, causing $US800 million in damage.

Irene was not used as a hurricane name in 1993 or 1987, so the previous one in
the list is 1981, which was a category three hurricane that moved both ways
across the Atlantic, eventually hitting France as an extra-tropical storm.

The 1971 Hurricane Irene was a category one which moved over Nicaragua, then to
the eastern Pacific, becoming Hurricane Olivia.

In 1959, there was also Tropical Storm Irene, which caused minor damage to
northwest Florida.

Stains can be wiped with Perc

Thank you very much for your answer to my question about diesel stain on Monday,
August 22. Could you please tell me the names of ``dry-cleaning solvents''? I
don't know what they are. - M.N. (Orroroo)

One of the most commonly used dry-cleaning solvents is usually known as Perc,
full name perchloroethylene.

According to the Dry-cleaning Institute of Australia, perc is widely used by
dry-cleaning businesses in Australia, among other less common hydrocarbon or
petroleum-based solvents.

Perc has been used since the 1940s. It is non-flammable and works better on
oil-based stains than water-soluble stains.

It is available from some cleaning chemical businesses, especially carpet
cleaners.

You can get more information about using this solvent, along with others at
http://www.drycleanersweb.com.au/history/.

Where to write

Questions should be addressed to What's Your Problem? The Advertiser, GPO Box
339, Adelaide, 5001, or email to problems@adv.newsltd.com.au Please include name
and address, not necessarily for publication.Need more information? Contact the
State Library of SA inquiry service on 82077250/7252 or country (freecall)
1800182013.WWW home page: http://www.slsa.sa.gov.au/goto/askus

Please note that answers published are not necessarily supplied by the State
Library.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ADV


                   Copyright 2011 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 824 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                     The Times Higher Education Supplement

                               September 5, 2003

In The Eye Of A Real Tiger

BYLINE: Howard Bluestein

SECTION: BOOKS; GEOGRAPHY AND ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE; No.1605; Pg.33

LENGTH: 692 words


Stormchasers: The Hurricance Hunters and their Fateful Flight into Hurricane
Janet By David Toomey Norton, 314pp, Pounds 19.95 ISBN 0 393 02000 2

In the autumn of 1984 I spent several months at the Hurricane Research Division
in Miami, Florida, and flew with hurricane researchers into the eye of
hurricanes. The P-3 aircraft we flew in was equipped with a Doppler radar, that
was being used to study the structure of the hurricanes. David Toomey, in his
riveting account of the history of US-military airborne reconnaissance missions
into hurricanes, notes that "technology has a way of numbing us to history".

Although the sensation of penetrating the turbulent eyewall and breaking out
into the calm, stadium-like panorama of clouds inside the eye, 3km above the
churning ocean, was breathtaking, the flights seemed routine, or, in Toomey's
word, numbing, and there was no hint of the dangers presented to the pioneers
who had flown without the benefit of satellites to locate storms precisely,
without computer models to forecast storm movement and changes in intensity, and
unaware of the safest altitude at which to fly through storms.

Toomey's narrative centres on an ill-fated US Navy flight in 1955 into Hurricane
Janet. The story, both actual and hypothesised, of the crew, its families and
its flight, is interspersed with a lively and informative history of flights
into hurricanes and hurricane research. The title of the book is partly a
misnomer, since "stormchasers" is a colloquial term used to describe the people
who "chase" tornadoes; those who fly into hurricanes have been called "hurricane
hunters", which is perhaps more descriptive of what was done in the early days
of hurricane reconnaissance when the location of the hurricane was not known
very well.

Hurricanes, unlike tornadoes, persist for days, so they are easy targets.

Nowadays, their location is known very well and it is relatively safe to fly
into them at high enough altitudes. Nevertheless, Toomey does an excellent job
describing to the layperson what it is like to fly into a hurricane and the awe
that must have been felt by the pioneers of this risky work. The roles that
politics, technology, the media and human personalities have played in hurricane
reconnaissance are all explored. The intense rivalry between two 19th-century
American amateur scientists, William Redfield and James Espy, and their
different theories of storms, are particularly well treated. The efforts of many
of the significant early players are briefly noted as well.

Toomey suggests that the concept of "stormchasing" originated with the
Englishman Henry Piddington who, in 1845, prophesied: "The day will yet come
when ships will be sent out to investigate the nature and course of storms and
hurricanes, as they are now sent out to reach the poles or to survey
pestilential coasts, or on any other scientific service."

Just as the exploits of tornado chasers have been publicised by television and
motion pictures, the exploits of hurricane hunters were also publicised by
television during its early days and in a 1949 movie, Slattery's Hurricane.
Taking meteorological measurements from aircraft, equipping them to fly into
storms and establishing emergency procedures are all given consideration here.
The naming of hurricanes and the first attempts at forecasting meteorological
parameters using computers are treated in a lively and informative manner. It
would have been useful, though, for the sake of continuity, to have seen brief
accounts of some of the more contemporary personalities involved in hurricane
research and how they built on the work of their predecessors.

While there are a few minor scientific inaccuracies, the overall attempt to
explain a complex subject to the layperson is excellent. I highly recommend this
book to the general public and meteorologists alike, not only as a poignant
account of a tragic event but also to learn the historical context of hurricane
research and forecasting.

Howard B. Bluestein is professor of meteorology, University of Oklahoma, US,
where he specialises in tornado research.


LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2003

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Magazine

                      Copyright 2003 TSL Education Limited


                          FOCUS - 825 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                             August 27, 2006 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

First hurricane of season looms: U.S. Gulf Coast on alert for repeat of Katrina
horrors

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 300  words

DATELINE: MIAMI


The fifth tropical storm of the Atlantic season, Ernesto, could become a
dangerously powerful hurricane in the oil-producing Gulf of Mexico this week
around the anniversary of hurricane Katrina, U.S. forecasters said Saturday.

The U.S. National Hurricane Center said forecasting Ernesto's future strength
was riddled with uncertainty.

But very warm waters as it approached the Gulf, where a quarter of U.S. crude
oil and natural gas production is located, could lead to significant
strengthening.

"Ernesto could become a potentially dangerous hurricane as it moves across the
northeastern Caribbean sea and the Gulf of Mexico," forecaster Jack Beven said.

Jamaica, the Cayman Islands and Cuba issued hurricane watches as Ernesto bore
down, meaning hurricane conditions could be expected within 36 hours.

The hurricane centre said Ernesto could be near hurricane strength, with winds
near 120 km/h, as it passed Jamaica and Haiti today. Next in line were the
wealthy British dependency of the Cayman Islands and Cuba.

Hundreds of Jamaicans, wary of nature's wrath after being struck by several
hurricanes over the past two years, heeded a warning by Prime Minister Portia
Simpson Miller to take Ernesto seriously, and headed for shelters. Supermarkets
reported they were running out of basic supplies as people stocked up.

Ernesto would be the first hurricane of the six-month hurricane season, which
began June 1.

Ernesto's forecast track could take it by Thursday to the middle of the Gulf as
a Category 3 hurricane, with sustained winds of at least 178 km/h.

Hurricane Katrina was a Category 3 storm when it came ashore in Louisiana last
Aug. 29 and devastated New Orleans by breaching its levees. It killed 1,500
people on the U.S. Gulf Coast.

"Our entire coast is on alert," said Louisiana Gov. Kathleen Blanco.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Ramon Espinosa, Associated Press; People in Santo Domingo, Dominican
Republic, watch waves produced by a strengthening tropical storm Ernesto.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2006 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 826 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Star-News (Wilmington, NC)

                            December 21, 2009 Monday
                                  1ST Edition

Hurricane forecasts, out early, foreboding but called unreliable

BYLINE: Emily Nipps; St. Petersburg Times

SECTION: Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 445 words


ST. PETERSBURG, FLA. | Days after the 2009 hurricane season ended, two of the
country's leading hurricane experts delivered this grim news:

The 2010 Atlantic season doesn't look good. Anticipate an above-average
probability of major hurricane landfall, with 11 to 16 named storms, six to nine
hurricanes and as many as five that could become major hurricanes.

True, that prediction is very similar to the over-estimations we've seen over
the last few years. And even Colorado State University's Bill Gray and Phil
Klotzbach, who put out the December forecast, admit it's impossible to predict
potential hurricane activity this early.

Issuing such a report cracks open the complicated world of hurricane predictions
and climatology. As more is understood about global climate conditions and
computer models become more sophisticated, hurricane experts have felt pressure
to release early findings to an information-hungry public.

But a lot of that information is far too preliminary and inaccurate, said Bay
News 9 chief meteorologist Mike Clay, and it's often overplayed by the media.

"The December reports aren't useful and they don't mean anything," Clay said.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, perhaps the world's top
source for hurricane information, also issues early forecasts in May. But
meteorologists there prefer to downplay the preseason reports and instead point
to forecasts in August - halfway into the season - as examples of NOAA's
accuracy.

"With a lot of hurricane awareness heating up before the season, it certainly
makes sense to put out an early report," said Gerry Bell, NOAA's lead Atlantic
hurricane seasonal forecaster. "But in August, that's when you really have the
best handle on it. With August outlooks, we were right within our predicted
range nine out of 12 times."

Peter Ray, a meteorology professor at Florida State University who independently
studies hurricanes, believes we are actually entering a less active season based
on his studies about Atlantic warm pools.

Warm pools are wide regions of sea surface temperatures warmer than 28.5 degrees
Celsius, or about 83 degree Fahrenheit. Hurricanes generally require water
temperatures of at least 79 degrees. And the bigger the warm pool, the more
active a hurricane season.

The lack of a warm pool, along with the increased wind shear because of El Nino,
is why we had a quiet 2009, Ray said. He expects the lack of warm pool to
continue, cutting down on hurricanes for years to come.

Like the other meteorologists, he issued his prediction with the caveat that
nature is tricky, and only one kind of forecast is 100 percent.

"Everyone's right the day of the landfall," Ray said.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2009 Star-News, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 827 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 6, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: First Above-Normal Atlantic Hurricane Season Since 2012 Produced
Five U.S. Storms Making Landfall

LENGTH: 700  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: U.S Department of Commerce has issued the following news release:



 As the Atlantic, eastern Pacific and central Pacific 2016 hurricane seasons
have come to a close, NOAA scientists have said that all three regions saw
above-normal seasons.





 For the Atlantic, this was the first above-normal season since 2012. The
Atlantic saw 15 named storms during 2016, including 7 hurricanes (Alex, Earl,
Gaston, Hermine, Matthew, Nicole, and Otto), 3 of which were major hurricanes
(Gaston, Matthew and Nicole). NOAA's updated hurricane season outlook in August
called for 12 to 17 named storms, including 5 to 8 hurricanes, with 2 to 4 of
those predicted to become major hurricanes.



 Five named storms made landfall in the United States during 2016, the most
since 2008 when six storms struck. Tropical Storm Bonnie and Hurricane Matthew
struck South Carolina. Tropical Storms Colin and Julia, as well as Hurricane
Hermine, made landfall in Florida. Hermine was the first hurricane to make
landfall in Florida since Wilma in 2005.



 Several Atlantic storms made landfall outside of the United States during 2016:
Tropical Storm Danielle in Mexico, Hurricane Earl in Belize, Hurricane Matthew
in Haiti, Cuba, and the Bahamas, and Hurricane Otto in Nicaragua.



 The strongest and longest-lived storm of the season was Matthew, which reached
maximum sustained surface winds of 160 miles per hour and lasted as a major
hurricane for eight days from Sept. 30 to Oct. 7. Matthew was the first category
5 hurricane in the Atlantic basin since Felix in 2007.



 Matthew intensified into a major hurricane on Sept. 30 over the Caribbean Sea,
making it the first major hurricane in that region since Poloma in 2008. It made
landfall as a category 4 major hurricane in Haiti, Cuba and the Bahamas, causing
extensive damage and loss of life. It then made landfall on Oct. 8 as a category
1 hurricane in the U.S. near McClellanville, South Carolina.



 Matthew caused storm surge and beach erosion from Florida through North
Carolina, and produced more than 10 inches of rain resulting in extensive
freshwater flooding over much of the eastern Carolinas. The storm was
responsible for the greatest U.S. loss of life due to inland flooding from a
tropical system since torrential rains from Hurricane Floyd caused widespread
and historic flooding in eastern North Carolina in 1999.



 "The strength of Hurricane Matthew, as well as the increased number of U.S.
landfalling storms this season, were linked to large areas of exceptionally weak
vertical wind shear that resulted from a persistent ridge of high pressure in
the middle and upper atmosphere over Caribbean Sea and the western Atlantic
Ocean," said Gerry Bell, Ph.D., lead seasonal hurricane forecaster at NOAA's
Climate Prediction Center. "These conditions, along with very warm Caribbean
waters, helped fuel Matthew's rapid strengthening."



 Eastern and central Pacific Hurricane Seasons



 The eastern Pacific hurricane basin, which covers the eastern Pacific Ocean
east of 140 degrees West, produced 20 named storms during 2016, including 10
hurricanes of which 4 became major hurricanes. July through September was the
most active three-month period on record for this basin. NOAA's eastern Pacific
hurricane season outlook called for 13 to 20 named storms, including 6 to 11
hurricanes, 3 to 6 of which were expected to become major hurricanes.



 The central Pacific hurricane basin covers the Pacific Ocean west of 140
degrees West to the International Date Line. This basin saw seven tropical
cyclones (includes tropical depressions and named storms) during 2016. All seven
became named storms, and included three hurricanes of which two were major
hurricanes. Tropical Storm Darby made landfall on the Big Island of Hawaii,
marking the first time in recorded history that two storms in three years struck
the Big Island (Darby in 2016 and Iselle in 2014). NOAA's central Pacific
hurricane season outlook called for 4 to 7 tropical cyclones. That outlook does
not predict specific ranges of named storms, hurricanes and major hurricanes.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 828 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 6, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: First Above-Normal Atlantic Hurricane Season Since 2012 Produced
Five U.S. Storms Making Landfall

LENGTH: 700  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: U.S Department of Commerce has issued the following news release:



 As the Atlantic, eastern Pacific and central Pacific 2016 hurricane seasons
have come to a close, NOAA scientists have said that all three regions saw
above-normal seasons.





 For the Atlantic, this was the first above-normal season since 2012. The
Atlantic saw 15 named storms during 2016, including 7 hurricanes (Alex, Earl,
Gaston, Hermine, Matthew, Nicole, and Otto), 3 of which were major hurricanes
(Gaston, Matthew and Nicole). NOAA's updated hurricane season outlook in August
called for 12 to 17 named storms, including 5 to 8 hurricanes, with 2 to 4 of
those predicted to become major hurricanes.



 Five named storms made landfall in the United States during 2016, the most
since 2008 when six storms struck. Tropical Storm Bonnie and Hurricane Matthew
struck South Carolina. Tropical Storms Colin and Julia, as well as Hurricane
Hermine, made landfall in Florida. Hermine was the first hurricane to make
landfall in Florida since Wilma in 2005.



 Several Atlantic storms made landfall outside of the United States during 2016:
Tropical Storm Danielle in Mexico, Hurricane Earl in Belize, Hurricane Matthew
in Haiti, Cuba, and the Bahamas, and Hurricane Otto in Nicaragua.



 The strongest and longest-lived storm of the season was Matthew, which reached
maximum sustained surface winds of 160 miles per hour and lasted as a major
hurricane for eight days from Sept. 30 to Oct. 7. Matthew was the first category
5 hurricane in the Atlantic basin since Felix in 2007.



 Matthew intensified into a major hurricane on Sept. 30 over the Caribbean Sea,
making it the first major hurricane in that region since Poloma in 2008. It made
landfall as a category 4 major hurricane in Haiti, Cuba and the Bahamas, causing
extensive damage and loss of life. It then made landfall on Oct. 8 as a category
1 hurricane in the U.S. near McClellanville, South Carolina.



 Matthew caused storm surge and beach erosion from Florida through North
Carolina, and produced more than 10 inches of rain resulting in extensive
freshwater flooding over much of the eastern Carolinas. The storm was
responsible for the greatest U.S. loss of life due to inland flooding from a
tropical system since torrential rains from Hurricane Floyd caused widespread
and historic flooding in eastern North Carolina in 1999.



 "The strength of Hurricane Matthew, as well as the increased number of U.S.
landfalling storms this season, were linked to large areas of exceptionally weak
vertical wind shear that resulted from a persistent ridge of high pressure in
the middle and upper atmosphere over Caribbean Sea and the western Atlantic
Ocean," said Gerry Bell, Ph.D., lead seasonal hurricane forecaster at NOAA's
Climate Prediction Center. "These conditions, along with very warm Caribbean
waters, helped fuel Matthew's rapid strengthening."



 Eastern and central Pacific Hurricane Seasons



 The eastern Pacific hurricane basin, which covers the eastern Pacific Ocean
east of 140 degrees West, produced 20 named storms during 2016, including 10
hurricanes of which 4 became major hurricanes. July through September was the
most active three-month period on record for this basin. NOAA's eastern Pacific
hurricane season outlook called for 13 to 20 named storms, including 6 to 11
hurricanes, 3 to 6 of which were expected to become major hurricanes.



 The central Pacific hurricane basin covers the Pacific Ocean west of 140
degrees West to the International Date Line. This basin saw seven tropical
cyclones (includes tropical depressions and named storms) during 2016. All seven
became named storms, and included three hurricanes of which two were major
hurricanes. Tropical Storm Darby made landfall on the Big Island of Hawaii,
marking the first time in recorded history that two storms in three years struck
the Big Island (Darby in 2016 and Iselle in 2014). NOAA's central Pacific
hurricane season outlook called for 4 to 7 tropical cyclones. That outlook does
not predict specific ranges of named storms, hurricanes and major hurricanes.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 829 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 7, 2016 Wednesday

Washington: First Above-Normal Atlantic Hurricane Season Since 2012 Produced
Five U.S. Storms Making Landfall

LENGTH: 700  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: U.S Department of Commerce has issued the following news release:



 As the Atlantic, eastern Pacific and central Pacific 2016 hurricane seasons
have come to a close, NOAA scientists have said that all three regions saw
above-normal seasons.





 For the Atlantic, this was the first above-normal season since 2012. The
Atlantic saw 15 named storms during 2016, including 7 hurricanes (Alex, Earl,
Gaston, Hermine, Matthew, Nicole, and Otto), 3 of which were major hurricanes
(Gaston, Matthew and Nicole). NOAA's updated hurricane season outlook in August
called for 12 to 17 named storms, including 5 to 8 hurricanes, with 2 to 4 of
those predicted to become major hurricanes.



 Five named storms made landfall in the United States during 2016, the most
since 2008 when six storms struck. Tropical Storm Bonnie and Hurricane Matthew
struck South Carolina. Tropical Storms Colin and Julia, as well as Hurricane
Hermine, made landfall in Florida. Hermine was the first hurricane to make
landfall in Florida since Wilma in 2005.



 Several Atlantic storms made landfall outside of the United States during 2016:
Tropical Storm Danielle in Mexico, Hurricane Earl in Belize, Hurricane Matthew
in Haiti, Cuba, and the Bahamas, and Hurricane Otto in Nicaragua.



 The strongest and longest-lived storm of the season was Matthew, which reached
maximum sustained surface winds of 160 miles per hour and lasted as a major
hurricane for eight days from Sept. 30 to Oct. 7. Matthew was the first category
5 hurricane in the Atlantic basin since Felix in 2007.



 Matthew intensified into a major hurricane on Sept. 30 over the Caribbean Sea,
making it the first major hurricane in that region since Poloma in 2008. It made
landfall as a category 4 major hurricane in Haiti, Cuba and the Bahamas, causing
extensive damage and loss of life. It then made landfall on Oct. 8 as a category
1 hurricane in the U.S. near McClellanville, South Carolina.



 Matthew caused storm surge and beach erosion from Florida through North
Carolina, and produced more than 10 inches of rain resulting in extensive
freshwater flooding over much of the eastern Carolinas. The storm was
responsible for the greatest U.S. loss of life due to inland flooding from a
tropical system since torrential rains from Hurricane Floyd caused widespread
and historic flooding in eastern North Carolina in 1999.



 "The strength of Hurricane Matthew, as well as the increased number of U.S.
landfalling storms this season, were linked to large areas of exceptionally weak
vertical wind shear that resulted from a persistent ridge of high pressure in
the middle and upper atmosphere over Caribbean Sea and the western Atlantic
Ocean," said Gerry Bell, Ph.D., lead seasonal hurricane forecaster at NOAA's
Climate Prediction Center. "These conditions, along with very warm Caribbean
waters, helped fuel Matthew's rapid strengthening."



 Eastern and central Pacific Hurricane Seasons



 The eastern Pacific hurricane basin, which covers the eastern Pacific Ocean
east of 140 degrees West, produced 20 named storms during 2016, including 10
hurricanes of which 4 became major hurricanes. July through September was the
most active three-month period on record for this basin. NOAA's eastern Pacific
hurricane season outlook called for 13 to 20 named storms, including 6 to 11
hurricanes, 3 to 6 of which were expected to become major hurricanes.



 The central Pacific hurricane basin covers the Pacific Ocean west of 140
degrees West to the International Date Line. This basin saw seven tropical
cyclones (includes tropical depressions and named storms) during 2016. All seven
became named storms, and included three hurricanes of which two were major
hurricanes. Tropical Storm Darby made landfall on the Big Island of Hawaii,
marking the first time in recorded history that two storms in three years struck
the Big Island (Darby in 2016 and Iselle in 2014). NOAA's central Pacific
hurricane season outlook called for 4 to 7 tropical cyclones. That outlook does
not predict specific ranges of named storms, hurricanes and major hurricanes.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 830 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 23, 2014 Tuesday

Washington: Embarrassing Facts Haunt Global Warming March

LENGTH: 577  words

DATELINE: Washington


The Heartland Institute has issued the following news release:

Just two days after a summer freeze cut growing seasons prematurely short in New
York and New England, global warming activists marched in New York City against
global warming.

Temperatures dropped below freezing Friday in many parts of New York and other
Northeastern states, with the freezing summertime temperatures setting many
records throughout the Northeast. Global warming activists responded on Sunday
by marching in New York City and claiming global warming is baking the planet.

With global temperatures remaining flat for the past 17 years and record
summertime cold sending people shivering throughout the Northeast, protest
organizer Bill McKibben deemphasized the "warming" part of global warming in a
New York Daily News article on the eve of the march. Instead, his article,
titled "New York, it's time to sound the climate change alarm," claimed "climate
change" is responsible for Hurricane Sandy and California wildfires ("a planet
that's now literally on fire"!).

In choosing to make Hurricane Sandy his hurricane poster child for global
warming, McKibben didn't really have much of a choice. Sandy came ashore in New
Jersey with winds registering 80 mph - barely hurricane strength. McKibben
couldn't choose a major hurricane strike (defined by meteorologists at Category
3 or higher) to pin on global warming because there hasn't been one since 2005.
It has been an unheard of 8 years, 11 months since the last major hurricane hit
the United States. We are currently benefiting from the longest stretch in
recorded history without a major hurricane strike. The prior record was merely 6
years, 2 months between major hurricanes.

Nor can McKibben and his fellow alarmists claim global warming makes hurricanes
more likely to hit heavily populated Northeastern states. While Northeastern
hurricane strikes are rare in recent decades, they were much more frequent in
past decades before our recent global warming. No major hurricane has struck the
Northeast since Hurricane Gloria came ashore on Long Island and then pushed up
the Connecticut River Valley in 1985, and Gloria is the only major hurricane to
strike the Northeast in the past 50 years. Compare that to the pre-global
warming era when hurricanes in the U.S. Northeast were much more frequent. Four
major hurricanes - Carol, Edna, Connie, and Donna - made their way up the East
Coast and subsequently barreled into the Northeast between 1953 and 1960, during
a period of global cooling. Major hurricanes struck the Northeast in the 1930s
and 1940s, also.

We are now benefiting from the longest period in recorded history without a
major hurricane strike anywhere in the nation. We are also benefiting from an
unprecedented scarcity of major hurricane strikes in the U.S. Northeast. With so
little to work with, McKibben takes the sole minor hurricane of any significance
during the past nine years and claims it was created by global warming. Well, if
you can pin the formation of any minor hurricane - no matter how small or
infrequent - on global warming, then you also have to pin the remarkable recent
lack of hurricanes on global warming. And by McKibben's logic, global warming
has prevented seven major hurricane strikes that would otherwise have clobbered
the United States during the past nine years.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 831 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 25, 2014 Thursday

Washington: Embarrassing Facts Haunt Global Warming March

LENGTH: 577  words

DATELINE: Washington


The Heartland Institute has issued the following news release:

Just two days after a summer freeze cut growing seasons prematurely short in New
York and New England, global warming activists marched in New York City against
global warming.

Temperatures dropped below freezing Friday in many parts of New York and other
Northeastern states, with the freezing summertime temperatures setting many
records throughout the Northeast. Global warming activists responded on Sunday
by marching in New York City and claiming global warming is baking the planet.

With global temperatures remaining flat for the past 17 years and record
summertime cold sending people shivering throughout the Northeast, protest
organizer Bill McKibben deemphasized the "warming" part of global warming in a
New York Daily News article on the eve of the march. Instead, his article,
titled "New York, it's time to sound the climate change alarm," claimed "climate
change" is responsible for Hurricane Sandy and California wildfires ("a planet
that's now literally on fire"!).

In choosing to make Hurricane Sandy his hurricane poster child for global
warming, McKibben didn't really have much of a choice. Sandy came ashore in New
Jersey with winds registering 80 mph - barely hurricane strength. McKibben
couldn't choose a major hurricane strike (defined by meteorologists at Category
3 or higher) to pin on global warming because there hasn't been one since 2005.
It has been an unheard of 8 years, 11 months since the last major hurricane hit
the United States. We are currently benefiting from the longest stretch in
recorded history without a major hurricane strike. The prior record was merely 6
years, 2 months between major hurricanes.

Nor can McKibben and his fellow alarmists claim global warming makes hurricanes
more likely to hit heavily populated Northeastern states. While Northeastern
hurricane strikes are rare in recent decades, they were much more frequent in
past decades before our recent global warming. No major hurricane has struck the
Northeast since Hurricane Gloria came ashore on Long Island and then pushed up
the Connecticut River Valley in 1985, and Gloria is the only major hurricane to
strike the Northeast in the past 50 years. Compare that to the pre-global
warming era when hurricanes in the U.S. Northeast were much more frequent. Four
major hurricanes - Carol, Edna, Connie, and Donna - made their way up the East
Coast and subsequently barreled into the Northeast between 1953 and 1960, during
a period of global cooling. Major hurricanes struck the Northeast in the 1930s
and 1940s, also.

We are now benefiting from the longest period in recorded history without a
major hurricane strike anywhere in the nation. We are also benefiting from an
unprecedented scarcity of major hurricane strikes in the U.S. Northeast. With so
little to work with, McKibben takes the sole minor hurricane of any significance
during the past nine years and claims it was created by global warming. Well, if
you can pin the formation of any minor hurricane - no matter how small or
infrequent - on global warming, then you also have to pin the remarkable recent
lack of hurricanes on global warming. And by McKibben's logic, global warming
has prevented seven major hurricane strikes that would otherwise have clobbered
the United States during the past nine years.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 832 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                              June 9, 2008 Monday

Is there a Bob or a Gloria in Greater Lowell's future this hurricane season?

BYLINE: By Dennis Shaughnessey, dshaughnessey@lowellsun.com

SECTION: TODAY'S HEADLINES

LENGTH: 713 words


LOWELL -- On Aug. 12, 1991, a tropical cyclone began forming several hundred
miles from Bermuda.

Intensifying and hovering ominously off the Florida coast over the next few
days, it began to make its way north but never touched land. By Aug. 15, the
storm had become a full-blown hurricane and was given the name Bob.

Bob brushed the Outer Banks of North Carolina then set its sights on New
England. It came ashore in Newport, R.I., as a Category 2 hurricane on Aug. 19
and cut a path across Massachusetts and into Maine before crossing the Atlantic
Ocean and dissipating near the coast of Portugal on Aug. 29.

It was the last hurricane to touch New England's borders. Before that, Hurricane
Gloria was a Category 4 that weakened when it hit Connecticut but still managed
to do some damage in Massachusetts in September 1985.

"There is really no way to predict landfall events, especially in New England,"
said Dave Roberts, a Navy hurricane specialist at the National Hurricane Center
in Coral Gables, Fla. "We use what tools we have to track the storms and gauge
the potential so we come up with a general idea, but there's no way to know if
it will ever hit land."

A hurricane forecast team from Colorado State University has predicted an active
2008 hurricane season that includes 15 named storms in the Atlantic. As many as
eight of those could be hurricanes, and of those, four could be major
hurricanes. In May, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration called
for 12 to 16 named storms, including as many as nine hurricanes. A normal season
has 11 storms, including six hurricanes, two of which are major.

"When you read the seasonal forecast, it's fairly general," Roberts said. "It's
important to remember that the focus should not be on the number of storms
expected. The focus should be on preparedness. You have to be ready for any
event. You never know. All it takes is one."

According to NOAA statistics, 2006 and 2007 saw slightly below-average activity,
with only one Category 1 hurricane, Humberto, reaching U.S. soil in 2007.

The Colorado team said that 2004 and 2005 were anomalies. Four hurricanes hit
land each year. Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne caused devastating
damage in 2004, followed by Dennis, Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005.

The first named storm of 2008, Arthur, hit on May 31, just one day before the
official start of the hurricane season, carrying 40-mph winds and dumping
between 7 to 10 inches of rain on Guatemala before losing steam over Mexico.

Hurricane Bob was a Category 2 hurricane, meaning it was weak in its intensity.
The last Category 3 hurricane to hit New England was Carol in 1954.

"For those who live in New England their whole lives, unless they remember
Carol, they don't really know what a major hurricane is like," said Matt Noyes,
a meteorologist for the New England Cable News network. "New England hurricanes
are a rare and special breed. They need to come racing up the coast and reach
speeds of 50 to 60 miles an hour by the time they reach land. That hasn't
happened since 1954, really. And before that, 1938."

Hurricanes at Category 3 or above can carry winds up to 183 mph and wreak havoc
on anything in their paths.

"It doesn't have to be a Cat-5," Noyes said. "A Cat-3 could be enough to send a
22-foot wall of water over a sea wall. It's amazing when you think about all the
new development that has taken place along the coastline in the last 30 or 40
years."

Noyes, Roberts and the Colorado team concur that a number of real-world factors
are considered when forecasting the hurricane season. Sea surface temperatures,
trends and patterns from previous years, oceanic and atmospheric conditions,
wind currents and the jet stream all provide meaningful information in the
determination.

"The bottom line is that it's a crap shoot," Noyes said. "I take the information
and use it as guidance. Could this be the year? Who knows? It's more important
to be in a constant state of readiness."

Most tropical storms that reach New England result in severe flooding
conditions. Noyes suggests visiting www.floodsmart.gov, a Web site that provides
valuable information about flood insurance.

"The average policy takes about 30 days to kick in, and now would be the perfect
time to look into that," he added.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 833 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 2, 2014 Saturday

CSU Forecasters Reaffirm Forecast for Quiet Hurricane Season

LENGTH: 447  words


Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society has issued the following news
release:

With the peak of the 2014 hurricane season approaching, researchers at Colorado
State University reaffirmed their June forecast for a relatively quiet summer.

CSU meteorologists Phil Klotzbach and William Gray said today they think nine
tropical storms will form in the Atlantic Basin -- which includes the Atlantic
Ocean, Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea -- between August 1 and the end of the
hurricane season on November 30. Of those storms, Klotzbach and Gray think four
tropical storms will strengthen into hurricanes with winds of at least 74 mph.

The forecasters think one of those hurricanes will intensify into a major
hurricane with peak winds exceeding 110 mph.

One hurricane formed earlier this month. That storm, Hurricane Arthur, became a
category two hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Scale, which rates hurricanes by
wind speeds and destructive potential. A category two hurricane has peak winds
ranging from 96 mph to 110 mph.

Hurricane Arthur made landfall near Cape Lookout, North Carolina on July 3 with
peak winds of about 101 mph. The storm then curved back out to sea but caused
flooding along the U.S. east coast as it moved to a second landfall at Nova
Scotia on July 5.

In a prepared statement from CSU, Klotzbach said conditions in the Atlantic are
not favorable for hurricane formation this summer and aren't expected to
improve.

Hurricanes draw their energy from seawater that has been heated to at least 80
degrees Fahrenheit. Water that is even a few degrees cooler will not sustain a
tropical storm.

Upper level winds, known as wind shear, can also inhibit hurricane formation. If
a hurricane encounters wind shear, it will quickly begin losing intensity.

"The tropical Atlantic remains anomalously cool, and vertical shear throughout
the basin remains at above-average levels," Klotzbach said. "In addition, the
chances of a weak to moderate El Niño event during the peak of the hurricane
season remain elevated. Historical data indicate fewer storms form in these
conditions."

An El Niño occurs when waters in the south central and southeastern Pacific
Ocean are unusually warm. One of the effects of an El Niño is stronger than
usual wind shear over the Atlantic Ocean.

The likelihood that tropical storms will form in the Atlantic starts increasing
in August, after the waters have been absorbing heat for several months. The
peak of the hurricane season is September 10, when conditions usually are most
favorable for storm formation.

After September, hurricanes are more likely to form in the Caribbean Sea.

For more information please visit: http://www.nationalgeographic.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 834 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            March 19, 2005 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

HURRICANE CHARTS TO ADD WIND INFORMATION

BYLINE: By ROBERT P. KING Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 387 words


People hunkering down for the next hurricane will get a little more information
about what to expect.

The National Hurricane Center is tweaking one of its lesser known forecast maps
by adding information on the likelihood of severe winds. The new map will be
available online during the hurricane season that begins June 1.

The changes won't affect the hurricane map that people see most often: the one
that shows the storm's projected path as a skinny black line within a blob-like
"cone of death," where a hurricane strike is possible.

Federal forecasters have separately considered dropping the skinny line from
their main hurricane map, on the grounds that it offers false comfort to people
who should be preparing for a possible landfall.

They may announce that decision next week at the National Hurricane Conference
in New Orleans.

For now, the forecasters have settled on experimental changes to a lesser-known
map, which originally showed the chances of a storm's center passing within 75
miles of a given location.

The new version will answer a more useful question: How likely are the winds in
a certain area to reach hurricane-force speeds of 74 mph? Separate maps will
show the chances of getting tropical-storm winds (39 mph) and an in-between
speed of 58 mph.

The new map takes into account a storm's projected strength and size, not just
its path, said hurricane center specialist James Franklin.

It is aimed primarily at emergency managers but will be available to the public
on the center's Web site, www.nhc.noaa.gov.

Palm Beach County emergency manager Bill O'Brien welcomed the new map, although
he said he didn't get much use out of the old, 75-mile version. "The more stuff
they put up, the happier I am," he said.

Charlotte County emergency manager Wayne Sallade said the new map probably
wouldn't have made much difference last August for his community, which was
already within the so-called "cone of death" when Hurricane Charley unexpectedly
swerved ashore instead of following its projected path toward Tampa.

Still, the center says the new chart would have given Charlotte residents some
crucial information: A day before Charley hit land, their region and Tampa Bay
had an equal chance of getting hurricane winds.

bob_king@pbpost.com

Storm 2005

Get tips on preparing for hurricane season.

PalmBeachPost.com

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions.

GRAPHIC: MAP (2 C)
 BRENNAN KING/Staff Artist Better storm warnings Federal forecasters will
provide more information on expected wind speeds when a new hurricane chart
debuts this year. They also are considering changes to a different chart that
shows a hurricane's projected path. Examples from Hurricane Ivan, Sept. 13: 1.
Old chart: Showed the chance of a hurricane's center passing within 75 miles
during the next three days. Source: National Hurricane Center 2. New chart:
Shows the chance of experiencing hurricane-force winds during the next five
days. Separate charts will provide information on tropical storm-force winds,
plus intermediate winds of 58 mph.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2005 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 835 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                              May 28, 2006 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

STORM 2006 UPDATE

SECTION: GOOD LIFE; Pg. 2K

LENGTH: 709 words


HURRICANE BLOG

Robert P. King

Season of the swath

South Florida: Be prepared. That's the message from AccuWeather in the
Pennsylvania-based company's predictions for the 2006 hurricane season.

AccuWeather predicts a "high" risk for hurricane strikes in southeastern and
southwest Florida, especially late in the season. Other areas at high risk
include the Texas Gulf Coast and Nova Scotia. The Carolinas and the New
York-Massachusetts corridor fall into the even more dreaded "very high"
category.

The company also calls for six tropical storms or hurricanes to make landfall,
including three major hurricane hits on the U.S. coast.

Keep in mind that long-range hurricane forecasts are a tricky business, and lots
of folks are making them these days. The UK outfit TropicalStormRisk.com, which
had one of the best hurricane prediction records last year, just issued its
forecast for about 15 named storms this year (that's 50 percent more than
average).

Like any prominent company, AccuWeather has its share of critics, some of whom
don't want to let anyone forget its statement last July that the greatest risk
for hurricane landfalls would be the U.S. East Coast, while the probability of
more Gulf Coast hurricanes had been "lessened."

Hurricane season is just days away. Everyone needs to get ready, no matter where
you are.

--- To see Bob's hurricane blog online and post your comments, visit
Storm2006.com

Gadget Guru! Portable Power Pack

Never feel powerless again with this backpack that uses solar power to recharge
small electronics. Equipped with three solar panels and a battery pack to store
its sun-generated power, the Voltaic Backpack generates up to 4 watts of power
to recharge cellphones, cameras, PDAs, electronic games and iPods, but not
laptops. It could also come in handy on boats or camping trips. It comes with 11
adapters to fit most devices. It's $239 from www.voltaicsystems.com.

- Barbara Marshall

HURRICANE HISTORY Q&A

Question: Before 2004, had Florida ever been struck by four hurricanes in the
same year?

Answer: The storms of 2004 were unprecedented. Only twice since 1900 has Florida
been struck by three hurricanes the same year: Cleo, Dora and Isbell in 1964,
and hurricanes in Daytona Beach, Miami and an unnamed storm that paralleled the
South Florida coast in 1926.

- Eliot Kleinberg

Send questions to Hurricane History Q&A, The Palm Beach Post, 2915 S. Congress
Ave., Delray Beach, FL 33445. View the archives and ask questions online at
Storm2006.com

SUSAN SCIBETTA

Boynton Beach

'Chicken Little' keeps pantry full

Being a busy, organized mom, it was just natural to me to add hurricane
preparation to my "to-do" list when I arrived in Florida. We ordered shutters
immediately after Hurricane Andrew, and my family groaned and complained the few
times we put them up over the years. My family has continually poked fun at all
my preparations and laughingly call me "Chicken Little," claiming I was hoping
for a hurricane just so I could use my stockpiles.

My pantry is fully stocked year-round, and items have dates of purchase noted in
black marker on the lids. I also specifically purchase small jars of mayo and
salad dressing and salsa for hurricane one-time use. I do troll the stores for
ideas and offer my good finds to complete strangers in Publix, on occasion. At
home, I scribble in bold marker all over boxes "for hurricane use only" to keep
snackers out of my hurricane stash.

My kids gripe about all the "good-stuff" hurricane treats I buy that they don't
get to eat until after hurricane season is over, like cookies and crackers and
canned dips and Kraft-squeeze-cheese-in-a-can.

When a storm is upon us, the rule is to eat down the freezer contents, and I
start to fill the space with four full-gallon plastic jugs of water to freeze.

Meet the rest of the team and send us your tips (you could win a Storm Team
T-shirt!) by clicking on the 'Ask A Local Storm Team' link at Storm2006.com

BEST OF THE WEB

90 miles on U.S. 90

U.S. 90 spans the length of the enormous disaster that struck the Gulf Coast in
2005. Seeing it now, Katrina could have hit yesterday.

Take a multimedia trip through a storm-ravaged section of the Gulf Coast between
New Orleans and Biloxi as the area prepares for hurricane season:
Storm2006.com/katrina

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2 B&W)
 1. The Voltaic Backpack generates up to 4 watts of power. 2. TIM STEPIEN/Staff
Photographer Susan Scibetta likes to give hurricane-themed gifts such as
lanterns to friends and family members.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 836 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            August 5, 2006 Saturday
                            MARTIN-ST. LUCIE EDITION

HURRICANE CD: IT'S MUSIC FOR CHILDREN'S FEARS

BYLINE: By DON JORDAN Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH


Tom Dalton turns from the circle of anxious preschoolers seated on the floor and
clicks a button on the CD player - the show has begun.

The kids at Clark Forest Hill Montessori School call out the song before the
singing even begins. Dalton has visited before.

"I wonder what a hurricane sounds like," Dalton sings as the music starts,
echoing his voice coming from the CD player and the voices of the children
around him.

He strums his guitar while the youngsters hold a variety of simple instruments -
tambourines, maracas, drums - that they shake and pound when the song prompts
them to make the sound of waves, wind and coconuts flying by in a storm.

Before long, the small schoolroom is enveloped in a thunderous noise of singing
and laughter that would make most people reach for the storm shutters.

And while the 3- and 4-year-olds are all smiles, Dalton has not come to the
school just to entertain.

The music therapist and mental health counselor released Hurricane Songs for
Kids last month. The nine-track CD is meant to help children cope with the
emotional troubles of a hurricane. With songs such as My Little Flashlight,
Sometimes I Get So Scared and What a Hurricane Sounds Like, Dalton, 53, sings
about everything from preparing a hurricane kit to having a post-storm party
with neighbors.

The idea is that when children understand a hurricane and know what to expect,
they will be more relaxed and confident when a storm hits, he said.

"I wanted to give (kids) a tool," Dalton said Thursday. He hopes youngsters who
listen to the CD will take a proactive approach to dealing with a hurricane.

"It's important for kids to be part of that progress, not just waiting in the
background."

The CD was born from experiences in both his personal and professional life. As
a counselor, Dalton has worked with families traumatized by hurricanes. As
father of 7-year-old Deanna, he remembers the fear she had as hurricanes
battered the area in recent years.

Dalton hopes families will listen to the CD together.

"It's a needed thing for parents to talk to their kids about this," he said.
"(Children) don't have a lot of resources to know what to do."

Dalton is trying to change that this summer by spreading his music and message
through workshops at preschools and summer camps.

He is on vacation from his job at Indian Ridge School, a special-education
school in suburban West Palm Beach that serves students who have mental
illnesses.

Principal Sherri Kelty said Dalton recently gave her a copy of Hurricane Songs
for Kids, and she was very impressed.

"He is just extremely talented," Kelty said.

Bee Clark, director and lead teacher at Clark Forest Hill Montessori, said the
school often plays Dalton's CD, and students are receptive.

They should be. They provided the background vocals on the recording, credited
as the Clark Montessori Children's Choir. A pair of Lake Worth youths also
contribute raps on two songs.

"It's good for children because they are so freaked out by the hurricanes,"
Clark said, adding that she remembers being frightened of the sounds of a
hurricane as a young girl.

At the end of Thursday's performance, with the lights off, Dalton asks the
youngsters to lie down and close their eyes.

He turns on Hurricane Lullaby, a soft, guitar-picked tune, and the kids pretend
to sleep.

Dalton watches over them, clutching his guitar and singing along.

The children keep quiet until one makes an exaggerated snoring noise and the
room erupts in giggles.

"This opens up the communication," Dalton said later. "That way, when a
hurricane comes, the kids will say, 'Hey, I know about that.' "

don_jordan@pbpost.com

The songs

1. I Know About Hurricanes

2. What a Hurricane Sounds Like

3. My Little Flashlight

4. Hurricane Kit

5. I've Got Plans for the Hurricane

6. No More Hurricanes

7. Sometimes I Get So Scared

8. Hurricane Party

9. Hurricane Lullaby

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Info box at end of text.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2 B&W)
  RICHARD GRAULICH/Staff Photographer 1. The hurricane CD was born of Tom
Dalton's experiences, professional and personal. He recalled his own daughter
Deanna's fears during recent storm seasons and says he hopes families will
listen to the CD together 2. Tom Dalton, a music therapist at the
special-education Indian Ridge School in suburban West Palm Beach, holds
Hurricane Songs for Kids.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 837 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            August 5, 2006 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

MUSIC FOR KIDS' FEARS

BYLINE: By DON JORDAN Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH


Tom Dalton turns from the circle of anxious preschoolers seated on the floor and
clicks a button on the CD player - the show has begun.

The kids at Clark Forest Hill Montessori School call out the song before the
singing even begins. Dalton has visited before.

"I wonder what a hurricane sounds like," Dalton sings as the music starts,
echoing his voice coming from the CD player and the voices of the children
around him.

He strums his guitar while the youngsters hold a variety of simple instruments -
tambourines, maracas, drums - that they shake and pound when the song prompts
them to make the sound of waves, wind and coconuts flying by in a storm.

Before long, the small schoolroom is enveloped in a thunderous noise of singing
and laughter that would make most people reach for the storm shutters.

And while the 3- and 4-year-olds are all smiles, Dalton has not come to the
school just to entertain.

The music therapist and mental health counselor released Hurricane Songs for
Kids last month. The nine-track CD is meant to help children cope with the
emotional troubles of a hurricane. With songs such as My Little Flashlight,
Sometimes I Get So Scared and What a Hurricane Sounds Like, Dalton, 53, sings
about everything from preparing a hurricane kit to having a post-storm party
with neighbors.

The idea is that when children understand a hurricane and know what to expect,
they will be more relaxed and confident when a storm hits, he said.

"I wanted to give (kids) a tool," Dalton said Thursday. He hopes youngsters who
listen to the CD will take a proactive approach to dealing with a hurricane.

"It's important for kids to be part of that progress, not just waiting in the
background."

The CD was born from experiences in both his personal and professional life. As
a counselor, Dalton has worked with families traumatized by hurricanes. As
father of 7-year-old Deanna, he remembers the fear she had as hurricanes
battered the area in recent years.

Dalton hopes families will listen to the CD together.

"It's a needed thing for parents to talk to their kids about this," he said.
"(Children) don't have a lot of resources to know what to do."

Dalton is trying to change that this summer by spreading his music and message
through workshops at preschools and summer camps.

He is on vacation from his job at Indian Ridge School, a special-education
school in suburban West Palm Beach that serves students who have mental
illnesses.

Principal Sherri Kelty said Dalton recently gave her a copy of Hurricane Songs
for Kids, and she was very impressed.

"He is just extremely talented," Kelty said.

Bee Clark, director and lead teacher at Clark Forest Hill Montessori, said the
school often plays Dalton's CD, and students are receptive.

They should be. They provided the background vocals on the recording, credited
as the Clark Montessori Children's Choir. A pair of Lake Worth youths also
contribute raps on two songs.

"It's good for children because they are so freaked out by the hurricanes,"
Clark said, adding that she remembers being frightened of the sounds of a
hurricane as a young girl.

At the end of Thursday's performance, with the lights off, Dalton asks the
youngsters to lie down and close their eyes. He turns on Hurricane Lullaby, a
soft, guitar-picked tune, and the kids pretend to sleep.

Dalton watches over them, clutching his guitar and singing along. The children
keep quiet until one makes an exaggerated snoring noise and the room erupts in
giggles.

"This opens up the communication," Dalton said later. "That way, when a
hurricane comes, the kids will say, 'Hey, I know about that.' "

don_jordan@pbpost.com

The songs

1. I Know About Hurricanes

2. What a Hurricane Sounds Like

3. My Little Flashlight

4. Hurricane Kit

5. I've Got Plans for the Hurricane

6. No More

Hurricanes

7. Sometimes I Get So Scared

8. Hurricane Party

9. Hurricane Lullaby

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Did not run MSL. Info box at end of text.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (C & B&W)
 1. (C) RICHARD GRAULICH/Staff Photographer Tom Dalton, a music therapist at the
special-education Indian Ridge School in suburban West Palm Beach, holds
Hurricane Songs for Kids. 2. (B&W) (C) RICHARD GRAULICH/Staff Photographer The
hurricane CD was born of Tom Dalton's experiences, professional and personal. He
recalled his own daughter Deanna's fears during recent storm seasons and says he
hopes families will listen to the CD together. SubHeadStudents sang background
vocals

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 838 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             April 5, 2007 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

FUND LAG HINDERS STORM BATTLE

BYLINE: By ROBERT P. KING Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS


Americans keep flocking to the nation's hurricane-battered coasts despite the
lives and billions of dollars lost to storms in recent years.

Yet federal efforts to meet the threat are mired by stagnant budgets, the
nation's chief storm forecaster lamented Wednesday during the National Hurricane
Conference.

Among the symptoms: Spending on federal hurricane research is several hundred
million dollars short of what it should be, National Hurricane Center Director
Bill Proenza told reporters in this city still littered with 19-month-old
wreckage from Katrina. One program aimed at converting research into better
predictions has seen its budget go down, not up.

Proenza also repeated his warnings that an aging satellite that provides crucial
wind measurements could fail any day, cutting the accuracy of three-day
hurricane forecasts by an estimated 16 percent.

NASA administrators, whose priorities include sending astronauts to Mars,
haven't committed to replacing the satellite.

"The amount of money that's being invested in research on the national
hurricane-warning program - into the science and the application of that science
- isn't up to the level of the significance of the hurricane vulnerability of
this nation," Proenza said, calling for renewed spending on the problem.
Hurricanes, he said, are "the major natural disaster threat that this nation
faces."

His predecessor, Max Mayfield, said Proenza is sending the right message.

"The National Hurricane Center did an outstanding job with the resources we
had," said Mayfield, who retired in January and recently signed on as a
hurricane commentator for WPLG-Channel 10 in Miami. "We could have done better
if we had more resources."

Mayfield praised one bill, filed by U.S. Sens. Mel Martinez and Bill Nelson of
Florida, that aims to increase spending on hurricane research. The bill is in
committee.

Proenza's words came amid a series of warnings that last year's humdrum
hurricane season may have been just a pause in the hyperactive storm factory
that emerged in the Atlantic in 1995.

The hurricane center won't offer its first 2007 forecast until next month. But
Proenza noted that El Nino, the global climate pattern that played a major role
in smothering last year's Atlantic hurricanes, has faded. And the oceans remain
warm enough to spawn plenty of storms, just as they were in 2004 and 2005.

On the other hand, the meteorologists cautioned, it's too soon to say how many
of this year's hurricanes will hit land.

Even so, Proenza cited U.S. Census figures showing that the risk is rising:
Fifty-three percent of the population lives within 50 miles of the coast, and
the coastal population is rising by roughly 7 million a year.

Many of those newcomers have never experienced a hurricane. The influx also
means that meteorologists face demands for increasingly advanced warnings of
when residents must evacuate before a storm.

That means they need more accurate forecasts, which means they need better
research.

Proenza said he has no idea how high in the federal leadership his message has
spread. "We're in the process of continuing to advocate our needs through the
normal budget process," he said.

Proenza cited a few bright spots, including this year's debut of a new computer
model that scientists hope will produce more accurate predictions of storms'
strength, a major failing of forecasts now. But it will take time to assess the
model's performance, meteorologists said.

Also Wednesday, the head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency promised
that victims of the next disaster will witness "a new FEMA" -- leaner, nimbler,
more efficient and more open than the agency that drew so much criticism for its
failings after Katrina.

"We looked very carefully at what happened during Katrina -- a lot of problems,"
said Administrator R. David Paulison, a former Miami-Dade County fire chief who
replaced former FEMA leader Michael Brown two weeks after the disaster.

Among other steps, he said the agency has replaced outdated communications
equipment, stocked up on enough food and water to supply a million people for a
week, taken steps to stop fraud and filled leadership positions with emergency
professionals instead of political appointees. When deadly tornadoes struck
Florida this year, he said, FEMA was issuing aid checks within 24 hours.

Paulison acknowledged that his agency will have to prove his claims by
performing during the next crisis.

"I don't think anybody can get up there and talk about the good game without
showing you can perform," he said. "And that's what we have to do."

- bob_king@pbpost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (C)
 Bill Proenza (mug)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2007 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 839 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                Scottish Express

                           September 12, 2017 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

Ten things you never knew about... hurricanes

BYLINE: WILLIAM HARTSTON

SECTION: LETTERS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 206 words


Hurricanes Harvey and Irma have been battering Caribbean islands and Florida
over the last few days leaving devastation in their wake. Here are a few facts
about hurricanes.

1. There are five categories of hurricane, from category 1 (74-95mph) to
category 5 (over 155mph). 2. The National Hurricane Center began giving female
names to storms in 1953. Since 1978, male and female names have alternated.

3. The deadliest US hurricane was a storm that hit Galveston, Texas in 1900,
killing 8,000 people. 4. Tropical storms have winds from 39-73mph. Hurricanes
have winds of 74mph and above.

5. Hurricanes rotate anticlockwise in the northern hemisphere, clockwise in the
southern.

6. Hurricanes in the Pacific Ocean are known as typhoons; in the Indian Ocean
they are cyclones. 7. When a hurricane is particularly bad, its name is removed
from the list. Recently retired names include Katrina, Andrew, Mitch and Sandy.
8. There are six lists of hurricane names, used in rotation, each having names
with every initial letter of the alphabet except U, X, Y and Z. 9. The Great
Hurricane of 1780 killed an estimated 22,000 people in the Caribbean.

10. "Hurricane Irma" is an anagram of "I rear much rain". "Hurricane" is an
anagram of "raunchier".

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DXPscot


                       Copyright 2017 Express Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 840 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                  The Guardian

                      November 27, 2016 Sunday 9:30 PM GMT

Hurricanes become more costly;
As the 2016 Atlantic hurricane season draws to a close, the eye-watering cost is
becoming ever more apparent

BYLINE: Kate Ravilious

SECTION: WORLD NEWS

LENGTH: 295 words


In a couple of days the Atlantic hurricane season officially comes to a close.
2016 has been very active, with 15 named storms, seven of which became
hurricanes.

It started nearly five months early with Alex in mid-January, and ended
unusually late with Otto, just a few days ago. Three storms - Gaston, Matthew
and Nicole - developed into major hurricanes, and Matthew's long passage over
land made it particularly deadly, taking 1,655 lives. In total the storms have
unleashed over 60% more energy than an average hurricane season, and it's also
been the costliest since 2012, causing over $11.5bn (£9.2bn) of damage thus far.

Related:  The die is cast for a wet and stormy winter

Recent years have seen some eye-watering bills for hurricane damage. The storms
of 2012 (which included hurricane Sandy ) resulted in $79.2bn (£63.6bn) of
damage, while 2005 (which included hurricane Katrina ) cost $158.9bn (£127.7bn)
- the most expensive Atlantic hurricane season in history. Now research
published in Environmental Research Letters predicts that the cost associated
with Atlantic hurricanes will keep increasing, with the average losses becoming
three times greater by 2100.

Modelling hurricane damage in the US for the period 1963 through to 2100, the
scientists found that a third of the increased cost will be due to climate
change (bringing more frequent and intense hurricanes), while two thirds of the
increased cost will be due to socio-economic factors. Ownership of more
expensive gadgets, and confidence that insurance policies or governments will
pick up the tab, will lead to rapidly increasing hurricane damage bills.

Understanding where and why hurricane costs are increasing is important, to make
sure governments select the best strategies to reduce the risk.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 841 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                    September 14, 2017 Thursday 9:30 PM GMT

Scaling up our response to super-hurricanes;
As oceans warm and the probability of more intense tropical storms rises, is it
time to revamp the rating system?

BYLINE: Kate Ravilious

SECTION: NEWS; Version:1

LENGTH: 293 words


Hurricane Irma has unleashed her fury across the Caribbean and the south-eastern
US. She's been the second major hurricane to barrel into the US mainland in
recent weeks, and with Hurricane Jose following hot on her heels, 2017 is
shaping up to be one of the busiest hurricane seasons for at least a decade.

The strength and intensity of Irma - she sustained wind speeds of 185mph for a
record breaking 35 hours - has taken everyone by surprise, and some have raised
the question of whether a new category is needed, to describe "super-hurricanes"
like Irma.

Related:  Storm spies: radar at sea to gauge hurricanes

The Saffir-Simpson hurricane wind scale is based on hurricane wind-speed, with
anything over 157mph being given a category 5 - the highest rank on the scale.
When it was developed, more than four decades ago, super-hurricanes like Irma
were exceedingly rare. But since then oceans have warmed, and models suggest
that the probability of more intense hurricanes is likely to rise (for every
degree of warming in tropical seas hurricane wind-speeds increase by an average
of 10mph), though the overall number of tropical storms is expected to fall.

So from a measurements perspective adding a category 6 (winds over 175mph) seems
reasonable, though this extra category tells us little about the risk associated
with these winds; any hurricane of category 5 and over is going to flatten most
things. Instead, a revamp of the hurricane rating system might make more sense.
The National Center for Atmospheric Research's hurricane severity scale includes
such risk factors as whether the hurricane is likely to stall in one place (as
Harvey did to devastating effect).

Kate Ravilious                     @katerav

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 842 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        Florida Keys Keynoter (Marathon)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          November 27, 2013 Wednesday

Whew! Stormless hurricane season ending

BYLINE: Kevin Wadlow, Florida Keys Keynoter, (Marathon, Fla.)

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 471 words


Nov. 27--While around the dinner table on Thanksgiving, Florida Keys residents
may want to give thanks for one of the quietest hurricane seasons ever.

"None of the storms this year threatened the Keys," said Irene Toner, director
of Emergency Management for Monroe County. "So this really is a good
Thanksgiving."

The six-month hurricane season officially ends Saturday -- with nothing on the
Atlantic tropical-storm front developing by then.

Only two hurricanes -- Ingrid and Humberto, both Category 1 -- formed from among
the 13 named Atlantic storms in 2013.

"This year is expected to rank as the sixth-least active Atlantic hurricane
season since 1950," according to a National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration report on "collective strength and duration of tropical storms
and hurricanes."

The two hurricanes was the lowest number in nearly 20 years.

On average, there are six hurricanes in the season, with three reaching "major
hurricane" status of Category 3 or higher.

NOAA experts said Monday that "persistent, unfavorable atmospheric conditions
over the Gulf of Mexico, Caribbean Sea, and tropical Atlantic Ocean" caused the
weak season. "As a result, we did not see the large numbers of hurricanes that
typically accompany these climate patterns," said Gerry Bell, hurricane
forecaster at NOAA's Climate Prediction Center.

Dusty, dry air coming off the Sahara and persistent wind shear were among the
main factors limiting the storm formation.

"There wasn't a whole lot of energy for them to really get strong," state
meteorologist Amy Godsey told the News Service of Florida.

Early predictions called for an "extremely active season," with up to 20 named
storms and three to four major hurricanes.

"This is why, when the early predictions come out, we really don't care," Toner
said. "Even if it's a slow season, it only takes one. We have to be ready."

"We're glad they were wrong about this," Toner said. "It's another sign that
this is Mother Nature at work, and she's going to do whatever she wants to do."

The season's first tropical storm, Andrea, dumped a lot of rain on North
Florida. But it was an alert-free season for Florida after that.

Seven hurricanes raked Florida over the hectic 2004 and 2005 seasons. Now it has
been eight years since a hurricane landfall on state shores.

"If the ocean currents and steering currents and the atmosphere were just
shifted a little bit, those two [2013] hurricanes might have come to the United
States," Godsey told the News Service.

"Storms can look like nothing but then get stronger or change direction, so we
watch every one," Toner said. "But it would be nice if it stayed like this for
the next 30 years."

___ (c)2013 the Florida Keys Keynoter (Marathon, Fla.) Visit the Florida Keys
Keynoter (Marathon, Fla.) at www.keysnet.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131127-FK-Whew-Stormless-hurricane-season-ending-1127-20131127

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FK


                      Copyright 2013 Florida Keys Keynoter


                          FOCUS - 843 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Brunswick News (Georgia)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            November 29, 2013 Friday

Hurricane predictions fail to match results

BYLINE: Michael Hall, The Brunswick News, Ga.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 493 words


Nov. 29--Jay Wiggins doesn't want the least active hurricane season since 1982
to lull coastal Georgians into even more complacency about the dangers of
tropical storms.

Wiggins, a Glynn County police captain who is director of the county's Emergency
Management Agency, knows how the thinking goes: The Golden Isles is so far off
the gulf stream, those hurricanes are just going to ride it up into the
Carolinas and miss us.

Just because coastal Georgia has escaped significant tropical storm damage for
decades does not mean it can't happen.

"This year just piles another level of complacency on what people have already
developed," Wiggins said.

After predictions forecasters made this past spring for an active North Atlantic
hurricane season from June 1 through Nov. 30, only one storm, Tropical Storm
Andrea, made landfall, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's Climate Prediction Center.

Although 13 named storms formed in the Atlantic, only two, Humberto and Ingrid,
became hurricanes, and neither was a major storm of a Category 3 or higher.

While it has been decades since Glynn County has had a major storm, there were
times, such as the late 1880s, when coastal Georgia seemed like the epicenter
for one of the busiest hurricane years on record.

"What does history have a tendency to do?" Wiggins asked. "It repeats itself."

The hurricane season coming to an end Saturday was quiet for a simple reason:
Atmospheric conditions simply were not right for storm formations.

"A combination of conditions acted to offset several climate patterns that
historically have produced active hurricane seasons," said Gerry Bell, a
forecaster with the climate prediction center. "As a result, we did not see the
large numbers of hurricanes that typically accompany these climate patterns."

Bell said exceptionally dry, sinking air and strong vertical wind shear in much
of the main hurricane formation region, which spans the tropical Atlantic Ocean
and Caribbean Sea, prevented the growth of storms.

With the season ending, there is very little chance of storms popping up, said
Dennis Feltgen, public affairs officer for the National Hurricane Center.
"(Hurricane season) is the only time of year the conditions exist for tropical
storms," Feltgen said.

Warm water and atmospheric conditions that tend to exist during the summer and
early fall are necessary for hurricanes, Feltgen said. Without those conditions,
tropical storm activity is highly unlikely.

Ninety-seven percent of hurricanes develop during hurricane season, leaving only
a 3 percent chance that a storm might develop from December through May, he
said.

-- Reporter Michael Hall writes about public safety, environment and other local
topics. Contact him at mhall@thebrunswicknews.com, on Facebook or at 265-8320,
ext. 320.

___ (c)2013 The Brunswick News (Brunswick, Ga.) Visit The Brunswick News
(Brunswick, Ga.) at www.thebrunswicknews.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131129-GE-Hurricane-predictions-fail-to-match-results-1129-20131129

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GE


                       Copyright 2013 The Brunswick News


                          FOCUS - 844 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                            September 5, 2004 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Endless summer: Two months of the good life are coming to an end for kids. And
that's good news for many parents.

BYLINE: Janelle Hoddevik, Special to the Times Colonist

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1076  words


Summertime, and the livin' is easy. ... Sure, if you're a kid. Try being the
parent of these aimless, footloose and hedonistic creatures. Frankly, summer can
go on too long.

Not that the kids think so (or will admit to)! I didn't either when I was a kid.
We lived for the end of the school year in June. Oh Heaven, you could sleep in
'til any time you wanted and not hear that really loud alarm that always boomed
the same thing, "Get up, get up NOW, it's getting LATE!!!" I'm not sure where my
parents bought theirs -- mine came as a built-in with the house. It's funny how
this alarm always goes off in the middle of the night, when it's still too dark
to find your eyes. Nevertheless, it's a September-to-June kind of thing, and I'd
like to know why I'm the only one in the house who can hear it in July and
August.

My kids think it's really cool to have breakfast at lunchtime and lunch for
supper. It starts as a gradual novelty, pushing the boundaries further and
further until one day it actually hits me that we have become nocturnal
creatures. We've gone so far forward that we've actually transcended time and
culture: we eat multi-course Victorian-style repasts at 10 p.m. Multi-course
only, because everyone progressively grabs their favourite fridge offering.
Lucky for us (me that is), we have a spare, electronic dirty-dish cupboard that
has agreed to work nights. For a nominal wage of soap and liquid jet-dry and the
obligatory 21st century condition, getting Turned-On, we can stay one step ahead
of the Royal Cho: NOAA, Associated Press / Hurricane Frances is seen in this
satellite image from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, taken
at 5:15 a.m. PDT on Saturday. Frances crawled toward the Florida coast Saturday,
bringing a potential for 500 millimetres of rain and heavy flooding and
prompting tens of thousands of residents and tourists to evacuate during the
Labour Day weekend.; Jim Tiller, Associated Press / Michael Dodd, 13, uses a
sheet to capture the wind of hurricane Frances as the storm slowly bears down on
the Florida coast Saturday. Dodd, from Daytona Beach, was skateboarding on one
of Daytona Beach's many paved beach ramps which allow vehicular access to the
beach.

Battered on the west three weeks ago by hurricane Charley and being battered
this weekend on the east by hurricane Frances, Florida is a victim of a climate
currently favourable for hurricanes and of simple bad luck.

In 1995, after three relatively unstormy decades, a naturally occurring
oscillation in the Atlantic Ocean started a new active era for hurricanes.

"The number of major hurricanes went up by a factor of 21/2," said Stanley
Goldenberg, a meteorologist with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's hurricane research division in Miami. "You have a lot of
arrows, and you have a lot of targets."

Some hurricane targets like the Caribbean have been hit several times since
then. "They've been pounded," Goldenberg said. "They know we've had an
increase."

Goldenberg and other hurricane experts said Florida and other parts of the
United States were fortunate that more disastrous storms had not struck in
recent years. Of the 35 major hurricanes -- Category 3 or stronger, with
sustained winds of more than 180 kilometres miles per hour -- that have formed
in the Atlantic since August 1995, only four, or less than one in eight, have
hit the United States as major hurricanes. Historically, the odds have been one
in three. That means most of Florida has been unscathed since the 1960s, when
the last active era of hurricanes ended. In the 38 years from 1966 through 2003,
only one major hurricane, Andrew in 1992, struck southern Florida. In the
preceding active period, the 40 years from 1926 to 1965, southern Florida was
hit 14 times. "I view this year as very unlucky for Florida," said William Gray,
a professor of atmospheric science at Colorado State University who forecasts
the hurricane season, "but this is within the natural variation of storms."

Each year, between August and November, about 60 low-pressure systems form off
the western coast of Africa and waft westward. Warm waters and favourable winds
strengthen some of them into tropical storms; others dissipate and disappear.

Tropical storms acquire names when sustained winds exceed 62 km/h; hurricanes
are Atlantic tropical storms with winds of at least 119 km/h. An average
hurricane season has 9.6 named storms, of which 5.9 become hurricanes and 2.3 of
them turn into major hurricanes.

But this year, eight named storms formed during August alone -- a record, and
twice as many as Gray had forecast. On Friday, he increased his forecast for
this year's season to 16 named tropical storms (up from 13), eight hurricanes
(up from seven) and five major hurricanes (up from three).

Gray predicts that September will remain active, but that hurricane activity
will tail off in October, because of warm water in the central tropical Pacific,
possibly the beginnings of an El Nino climate pattern, which tends to suppress
storms in the Atlantic. Gray, Goldenberg and other scientists reported in 2001
that the severity of hurricane season correlates strongly with a decades-long
cycle of ocean temperatures in the Atlantic. When waters in the North Atlantic
are cooler, wind shear, which tear storms apart, is stronger, suppressing
hurricanes.

Global warming is not a significant factor in this year's storminess, experts
said. While some climate models predict that warming might eventually mean
somewhat stronger hurricanes, that effect is expected to be very small compared
to the natural hurricane cycle.

Where a hurricane goes depends on the surrounding meteorological conditions.

As they spin like tops across the Atlantic, some barrel straight west, into
Central America or Mexico. Others, after passing a semipermanent high-pressure
system that sits over Bermuda in the summer months, take a sharp right to the
north, missing land entirely. And some veer into the United States.

Although the number of hurricanes has been up for years, most have either headed
directly west, like hurricane Mitch in 1998, which killed 10,000 people in
Honduras and Nicaragua, or turned north, harmlessly.

Because the active hurricane pattern for the Atlantic will most likely continue
for decades, Goldenberg said disaster planners need to prepare for years like
2004.

"This is not just a spike," Goldenberg said. "This is a taste of what we still
have to come."

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Color Photo: Rob Struthers; Despite the sunshine, boys are often found
in front of the computer terminal during summer.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 845 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                           September 12, 2004 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricanes pack more power than nuclear bombs

BYLINE: Reese Halter, Calgary Herald

SECTION: OBSERVER; Reese Halter; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 939  words


Hurricanes are nature's fiercest storms, with about 10 occurring each year.

When Bikini Island was demolished with a thermonuclear bomb test, the explosion
lifted about five million tonnes of water into the air. A hurricane over Puerto
Rico drenched the island with 1.25 billion tonnes of water.

In 1970, a typhoon (which is the correct name when it occurs in the Pacific)
killed one million people in Bangladesh. In 1992, hurricane Andrew wreaked $30
billion US damage to Florida and left 250,000 people homeless.

A hurricane is a huge heat pump that gathers the sun's heat from a large area
over the ocean and pumps it into a concentrated region. It warms the air, making
it rise, sucking in air from the outskirts to fill the void and forcing the
entire mass to rotate, counterclockwise, faster and faster.

Finally, it collapses in on itself. Hurricanes form only over tropical oceans
where water temperatures are at least 25 C. They also only occur during the
warmest months from June to about November. They pick up not only heat, but also
moisture over the ocean.

The normal path of a hurricane is to the west across the Atlantic and then
around to the north, as it approaches the continental U.S. For a hurricane to be
a threat to Miami it has to start out far to the south below the islands of the
West Indies at about seven degrees latitude. They usually do not extend beyond a
30 degree latitude.

The energy release in just one hurricane is as much as in 500,000 atom bombs.

The eye of the hurricane moves very slowly, at about 15 kilometres per hour, yet
its outer wall can have storm-force winds in excess of 300 km/h. The average
house is built to withstand about 140 km/h winds. In the six hours before and
six hours after a hurricane hits land it can drop more than 35 centimetres of
rain.

In addition, the storm surge of waves that can come ashore can be as high as 7.5
metres (hurricane Camille 1969) or a 2.5 story building. In Galveston, Texas in
1900 one such storm surge hit the coast and killed 8,000 people.

So what conditions create such violence? First, swirling atmospheric conditions
that occur off the coast of east Africa create a moist low-pressure easterly
wave. Second, surface winds from the equator are displaced northward (in the
Northern Hemisphere) and converge with the easterly wave. When a very high
altitude anticyclone (spinning clockwise) sits directly above the centre of a
low-pressure tropical storm, then all of the necessary ingredients are in place
to create nature's greatest storm.

The upper-level high-pressure area in the centre pushes the air away, and the
low-pressure area at sea level sucks in air and sends it skyward into the centre
of the anticyclone, which then continues to build up pressure and spin the air
away. Warm tropical sea water is evaporated providing energy and the subsequent
condensation releases heat into the centre of the storm as it feeds upon itself.

The problem facing atmospheric scientists today is that they know how hurricanes
move but they cannot predict with any certainty, even with the most potent super
computers, the exact path.

In 1975 the Saffir-Simpson hurricane damage scale, from category one to five,
was invented based upon the pressure of the system, its wind speed and storm
surge. This year hurricane Charley was a Category 4 with wind speeds in excess
of 210 km/h and 4.5 metre swells. It decimated Florida's $9 billion citrus
industry and destroyed properties costing approximately $7.5 billion.

Fleets of geosynchronous satellites orbit earth and provide on going
surveillance over the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico.

They enable scientists to watch the birth and growth of hurricanes from the
beginning to the end, just as was the case this week as hurricane Ivan flattened
Grenada.

As the hurricanes approach continental U.S., air force planes fly into the eye
of the storm and collect important information. Finally as the hurricane nears
land, Doppler radar is used for more exact measurement of the size and swath of
the storm. Winds from hurricanes can extend as far as 275 kilometres in front of
the edge.

Once hurricanes move over land it usually marks the beginning of the end of the
eye of the storm because it cuts itself off from the fuel of warm ocean water.

If, however, the storm crosses the Florida panhandle and moves back onto the
warm water of the Gulf of Mexico it will refuel and continue to be a hurricane.
So far this year hurricane Frances has created not only massive flooding along
the eastern seaboard of the U.S. but spurred 92 tornadoes in its wake.

Hurricanes are powered by the sun's energy as absorbed in the surface layer of
the ocean and subsequently transferred to the atmosphere by evaporation and
condensation of water.

One concern about climate change is that the oceans will become warmer. There
could be more days of the year when tropical waters are warmer than 25 C, and
these waters would extend farther north and south.

The hurricane region would encompass more northern parts of the eastern seaboard
as well as the hurricane season would be extended. Warmer ocean temperatures
could be translated into higher wind velocities and larger storm surges.

Hurricanes are a necessary part of the earth's irrigation system. They bring
fresh drinking supplies to much of the American and Asian continents.

As our climate changes so to must precautions be taken for millions of people
who live in southeastern United States.

Reese Halter is a professor of Botany, Humboldt State University, environmental
speaker, and his latest book is Native Trees of B.C. with Nancy J. Turner, GFS
Press, rhalter@GlobalForestScience.org

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Associated Press; Hurricane Ivan is shown in satellite image
taken on Sept. 9.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 846 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                              India Insurance News

                       May 29, 2014 Thursday 6:30 AM EST

National Hurricane Survival Initiative: Hurricane Experts Release Top 10
Mistakes Made by Homeowners in Hurricane-Prone Areas, Warn About Complacency

LENGTH: 187  words


May 29 -- With hurricane season officially starting Sunday, the National
Hurricane Survival Initiative today released a list informed by hurricane
experts of the "Top 10 Mistakes" Americans make that increase their risk from
deadly storms and make recovery harder.



As part of Get Ready, America! The National Hurricane Survival Initiative,
hurricane experts also recommended simple but important steps that Americans
should take to protect their property and their loved ones before the next
hurricane strikes.

"We're entering the most concerning season of the year - hurricane season," said
Bryan Koon, Vice President of the National Emergency Management Association and
Director of the Florida Division of Emergency Management. "Unfortunately,
quieter-than-usual hurricane seasons like last year have left too many of us
complacent. We need to take the threat of hurricanes seriously and take steps to
protect our families and homes."

Americans in hurricane-vulnerable states often make small mistakes that can
significantly increase their risk and complicate recovery, experts say. Here are
the top 10 most common mistakes.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2014 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 847 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 25, 2010 Tuesday

Are you prepared for hurricane season?

BYLINE: Laura B. Martinez, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 656 words


May 25--With the start of the 2010 hurricane season one week away and a low
pressure system already brewing in the Atlantic, officials say it is time to get
ready for the upcoming hurricane season.

Officials are encouraging residents to begin preparing for the 2010 hurricane
season during National Hurricane Preparedness Week, which began on Sunday. They
want the public to not only think about preparations, but to begin them as well.

Hurricane season runs from June 1 through Nov. 30. The National Oceanic and
Atmosphere Administration (NOAA) is expected to release its 2010 Atlantic
hurricane outlook on Thursday.

Some experts have already predicted the 2010 hurricane season could be a busy
one, with University of Colorado forecasters calling for 15 named storms and 8
hurricanes, including 4 major hurricanes. There is also a 44-percent chance that
a hurricane will strike somewhere along the Gulf coast from Brownsville to
Florida, the forecasters say.

Cameron County Judge Carlos H. Cascos said residents should start putting
together checklists to determine what items they already have and what they
might need to purchase before a hurricane strikes the South Texas coast.

"Right now it is just getting people into the hurricane-preparedness mode. It
quickly comes up on us. It's the same drum beat every year," Cascos said. "We
don't expect people to run out today and start buying canned foods and plywood.
That's not the plan. The plan is to maybe have a list of what they need to do if
there is a threat."

Residents are urged to learn their local evacuation routes and be ready to
evacuate should officials advise it. They should also start buying emergency
supplies little by little in order to have an ample supply should a tropical
storm or hurricane strike the Rio Grande Valley. Homeowners should also start
measuring their windows in case they need to purchase plywood to board them up.

Although a low-pressure system was reported brewing about 475 miles southwest of
Bermuda on Monday and had a 30-percent chance of developing into the first
tropical storm of the Atlantic season, Cascos said the general population does
not really start paying attention to storms until they are on the southeast side
of the Yucatan Peninsula.

"That's the natural thing," he said. "By the time it hits the Yucatan Peninsula
it is probably seven to nine days away from us. Right now, you sit down and make
a list of what you need in case something happens."

Emergency Preparedness Supplies

First aid kit

Extra prescriptions, medications, written copies of prescriptions, other special
medical items

Important documents and records, photo IDs, proof of residence, information you
may need to process insurance claims

Cash

Battery-operated radio

Flashlight with extra batteries

Phone numbers of family and friends

Road maps, a travel plan, hotel reservations, list of places between your town
and your destination you can stop if highways are clogged

Three-day supply of non-perishable food, one gallon of bottled water per person
per day

Coolers for food and ice storage, paper plates, plastic utensils.

Manual can opener, knife, tools, booster cables, fire extinguisher, duct tape,
tarp, rope

Blankets, pillows, sleeping bags and extra clothing

Toilet paper, cleanup supplies, personal hygiene products

Eyeglasses, sunglasses, hearing aids

Special supplies needed for babies, older adults and pets

*This list is not all-inclusive; your checklist may be different

Source: Cameron County Homeland Security and Emergency Management

To see more of The Brownsville Herald, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.brownsvilleherald.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Brownsville Herald,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100525-BV-Are-you-prepared-for-hurricane-season-0525

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2010 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 848 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                              May 10, 2005 Tuesday

Coastal residents unready for storms;
They don't know enough about hurricanes or how to prepare, survey shows.

BYLINE: RACHEL DAVIS

SECTION: Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 394 words


Folks who live along the East Coast and the Gulf of Mexico don't know enough
about hurricanes and how to prepare for them, according to a survey released
Monday by the National Hurricane Survival Initiative.

But if you lived in Florida last year or have ever survived a hurricane, you are
more likely to know the storm surge is the most dangerous part of a land-falling
hurricane or that a garage door is more likely to be damaged than a roof, the
study found.

While people who have lived through hurricanes have a leg up on those who
haven't, no one has earned bragging rights. Out of 20 multiple choice and
true/false questions, the average person was able to answer only eight
correctly. Those who have lived through a hurricane averaged nine correct
answers.

"The poll revealed that so many people feel invulnerable to hurricanes and these
are people in coastal states," said Max Mayfield, director of the National
Hurricane Center.

The results are part of the National Hurricane Survival Initiative, which
educates residents in 12 hurricane-vulnerable states. The program, which
includes television and radio announcements, is sponsored by the National
Hurricane Center, Salvation Army and National Association of Emergency Managers.

The agency heads are concerned specifically about several findings in the poll.

For example, people who live within 10 miles of the coast were no more aware of
hurricane dangers than those who don't. Only 15 percent knew that a person is
more likely to drown in an inland county during a hurricane than one who lives
near the coast. And only 29 percent of those canvassed knew tornadoes can be
spawned hundreds of miles from the eye of the storm, rather than near the
hurricane's center.

The telephone survey of 1,100 adults, administered by Mason-Dixon Polling and
Research, has a margin of error of 3 percentage points.

While hurricane season doesn't officially begin until June 1, the agencies are
getting a jump on educating the public. They are trying to "encourage them to
learn the right answers," said Ron Sachs, spokesman for the National Hurricane
Survival Initiative. "Better to miss them in advance of the storm coming than
miss it when they're in the midst of one."

rachel.davis@jacksonville.com, (904) 359-4614

ONLINE

The report

@To see the entire study or for more information on the initiative, visit:
www.hurricanesafety.org

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
Hurricane Floyd nears Florida in 1999.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2005 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 849 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                          November 30, 2005 Wednesday

HURRICANES;
Take a breather

SECTION: Pg. B-6

LENGTH: 451 words


Hurricane season officially ends today -- or is supposed to, anyway.

But since when has this hurricane season been normal?

Let us recount some ways it has been abnormal, according to The Associated
Press:

-- The most named storms in recorded history, with Tropical Storm Epsilon
Tuesday becoming the 26th named storm of the season.

-- Hurricane Katrina set records in August as the most destructive hurricane
ever, battering the Gulf Coast states and driving up fuel costs nationwide.

-- Hurricane Wilma made history in October as the most intense Atlantic
hurricane ever, battering parts of Mexico and South Florida.

-- Hurricanes Katrina, Wilma and Rita all reached Category 5 status, topping the
old record of two storms reaching that intensity in one season.

-- Thirteen hurricanes formed over the Atlantic, with seven of them reaching
Category 3 (at least 111 mph or above). An average hurricane season brings six
hurricanes, with two reaching major strength.

The records are jaw droppers. But they only scrape the surface of this hurricane
season's impact.

Thousands of people died from the storms. Tens of thousands lost homes,
possessions and jobs. Hundreds of billions in storm damages resulted.

It will take years for many people and some cities -- such as New Orleans and
Biloxi, Miss. -- to reach a new sense of normality. And even then, life is
likely to be much different than before.

But everyone living in states thrashed by storms will face adjustments.
Insurance rates can only go up, along with the taxpayer costs of rebuilding
after the storms.

Perhaps the most concerning of all: Hurricane forecasters say we are in a cycle
that could produce similar seasons for the next decade or more.

Four big storms thrashed Florida last hurricane season.

"The real message from this record season isn't to fuss over the numbers or even
how well we did on a particular forecast," Gerry Bell, a meteorologist with the
national Climate Prediction Center, told Scripps Howard Newspapers.

"People need to know they can be affected by hurricanes even if they live well
inland, and they need to be prepared for not just one, but very possibly several
storms in a season as long as we stay in this more active pattern," he said.

Despite all the hurricane drama this season, more could still be in store.

Florida's cooler fall temperatures tend to ward off hurricanes, but forecasters
say there could still be a few more tropical storms or even hurricanes form
farther out in the Atlantic.

The latest hurricane to strike the United States in a season came on Nov. 30,
1925, near Tampa, the National Hurricane Center reports.

Let's hope that record stays the same.

Nearly all others broken in just one hurricane season is enough.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2005 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 850 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                             June 3, 2006 Saturday

County was pummeled by hurricanes in 1800s;
An official says 'we're overdue'

BYLINE: KEVIN TURNER

SECTION: Pg. P-10

LENGTH: 820 words


Residents here who don't believe the devastation unleashed on New Orleans last
year could come to Nassau County may not have heard of the hurricane of 1898.

That storm organized near Barbados on Sept. 25, 1898, and headed straight for
Northeast Florida, never wavering in its path.

On Oct. 2, the Category 4 monster slammed into Cumberland Island, lashing
Fernandina with 115 mph wind and floods that killed four people and destroyed
much of the town, according to newspaper accounts.

A thriving pier that extended today's Centre Street over the Amelia River was
home to a number of shops. It was ripped to its moorings, according to reports.
Floodwater poured in from the river as far east as Third Street. Virtually every
roof in the town was damaged or destroyed. Even the roof of the grand Egmont
Hotel, located at Beech and Seventh streets during Fernandina's "Golden Era,"
was torn off by the wind.

The popular Strathmore Hotel on Amelia Beach fared worse. It was splintered and
swept out to sea.

The 1898 storm wasn't the first hurricane to make its mark on Nassau County, but
it is the worst since the United States began to keep hurricane records in 1851,
according to the National Hurricane Center/Tropical Prediction Center archives
of hurricane seasons.

In the final four decades of the 1800s, several hurricanes and tropical storms
battered Nassau County. The next hurricane to directly hit Amelia Island was in
1944.

"Statistically speaking, we're overdue for a storm," Nassau County Emergency
Management Coordinator Ben Spillers said. "Researchers say we're in as much
danger as anyone else. We haven't been hit hard in anyone's lifetime. But in the
early 1800s or late 1700s, we could have been hit more than South Florida. We
don't know."

Two Category 1 hurricanes hit Nassau County in 1871. The first formed over the
Atlantic Ocean in mid-August, hit the southeast coast of Florida, passed over
Nassau County and the Southeast Georgia coast before turning around in the
Atlantic and returning to hit Georgia again. The second formed over the Gulf of
Mexico and approached Nassau County from the west in September and passed just
south of Amelia Island.

Another Category 1 storm lashed Nassau County in September 1874. It formed south
of the Yucatan peninsula, approached from the west and passed directly over
Harts Road, a settlement known today as Yulee. In October 1888, a Category 2
storm formed off the Mexican Gulf Coast and passed over Jacksonville on its way
to the Atlantic.

The only hurricane on record since 1851 to hit Amelia Island directly came in
1944. A westward-heading storm hit the south end of Amelia Island in October of
that year.

In 1945, a Category 1 hurricane packing 70 mph wind formed south of Cuba and
headed north. Two days later, the fast-moving hurricane passed near the southern
tip of Amelia Island.

The 2006 hurricane season marks the 100th anniversary of a 1906 storm that could
have been called "the loop." The Category 3 hurricane formed off the coast of
Colombia in early October, hit Central America, exited near the Yucatan
peninsula, hit the southern tip of Florida and appeared to head toward the open
water of the Atlantic. But for some reason, the unnamed hurricane turned around
and came back, hurricane archives show.

In unusual behavior for Atlantic hurricanes, it returned in mid-October as a
Category 1 hurricane and headed straight for Amelia Island. Ten miles offshore,
it veered south and slammed into St. Johns County. It completed its circular
course with a second strike on the Yucatan Peninsula at the end of the month.

A series of powerful storms formed during the 2004 and 2005 hurricane seasons.
In 2004, four hit Florida. While none hit Nassau County directly, fallout from
hurricanes Frances and Jeanne caused widespread damage in Nassau County,
Spillers said.

"We had areas in the western half of the county without power for two weeks,
even with the little bitty effects from the 2004 storms. You don't have to take
a direct hit to get a lot of destruction and people without power for a long
time," he said.

Hurricane Dora in 1964 proved that.

Hurricane Dora made landfall well south of Nassau County, punishing St. Johns
County in September 1964 with 110 mph wind. Nonetheless, Dora brought strong
wind and flood surge to Nassau County. Its effects still linger in locals'
memories unlike the devastating Nassau County hurricane of 1898.

More powerful hurricanes are likely, and Nassau County residents need to
remember and be prepared, officials said.

"In talking with our state and local meteorologists, we know we're in a
multidecade hurricane cycle," Spillers said. "They're expecting it to continue
for the next 10 or so years. We have no terrain features that protect us, and
we're a coastal community. We haven't been hit lately, but New Orleans and Port
Charlotte used to say the same thing."

kevin.turner@jacksonville.com,

(904) 261-7606, ext. 6354.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration Several hurricanes have hit or
come close to hitting Nassau County since record-keeping began in 1851.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 851 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                            August 30, 2005, Tuesday

How high pressure cap brought things to boil

BYLINE: Paul Simons, Times Weatherman

SECTION: Home news; 9

LENGTH: 716 words


KATRINA began five days ago as a fairly unremarkable tropical storm skirting the
Bahamas. The warm Atlantic seas fuelled its energy needs and by the time Katrina
hit the Florida coastline two days later it had grown into a Category 1
hurricane with sustained winds of 80 mph (129 km/h).

As the hurricane crossed Florida it was starved of its warm water fuel and
weakened, although 245mm (9.6in) of rain fell in just 24 hours -more than double
the normal rainfall for August -setting off severe flooding and killing seven
people. Once it emerged on the other side of Florida, Katrina could feed
voraciously again, on the deep, warm waters of the Gulf of Mexico.

Forecasters had expected this resurrection and predicted Katrina would turn into
a slightly stronger hurricane before swinging north into Alabama and Florida.

But another, somewhat unexpected, ingredient turned Katrina into a monster. More
than ten miles high, above the tops of the towering storm clouds, a cap of high
pressure gently massaged the storm and allowed it to erupt into a Category 5
hurricane, the most powerful category of storm. The high pressure also guided
the hurricane much further westwards, out towards Louisiana, giving it more time
to re-energise itself over the warm sea.

It seems bizarre that high pressure is so important to a hurricane when the core
of the storm has some of the lowest atmospheric pressure on earth. The reason is
that hurricanes are incredibly delicate and the high pressure aloft helps to
keep them alive.

True, a hurricane's winds can reach more than 200mph, able to suck up around 2
billion tonnes of moisture each day, and with the energy equivalent to 10,000
atom bombs. But the towering cumulonimbus clouds in a hurricane are as weak as
piles of bricks stacked up into a huge skyscraper -the higher they rise, the
easier they topple over. So, a fairly innocuous high-level wind blowing into the
top of the storm, especially head-on, can send the clouds crashing down and kill
off the whole storm. But a gentle ridge of high pressure overhead blows a far
gentler wind, usually in the same direction as the storm, and allows the storm
clouds to soar high without falling over and also helps to steer the storm
westwards. The high pressure wind also behaves like an exhaust pipe, blowing
away hot air shooting up from the hurricane's centre, and this helps to drive
the winds below into an even-greater frenzy.

This explains why Hurricane Katrina is an extraordinarily powerful hurricane.

Since 1851, only 25 Atlantic hurricanes are known to have reached Category 5
(nine made landfall at this intensity, which Katrina almost achieved). Katrina
is already the eleventh tropical storm in a season that is breaking records for
the numbers of hurricanes and with another three months of the season left,
forecasters are expecting many more tropical storms.

But whether this is caused by global warming is still not clear. A study last
month published in the journal Nature revealed that large tropical storms in
both the Atlantic and the Pacific have increased in duration and intensity by
about 50 per cent over the past 30 years.

These have been linked to rises in the temperatures of the ocean surfaces and
warmer air temperatures. However, the numbers of hurricanes also varies over
decades as natural salt and temperature changes in the Atlantic's deep currents
shift back and forth every 40 to 60 years. What is clear, though, is that
hurricanes are causing more damage.

FEEDING THE FURY

1. The hurricane now over the Gulf starts to gain strength.

2. Warm water fuels the storm.

3. Calm upper winds help to strengthen storm.

HOW HURRICANES CAN BE KILLED OFF

Rising warm air forms hurricane.

Strong high altitude winds can rip storm apart.

MEASURING A HURRICANE

CATEGORY 1 Winds 74-95mph

CATEGORY 2 Winds 96-110mph

CATEGORY 3 Winds 111-130mph

CATEGORY 4 Winds 131-155mph

CATEGORY 5 Winds Over 150mph Catastrophic damage

Source: US National Hurricane Centre.

PATH OF HURRICANE

Monday 29: Hurricane grows to Category 5 strength, but later downgraded to
Category 2.

Thursday 25: nine people killed in south Florida. Hurricane is Category 1.

Hurricane force winds as far as 100 miles from eye.


LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 2005 Times Newspapers Limited


                          FOCUS - 852 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                           August 31, 2005, Wednesday

Costs mount -and outlook is stormy

BYLINE: Christine Seib

SECTION: Overseas news; 6

LENGTH: 871 words


INSURERS were yesterday bracing themselves for the most expensive storm season
in history as Hurricane Katrina looked set to beat previous loss records by
billions of dollars.

Estimates of the damage ranged from $ 12 billion to $ 26 billion, raising the
prospect that Katrina would surpass 1992's Hurricane Andrew which, at $ 21
billion, had previously been the mostly costly hurricane of all time.

Insurers and reinsurers at Lloyd's of London conceded that they would be hit by
"significant claims" and promised to give further details by September 12.

Fitch Ratings, the financial ratings agency, said that it expected Hurricane
Katrina to be the biggest single insured loss since the terrorist attacks of
September 11, which cost insurers $ 20 billion. Last year's entire hurricane
season, the worst in 12 years, cost insurers $ 22.45 billion.

America's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) warned insurers
to be prepared to shoulder even greater losses by the end of the this year's
season, which typically runs from August to November. The NOAA believes that
2005 will be twice as busy as most years, with as many as 21 tropical storms.

Munich Re, the world's largest reinsurer, said that the season was already
showing signs of being a record-breaker. "In a normal year, we'd have 10
hurricanes but by the end August we have already had 11," a spokesman said. "Up
to now this season has been very active."

Steve Drews, a meterologist and associate vice-president of Aon Impact
Forecasting, an arm of the world's second-largest insurance broker, said that
the worst was still to come, given that hurricane activity usually peaked around
September 10.

"Insurers are definitely bracing themselves against what could be an unusually
bad loss year," Mr Drews said. "Just consider Katrina, which is one of the
strongest storms we've seen in recent history and possibly in the history of
forecasting."

A Lloyd's underwriter said yesterday that a number of insurers and reinsurers in
the market would be hit hard because they had ignored meteorological predictions
that it would be a catastrophic hurricane season. "I can't honestly say that
this industry has really tailored the amount of business it has taken on on the
basis of forecasts," he said. "I think that could be a bad thing for the
market."

Many of the losses from Hurricane Katrina are expected to pass to reinsurers.

According to underwriters, total losses of between $ 4 billion and $ 7 billion
are typically covered by the insurance industry, while the bulk of losses of
between $ 10 billion and $ 20 billion are passed on to reinsurers. Yesterday
Munich Re estimated that Katrina would cost the company as much as Euro 400
million, compared to the Euro 560 million it paid out on the entire 2004
hurricane season.

Swiss Re, the world's second largest reinsurer, said that it was likely to issue
a loss estimate later this year, while Gen Re, the reinsurer owned by the
investment genius Warren Buffett, does not give loss estimates. In the London
market, reinsurers such as Goshawk Insurance and Advent Capital Holdings are
expected to take the brunt of the costs.

HOW IT HAPPENED

MONDAY

6.10am (local time) Hurricane Katrina comes ashore as a Category 4 storm at the
Louisiana bayou town of Buras.

7.40am Most of the windows on the north side of the New Orleans Hyatt are blown
out.

2pm Many eastern districts of New Orleans reported to have been flooded under
six feet of water. Local television stations show footage of looting.

10pm Search and rescue operation boats launched.

11pm Mayor Ray Nagin tells WWL-TV: "Our city is in a state of devastation. It's
almost like a nightmare that I hope we wake up from".

TUESDAY

1:30am A levee on the 17th Street Canal, which connects into Lake Pontchartrain,
has a breach as wide as two city blocks.

10.27am Governor Kathleen Blanco says that her office expects the loss of life
to be high.

10.30am New Orleans is under martial law.

10.45am The Coast Guard closes all ports and waterways into New Orleans.

11.04am New Orleans police say that looting is out of control.

11.50am President Bush cuts short his holiday by two days to monitor the rescue
operation

FOOTING THE $ 26bn BILL

* World's biggest hurricanes by insurance loss 1974-2005

2005: Hurricane Katrina up to $ 26bn (est)

1992: Hurricane Andrew $ 21.5bn*

2004: Hurricane Ivan $ 11bn

2004: Hurricane Charley $ 8bn

1989: Hurricane Hugo $ 6.3bn

2004: Hurricane Frances $ 5bn

1998: Hurricane Georges $ 4bn

2004: Hurricane Jeanne $ 4bn

1999: Hurricane Floyd $ 2.6bn

1992: Hurricane Iniki $ 2.1bn

*US dollars indexed to 2004 * Global reinsurers likely to be hit by claims.
Munich Re, Swiss Re, Gen Re.

UK reinsurers likely to be hit by claims Maximum Minimum Goshawk Insurance,
Advent Capital Holdings * How Atlantic hurricane outlooks compare

Predicted number for 2005

Tropical storms. 21. 18

Hurricanes. 11. 9

Major hurricanes. 7. 5

Predicted number for 2004

Tropical storms. 15. 12

Hurricanes. 8. 6

Major hurricanes. 4. 2

Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.


LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 2005 Times Newspapers Limited


                          FOCUS - 853 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                           September 16, 2005, Friday

Global warming linked to increase of hurricanes

BYLINE: Mark Henderson, Science Correspondent

SECTION: Overseas news; 44

LENGTH: 647 words


HURRICANES of the intensity of Katrina have become almost twice as common over
the past 35 years, according to research suggesting that global warming could be
worsening severe storms.

The overall frequency of tropical storms worldwide has remained broadly static
since 1970, but the number of extreme Category 4 and 5 events has risen sharply,
satellite measurements have shown.

Since 1990 an average of 18 Category 4 and 5 storms, of similar strength to
Hurricane Katrina, have occurred every year, compared with an average of 10 in
the 1970s, US scientists have found.

Ocean surface temperatures -one of the key drivers of hurricane intensity have
increased by an average of 0.5C (0.9F) over the same period, indicating a
potential connection to global warming.

Researchers said that it was too early to be certain that climate change is
fuelling stronger hurricanes, but such a link would be consistent with the best
predictions of the likely effects of warmer seas.

Tropical storms, which always form over water, are known as hurricanes when they
occur over the Atlantic, and as typhoons or cyclones in the Pacific and Indian
Oceans. The storms are heat engines that build intensity by sucking up more and
more water vapour, generating winds of more than 100mph (161km/h).

Category 4 hurricanes sustain winds of between 131mph and 155mph, and the
biggest Category 5 storms blow at 156mph or more. Hurricane Katrina reached
Category 5 at its peak over the Gulf of Mexico and stood at Category 4 when it
devastated New Orleans and Mississippi.

In the latest study, published today in the journal Science, a team led by Peter
Webster, of the Georgia Institute of Technology, analysed all the satellite
records of hurricanes and typhoons since 1970.

"What we found was rather astonishing," he said. "In the 1970s, there was an
average of about 10 Category 4 and 5 hurricanes per year. Since 1990, the number
of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes has almost doubled, averaging 18 per year."

Judith Curry, his colleague, said: "Category 4 and 5 storms are also making up a
larger share of the total number of hurricanes. Category 4 and 5 hurricanes made
up about 20 per cent of all hurricanes in the 1970s, but over the past decade
they have accounted for about 35 per cent of these storms."

The findings, Dr Webster said, could be a result of global warming, though he
said much more research was needed.

"Our work is consistent with the concept that there is a relationship between
increasing sea surface temperature and hurricane intensity," he said. "However,
it's not a simple relationship." Several recent studies indicate that intense
storms can be expected to become more common with climate change. In August,
research by Kerry Emmanuel, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
published in Nature, found that the destructive energy of hurricanes had
increased in line with rising ocean temperatures. "We are clearly seeing the
same signal in the data," Dr Emmanuel said yesterday.

Another Science paper, by Kevin Trenberth, of the US National Centre for
Atmospheric Research, found in July that there is 2 per cent more water vapour
above the oceans today than there was in 1988. This suggests that more water
will be drawn into swirling tropical storms, generating higher wind speeds and
greater rainfall.

DEADLIEST DISASTERS

1900 Galveston hurricane, Texas, 8,000 dead

1928 Great Okeechobee hurricane, Florida, 2,500 die

1889 Johnstown flood, Pennsylvania, 2,200 dead

1893 Louisiana hurricane, 2,000 dead

1893 South Carolina and Georgia hurricane, 2,000 die

1938 Great New England hurricane, 720 dead

2005 Hurricane Katrina, at least 710 dead

1906 San Francisco earthquake, 700 dead

1881 Georgia-South Carolina hurricane, 700 dead

1925 tornado in Missouri, Illinois and Indiana, 695 die


LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 2005 Times Newspapers Limited


                          FOCUS - 854 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 28, 2013 Wednesday

Washington: Alarmists Are in Denial Proposing Hurricane Name Changes

LENGTH: 293  words

DATELINE: Washington


The Heartland Institute has issued the following news release:

The 350 Action group garnered substantial media attention yesterday by releasing
a video proposing naming hurricanes after legislators who are skeptical of the
asserted link between hurricanes and global warming. The video is perfectly
timed, considering we are halfway through the 2013 hurricane season and we have
yet to see an Atlantic hurricane.

The fact is, global hurricane and tropical storm activity has been in decline
for the past 40 years as our planet continues its modest warming in recovery
from the Little Ice Age. We are currently experiencing our longest period in
recorded history without a major hurricane strike in the United States. The
Obama administration has experienced the fewest hurricanes of any one or two
term presidency in history. And, as mentioned above, we are halfway through the
2013 hurricane season and not a single hurricane has formed in the Atlantic
basin.

The 350 Action video claimed global warming is creating more frequent
hurricanes. Amazingly (despite their leftist, alarmist bias), the Huffington
Post, Christian Science Monitor, Salon and others gave fawning coverage to the
ridiculous 350 Action claims without pointing out the long-term decline in
hurricanes, the lack of any Atlantic hurricanes this year, and the current
record lack of major hurricane strikes.
So, the Huffington Post asks, "What If Hurricanes Were Named For Climate Change
Deniers?" The answer is hurricanes would start being named "Al Gore," "Michael
Mann," and "Barbara Boxer." The only "denial" going on is the Huffington Post
and their alarmist allies making the ludicrous argument that global warming
causes hurricanes.

For more information please visit: http://heartland.org/

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 855 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                    September 6, 2017 Wednesday 10:44 AM GMT

Tropical storm Jose: Another Atlantic Ocean hurricane threatens chaos on trail
of Irma

BYLINE: Francesca Gillett

SECTION: WORLD; Version:1

LENGTH: 601 words


A new tropical storm is forming behind Hurricane Irma and is expected to become
a hurricane on Thursday, forecasters have warned.

Tropical storm Jose is the next potentially dangerous disaster of this year's
Atlantic hurricane season following in the wake of catastrophic hurricanes
Harvey and Irma.

Top ranking category five Hurricane Irma is the strongest Atlantic hurricane
ever recorded and made landfall in Barbuda on Wednesday morning UK time after
barreling across the ocean with wind speed highs of 185 mph.

Irma is now expected to rip through the northern Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico,
Dominican Republic, Haiti and Cuba before possibly heading to Florida over the
weekend.

The sea is expected to rise up to a "life threatening" 20ft around some of the
remote islands, bringing with it "large and destructive waves" and rainfall of
up to 12 inches.

But while all eyes are on Irma, on its trail is tropical storm Jose, the tenth
named storm of the 2017 season which "continues to gradually strengthen".

The National Hurricane Centre said it is too soon to know its path, but Jose
could potentially hit the Leeward Islands which are already set to be battered
by Irma.

Its winds are already up to 50mph and it is expected to be upgraded to a
hurricane on Wednesday night Atlantic Standard Time or in the early hours of
Thursday morning UK time.

Policemen talk to customers at a Costco shop in North Miami as mineral water is
sold out ahead of Irma. (AFP/

Getty

Images)

Also forming is the as yet unnamed "tropical depression 13" which could become a
hurricane in a couple of days, the National Hurricane Centre said.

The tropical depression - which happens when a group of thunderstorms come
together - is heading east in the south west Gulf of Mexico.

2017's Atlantic hurricane season, which runs from April to November, was
predicted by many experts to be an above-average season in terms of activity.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted this year's season
would see between 14 and 19 named storms including five to nine hurricanes and
two to four major hurricanes.

Between June andNovember, the UK Met Office predicted 13 named storms and eight
hurricanes.

So far this season has seen 10 named storms, four hurricanes and two major
hurricanes. It suggests that if the predictions ring true, more storms could be
on their way.

Hurricane Irma: People load up their cars with sandbags in St Petersburg as the
storm approaches (AP)

Ahead of Irma reaching land, British holidaymakers in the Caribbean and Florida
were warned by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office to follow the advice of local
authorities and any evacuation orders, while on Tuesday British Airways laid on
a special flight to bring 326 stranded Brits back from Antigua.

Authorities on the Leeward Islands cut power and urged residents to shelter
indoors while officials warned people to seek protection from Irma's "onslaught"
in a statement that closed with: "May God protect us all."

Read more

Londoner stuck in Caribbean as one of the biggest storms ever hits

US President Donald Trump declared emergencies in Florida, Puerto Rico and the
US Virgin Islands, and authorities in the Bahamas said they would evacuate the
residents of six islands at the southern end of the island chain.

Irma follows Hurricane Harvey, which caused devastation and mass flooding in
Texas and parts of Louisiana after bringing heavy rainfall. Dozens of people
were killed and more than one million people were displaced.

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office's guidance for Britons is to follow the
advice of the local authorities and any evacuation orders.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2017 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 856 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                       Sunday Star-News (Wilmington, NC)

                           December 12, 1999, Sunday

DON'T WEAKEN IT; Let's strengthen building code

BYLINE: HARMON BYRD

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. 7E

LENGTH: 682 words


As a practicing structural engineer, I feel that it is time to call on concerned
North Carolinians who depend on the security of their homes and businesses to
take action and protect themselves from the damaging tropical storms and
hurricanes that frequent their neighborhoods.

When Hurricane Floyd slammed into North Carolina, it scoured away fragile
beaches with hurricane forces that caused extensive flooding and widespread
property damage.

Soon after, Hurricane Irene compounded Floyd's damage.  These storm systems
coupled with Hurricane Bonnie in 1998, Hurricane Fran in 1996 and Hurricane Hugo
in 1989, have left North Carolina with billions of dollars in property damages
and a forceful reminder of the destructive power of a hurricane even in normally
unaffected areas of the East Coast.

As a result, the North Carolina Code Council is in the process of reviewing the
current North Carolina Building Code, and will receive input from public and
state officials at the State Building Code Council meeting on Tuesday in
Charlotte.

Part of their effort is centered on new technology that makes buildings safer
and more secure during hurricanes.

Florida, Hawaii, Texas and New York have responded to this need by enacting
strong hurricane building measures.  These states are currently in the process
of reviewing and strengthening their state building codes. North Carolina must
be added to this list.

According to the Institute of Business & Home Safety - an initiative of the
insurance industry to reduce deaths, injuries, property damage, economic losses
and human suffering caused by natural disasters - up to 90 percent of the damage
and injuries that occur during hurricanes result from windows that are broken by
windborne debris such as tree limbs, garbage cans, etc.

When hurricane winds are able to penetrate a home,pressure can push out the roof
and walls, resulting in the structure's complete destruction.

The installation of devices such as acceptable storm-shutter systems or
impact-resistant laminated glass should be required by law in order to protect
residents from these dangers.

North Carolina's past hurricanes have proved that no one can predict exactly
where or when major hurricanes will strike; therefore impact-resistance building
codes must be in place to encourage residents and building owners in
hurricane-prone areas to address the threats that hurricanes pose to them.

In areas where impact-resistant building codes are not currently mandatory, such
as North Carolina, many buildings are being designed on an assumption that their
exterior glass surfaces will remain intact during any storm.

These assumptions have resulted in millions of dollars in damage, extensive loss
of business, and hundreds of deaths over the years.

With more than $ 5 billion in damage caused by Hurricane Fran in 1996 and an
estimated $ 6 billion by Hurricane Floyd in 1999, plus predictions by Dr.
William Gray for increased intensity and numbers of hurricanes for the 2000
season, North Carolina citizens deserve and will be demanding the protection of
strong hurricane building measures.

Weak building codes result in weak buildings, and weak buildings result in
billions of dollars in property losses, lost dreams and lives.

Citizens of coastal North Carolina should act now by contacting the North
Carolina Building Code Council members meeting in Charlotte Dec. 14 to consider
revisions to the Building Code - actually, recommendations at the present time
weaken the code, when North Carolina should be moving in the direction of
adopting the International Building Code.

Gov. Jim Hunt has called a special session of the North Carolina General
Assembly to appropriate millions of dollars from current budget allocations for
damage caused by Hurricane Floyd.

Legislators should be sensitive and willing to advocate strong building codes
for the protections of our citizens.


Harmon Byrd is a former member of the N.C. Building Code Council. This column
was distributed by the Laminated Glass Information Center.


LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1999 Wilmington Star-News, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 857 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   November 30, 2000, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

USA was safe with eyes on the storms No hurricane hit despite an active season

BYLINE: Chris Cappella

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 10D

LENGTH: 523 words


This year's hurricane season officially ends today. It will be
remembered for its late start and its many storms, but for little
else.

There were 14 named storms in the Atlantic basin, which includes
the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea. Eight of them became hurricanes,
and three reached major hurricane status with steady winds stronger
than 110 mph.


But no hurricanes hit the USA, a relief to federal emergency managers,
who weathered billion-dollar hurricane disasters in four of the
past six years.

While that might seem unusual, it's not unheard of, says Max Mayfield,
director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami. "It was a
season in contrast: lots of activity, but no major impact to the
USA."

The last season without a hurricane landfall in the USA was 1994.

On average, the U.S. coast from Texas to Maine is hit by a hurricane
with winds of at least 74 mph about every other year.

Hurricane Gordon came closest during this year's six-month season,
which began June 1, but it weakened to a tropical storm just before
coming ashore near Cedar Key, Fla., in mid-September. It caused
$ 11 million in property damage from Sarasota to Apalachicola on
Florida's Gulf Coast, but it didn't kill anyone in the USA.

Tropical Storms Helene and Beryl brought rain to the Florida Panhandle
and South Texas, respectively, but little wind or coastal flooding.

The nation's biggest threat came from a minimal hurricane named
Debby in August.

At one point "Little Debby," as the storm was dubbed, was forecast
to become a major hurricane on its way to South Florida, forcing
visitors to flee the Florida Keys. Instead, the storm died over
Cuba, and the evacuees were left to salvage scrubbed vacations.

Mayfield points to a large trough of low pressure that kept the
East Coast storm-free.

That trough -- a dip in that river of air known as the jet stream
-- stayed over the East for much of the season. Its southwest
winds at the steering level for hurricanes deflected any storms
that approached.

That was not the case during the latter half of the 1990s, when
six tropical storms and hurricanes -- Arthur, Bertha and Fran
in 1996, Bonnie in 1998, and Dennis and Floyd last year -- ravaged
the Carolinas.

Hurricane expert William Gray, who underestimated this season's
activity even though he predicted a higher-than-normal number
of storms, says the high number of storms this year lifts the
past six years -- 1995 to 2000 -- to a record.

His team of forecasters at Colorado State University lists the
number of hurricanes since 1995 at 49, the most for any six-year
period since the start of reliable counts in the mid-1940s, when
aircraft reconnaissance began.

The next most active period was 1950 to 1955, when there were
48 Atlantic hurricanes and many rampaged along the coast from
Florida to New England.

A typical year logs nine named storms, including six hurricanes,
making 2000 a busy season in the Atlantic.

"This was an active year, in keeping with our predictions of
a new era of increased hurricane activity," Gray says.



LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS, B/W, AP (2); No news is good news: To the relief of emergency
workers and coastal residents, no hurricanes struck this year. On average, the
U.S. coast is hit every other year. Debby: A satellite-enhanced image from the
National Hurricane Center shows the hurricane with the eye 65 miles from the
British Virgin Islands in August.

                      Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 858 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                  thespec.com

                           January 14, 2016 Thursday

First Atlantic hurricane to form in January since 1938 headed for the Azores

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 246 words


The first January-born hurricane in the Atlantic Ocean since 1938 formed on
Thursday, and headed toward a string of islands off the coast of Portugal.

Hurricane Alex strengthened from a tropical storm into a Category 1 hurricane on
Thursday morning, with winds of up to 85 m.p.h. and an eye that stretched 15
miles across by about 1 p.m. Eastern, said Dennis Feltgen, a National Hurricane
Center meteorologist.

Hurricanes in the Atlantic are rare this time of year, with the season normally
spanning June through November. The last time meteorologists saw a hurricane in
the Atlantic Ocean in January was in 1955, when one named Alice carried over
from the previous month.

But the emergence of Hurricane Alex is the first time since 1938 that a
hurricane has formed in January in the Atlantic, according to the hurricane
centre, which has records going back to 1851.

Hurricane Alex was speeding toward the Azores islands, an archipelago of nine
volcanic islands about 900 miles from the coast of Portugal. More than 240,000
people are estimated to live in the autonomous island territory.

On Thursday afternoon, the hurricane was about 415 miles south of Faial in the
central Azores, which includes five of the islands. The centre of the hurricane
is expected to make landfall or move near the central Azores on Friday morning.

From the Azores, Hurricane Alex is expected to travel north, deeper into the
open waters and shipping lanes of the Atlantic before weakening, Feltgen said.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2016 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 859 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   The Times

                              June 2, 1997, Monday

Ocean heat holds key to hurricane's secrets

BYLINE: Anjana Ahuja

SECTION: Features

LENGTH: 866 words


The warmer the sea, the more frequent the hurricanes. Anjana Ahuja reports

For hurricane-watchers, 1995 will go down as one of the most dramatic seasons
since records began in 1886. There were 11 hurricanes and 19 tropical storms,
figures surpassed only in 1933 and 1969. A fortnight ago, scientists from
University College London published compelling statistical evidence that this
exceptionally high tally was linked to record sea warming.

Why should we be interested? The 1997 hurricane season officially started
yesterday. If the link is to be believed, the season is set to be a prolific one
because the sea is already slightly warmer than average. Moreover, other
research has suggested that higher sea temperatures whip up more powerful
hurricanes, which take longer to die out. That means damage might extend beyond
the North Atlantic hurricane hotspots of the Caribbean and the American East
Coast. For example, Hurricane Lili survived its spin across the Caribbean last
October to wind up on Britain's doorstep. It killed six people and wreaked
enormous damage.

Hurricanes, also known as typhoons and cyclones, are whirling tropical storms
that register the top score of 12 on the Beaufort scale of wind speed. Typical
speeds inside the storm range between 20 and 50 metres per second.

The birth of a hurricane starts innocuously enough, with the evaporation of warm
ocean waters. The waters need to be at least 27C. The evaporated water condenses
into a cloud, and the condensation releases heat energy. This heat warms up
parcels of air in the cloud, and the cloud rises.

In most cases, that is where the process stops. But if there is "spin" in the
atmosphere, the cloud can start swirling. Thunderstorm activity is also critical
- it can introduce a vortex. As the cloud swirls, the vortex acts as a focal
point for a drop in pressure. Winds are sucked in, and feed the vortex.
Meanwhile, the warm waters continue to evaporate, bulking out the cloud as it
rotates. Another contributing factor is whether wind speed varies with
atmospheric height, known as wind shear. If the shear is low, the spinning storm
remains upright rather than toppling over. This al lows the hurricane to gather
energy, bulk and momentum almost without bounds.

During formation, the hurricane glides across the ocean. Typical speeds are
20-30kmh, although they can approach 70kmh. As soon as the storm crosses land,
it starts to die.

Dr Mark Saunders and Dr Andrew Harris, from the Greig Fester Centre for Hazard
Research at University College London, decided to examine the sea surface tem
peratures for those years with a high number of hurricanes. They focused on the
Atlantic hurricane development region (10-20 0 N by 20-60 0 W). This is the
birthplace of the hurricanes that hit the Caribbean and America. The four worst
hurricanes to hit the area in 1995 - Erin, Luis, Marilyn and Opal - resulted in
an insurance payout of $ 7 billion.

In their paper in the journal Geophysical Research Letters , they concluded that
sea sur face temperature is the dominant influence on the frequency of
hurricanes. The average sea surface temperature for that area is 27.5C, and in
1995 the temperature rose by 0.7C, the highest ever increase. "It takes an
enormous amount of energy to get that sort of rise," Dr Saunders says.

Two top hurricane scientists, Dr Bill Gray and Dr Chris Landsea, of the United
States Hurricane Research Division in Miami, have used the British research in
their annual hurricane forecast, due out on Thursday. "It's a very good piece of
work," says Dr Landsea. "It emphasises a factor that we've neglected in the
past." There is one drawback - nobody has come up with a satisfactory physical
explanation for the connection between sea warming and the number of hurricanes.

However, the authors, whose research was funded by the Natural Environmental
Research Council, have suggested that it involves a strange atmospheric
phenomenon known as the temperature inversion layer. As a rule, temperature
drops with height. But at about one to two kilometres above the Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans, this rule reverses. The temperature starts rising again. As with
so much in hurricane research, the origin of the temperature inversion layer is
unknown.

Dr Saunders says: "When clouds reach the temperature inversion layer, the sudden
higher temperatures cause them to evaporate. That means hurricanes are less
likely to form.

"We suggest that when the sea surface temperature is higher, the energy released
as the cloud condenses is greater. This heat somehow breaks down the temperature
inversion layer. With the layer gone, the clouds are more likely to hang around.
Consequently, there is more chance of a hurricane developing."

Meanwhile, Dr Landsea, in the middle of preparing the season's hurricane
forecast, is keeping an eye on the sea temperature. "So far, the waters are
fairly warm, which could boost the number of storms and hurricanes," he says.
"We have to watch for other factors, too, such as the monsoon in Africa, which
might push the numbers up, and the El Nino current in the Pacific, which might
keep the numbers down."


LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1997 Times Newspapers Limited


                          FOCUS - 860 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 21, 1998, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Puerto Rico and Nearby Islands Brace for Big Hurricane

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 504 words

DATELINE: SAN JUAN, P.R., Sept. 20


With Hurricane Georges, the most powerful storm of the season, bearing down on
them today with 115-mile-per-hour winds, Puerto Rico and a dozen smaller
Caribbean islands south and east of here braced for what authorities warned
could become a disaster.

Three damaging hurricanes have struck Puerto Rico over the past decade,
including Hugo in 1989, and residents mobilized again after a hurricane warning
was issued this morning for an area from Dominica to the Dominican Republic.

With gusts of up to 190 m.p.h., the hurricane was described by meteorologists as
a severe threat to life and property, likely to cut a wide swath through the
region.

"This is similar in size and strength to Hurricane Hugo," James Lewis Free, a
research scientist at the National Hurricane Center in Miami, said. "It is an
extremely dangerous storm."

In advisories issued throughout the day, the National Hurricane Center said it
was likely that the storm would hit land in the northern Leeward Islands late
tonight before continuing a west-northwest course that would take its powerful
eye directly across Puerto Rico on Monday. The hurricane lost some strength late
tonight, and was downgraded to a category three storm, the third most powerful
type of hurricane.

Meteorologists said it was too early to tell if the hurricane could threaten the
southeastern United States this week. But with the course of the storm shifting
somewhat north and west during the day, that possibility is "something that
needs to be watched," Mr. Free said.

At a news conference here this afternoon, Gov. Pedro Rossello of Puerto Rico
declared a state of emergency, warning the 3.8 million residents of this
American commonwealth that the hurricane represented "a moment of crisis." Mr.
Rossello said the magnitude of the storm required that the population act "with
the utmost seriousness" and take extra precautions.

"Everything indicates this hurricane has the characteristics to be the most
powerful that we have confronted in Puerto Rico in decades," he said. "If
everything continues as predicted, there is going to be extensive damage and
destruction."

All days off and vacations for the police here have been canceled, as were
classes and public events scheduled for tonight and Monday. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency, criticized for its slow reaction when Hurricane
Andrew struck Miami in 1992, sent early response teams to Puerto Rico and the
United States Virgin Islands, which also lie in the hurricane's path.

Residents of Puerto Rico appeared calm, covering windows with plywood or metal
shutters and flocking to stores to buy emergency supplies.

"I'm as ready as I'm ever going to be," Sonia Padilla Guerra, a homemaker, said
as she emerged from a grocery.

By midafternoon, some flights between Luis Munoz Marin International Airport
here and other Caribbean destinations had already been canceled. American
Airlines announced that it was canceling all flights from Puerto Rico tonight.




LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 861 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   November 26, 1998, Thursday, Final Edition

Hurricane Forecaster: Trend Is Worsening

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A38

LENGTH: 581 words

DATELINE: FORT COLLINS, Colo., Nov. 25


Intense hurricane activity this year means worse is on the way in coming
seasons, Colorado State University forecaster William Gray predicted.

"Next year we'll be calling for above average hurricane activity, and we believe
this is a reflection of the new hurricane era we entered in 1995," Gray said
Tuesday. "We expect this trend to continue for the next few decades."

Gray, a professor of atmospheric sciences who has issued hurricane forecasts for
15 years, said he thinks the Atlantic Basin is in for years of increased
hurricane activity.

He blames it on the "Atlantic conveyor belt," which circulates water from the
tropics to the northeast Atlantic and back to the south along the North American
continent.

The basin encompasses the Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico. The
hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30.

Also factored into the forecast, he said, are above-average sea surface
temperatures in the tropical and north Atlantic, and a ridge of low barometric
pressure near the Azores earlier this year.

In terms of loss of life and property damage, this year's hurricane season has
been the most destructive on record in the Caribbean basin because of hurricanes
Georges and Mitch.

Gray said more hurricanes were reported from 1995 to 1998 than in any other
four-year period of hurricane activity this century. Since 1995, there have been
53 named storms, 32 hurricanes and 15 major hurricanes.

There have been 14 named storms, nine hurricanes and three intense hurricanes
this year, surpassing Gray's predictions of 10 named storms, six hurricanes and
two intense hurricanes.

The year's 14th named storm was Tropical Storm Nicole, which weakened as it spun
over the Atlantic Ocean far from land today. Forecasters said the rare
late-season storm was expected to continue to fade over the next 24 hours.

Nicole's center was more than 1,000 miles west-southwest of La Palma in the
Canary Islands and moving west-southwest at about 9 mph, the National Hurricane
Center said.

Nicole remained a tropical storm, but its maximum sustained winds had slowed to
about 50 mph. Forecasters said it was expected to begin to break apart as it
moved through unfavorable winds over the distant Atlantic.

"Strong winds in the upper levels of the atmosphere are expected to disrupt
Nicole," said Richard Pasch, a hurricane specialist at the center in Florida.

Tropical-storm-force winds of at least 39 mph extended as far as 200 miles from
Nicole's center.

Strong storms so late in the season are rare but not unprecedented, Pasch said.

"We had a hurricane, Lili, just a few days before Christmas in 1984. It
dissipated on the 24th of December near Hispaniola," he said. Hispaniola is the
Caribbean island that is home to Haiti and the Dominican Republic.

In Puerto Rico, fallout from Hurricane Georges was still being felt. Officials
said Angel Rodriguez Cabrera, mayor of the town of Toa Alta, about 10 miles west
of the Caribbean island's capital of San Juan, faces extortion and bribery
charges in an alleged $ 2.5 million kickback scheme involving cleanup contracts
for Georges.

The FBI alleged that Rodriguez tried to get Mississippi-based Jesco Construction
Corp. to pay him $ 2.5 million to secure a contract to clean up the municipality
after Hurricane Georges hit the U.S. commonwealth in September.

FEMA expects to pay $ 1.5 billion in emergency aid in Puerto Rico for damage
caused by Hurricane Georges.


LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1998 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 862 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     August 24, 1992, Monday, FINAL EDITION

The danger comes home for hurricane experts

BYLINE: Jack Williams

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 368 words

DATELINE: CORAL GABLES, Fla.


Meteorologists at the National Hurricane Center have been tracking the path of
threatening storms since 1979.

But with Hurricane Andrew, the high-tech offices of the nation's center for
hurricane predictions may actually be in the center of the storm.

Two meteorologists from the center were sent to a forecasting center Sunday in
Washington, D.C., just in case all power is lost and the Florida center is
unable to operate.

''I've never been in one on the ground,'' said Hugh Willoughby, a meteorologist
with the nearby Hurricane Research Lab, which flies missions into the hurricane
eyes to provide data for center forecasters.

Willoughby, a Miami-area resident who has flown in and out of hurricanes about
330 times, decided not to fly Sunday so he could stay near his family.

In the center's forecast room, 10 workers took turns sitting around a large
table plotting maps and watching satellite photos and radar maps on nearby
computer screens.

As Sunday wore on, Hurricane Andrew became visible on radar maps, filling up the
screens as the storm moved closer. Most workers appeared calm, if a little
tense.

''The fact that it's affecting us makes it even more difficult to handle,''
Director Bob Sheets said. ''We all have personal things to worry about also,
such as our families. Then we have to worry about the antennas on the roof being
blown off.''

10 DEADLIEST U.S. HURRICANES
Deaths     Name    Location                       Year
6,000   Unnamed    Galveston, Texas               1900
6,000   Unnamed    Florida, West Indies           1928
600   Unnamed    Alabama, Florida               1926
600   Unnamed    New England                    1938
526   Audry      Louisiana, Texas               1957
400   Unnamed    Florida                        1935
400   Diane      Eastern USA                    1955
389   Unnamed    N. Carolina to New England     1944
347   Hazel      Eastern USA, Haiti             1954
293   Inez       Florida, Caribbean, Mexico     1966

Source: The Associated Press

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

THE NATION; See info box at end of text

                      Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 863 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                            November 3, 2017 Friday
            WEB Edition; NC1 Edition; NC2 Edition; MF12 Edition; NC3
          Edition; NM1 Edition; NC Edition; NC14 Edition; MC1 Edition;
           MD1 Edition; NL1 Edition; NC14C Edition; NC4 Edition; CLFM
                            Edition; eBlast Edition

Barrington-area volunteers heading to Texas to repair homes for hurricane victim

BYLINE: By Bob Susnjara bsusnjara@dailyherald.com

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 566 words


Barrington-area volunteers heading to Texas to repair homes for hurricane
victims Barrington-area volunteers will leave next week for a 10-day mission to
help less fortunate Texas residents whose homes sustained significant damage
from Hurricane Harvey. What's called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief will
focus on the Houston area. The effort will be operated through the Barrington
nonprofit organization Build Team, which helps local families in need with
essential repairs so they can stay in their homes. John Dawson, who owns Dawson
Builders in Barrington and founded Build Team, will be among the roughly 20
volunteers planning to head to Houston on Friday, Nov.

10. He said the goal is to repair four or five homes for Harris County residents
who cannot afford the work. North Barrington philanthropist Vince Foglia's
family foundation will match the first $25,000 in donations for the rebuilding.
The money will go directly toward the construction and materials that'll be
purchased in Texas. "We know that 100 percent of the funds that we collect will
go toward fixing the homes," Dawson said Thursday. "We don't have any overhead.
There's no paid individuals in our organization. Everything is volunteer."
Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief volunteers will pay their own way to the
Houston area, with the donations covering only their meals while working there,
organizers said. The men and women will have different roles, such as
construction, errands, driving and cooking. Dawson, who has volunteered in
several rebuilding efforts after hurricanes and flooding, said he originally
planned to bring a few people to help in Texas. He mentioned he was looking for
some help to Barrington resident and longtime community volunteer Bob Lee, who
then assisted in assembling the much larger relief effort. Lee said he heard
from a number of people who were looking for a way to help the hurricane
victims. He said donors should be comfortable supporting the Barrington-area
effort because it's backed by community leaders whose work in the economically
distressed areas will be visible. "It's a great use of money," Lee said.
"There's no waste of it. And we know who's managing it." Dawson said the
Barrington group will be directed to the families in need by BakerRipley in
Houston, a 110-year-old nonprofit community development organization.
BakerRipley will find shelter for the volunteers, who plan to sleep on air
mattresses or in sleeping bags. Dawson said he hopes to provide more than
repaired homes to the Hurricane Harvey victims. "In a flood, you lose
everything," he said. "You lose your furniture and you lose your appliances. And
if we can raise enough money, then we'll do that part, too. First, we'll get the
house back in order, but if we have enough money, then we'll turn it back into a
home." About 40 community groups, businesses, nonprofit agencies and governments
in the Barrington area are backing the Hurricane Harvey rebuilding effort with
volunteers and other support. Barrington High School students are raising money
through the sale of special T-shirts, which cost $5, with an image of Texas and
"STAY HOUSTRONG" on them. Barrington High Associate Principal Heath McFaul said
along with the student-designed T-shirts, popcorn sales and dunk tanks with
administrators have been among other fundraisers. "It's really been a
whole-school effort," McFaul said.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com John Dawson of Dawson Builders in
Barrington shows a trailer loaded with tools and supplies. Barrington-area
volunteers are getting ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane
Relief, to repair homes for families affected by Hurricane Harvey in the Houston
area. Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com John Dawson of Dawson Builders shows
a trailer loaded with tools and supplies. Barrington-area volunteers are getting
ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief, to repair and
rebuild homes for some families affected by Hurricane Harvey in the Houston
Area. John Dawson of Dawson Builders in Barrington shows a trailer loaded with
tools and supplies. Barrington-area volunteers are getting ready for a mission,
called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief, to repair homes for families
affected by Hurricane Harvey in the Houston area.Joe
Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington High School Associate Principal
Heath McFaul, left, and Bob Lee unfurl a banner as Barrington-area volunteers
get ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief. About 20
volunteers will do construction work and other jobs in the effort to repair
houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston area. Joe
Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington High School Associate Principal
Heath McFaul, left, and John Dawson unfurl a banner as Barrington-area
volunteers get ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief.
About 20 volunteers will do construction work and other jobs in the effort to
repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston area. Joe
Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington High School Associate Principal
Heath McFaul, left, and John Dawson unfurl a banner as Barrington-area
volunteers get ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief.
About 20 volunteers will do construction work and other jobs in the effort to
repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston area. Joe
Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington High School Associate Principal
Heath McFaul, left, and John Dawson unfurl a banner as Barrington-area
volunteers get ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief.
About 20 volunteers will do construction work and other jobs in the effort to
repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston area.Joe
Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief will be an
effort to repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston area.
Barrington High School students are selling these T-shirts as a fundraiser for
the effort. Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington Regional Hurricane
Relief will be an effort to repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the
Houston area. Barrington High School students are selling these T-shirts as a
fundraiser for the effort. Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington
Regional Hurricane Relief will be an effort to repair houses for Hurricane
Harvey victims in the Houston area. Barrington High School students are selling
these T-shirts as a fundraiser for the effort. Joe
Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief will be an
effort to repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston area.
Barrington High School students are selling these T-shirts as a fundraiser for
the effort.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 864 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                           November 4, 2017 Saturday
            WEB Edition; NC1 Edition; NC2 Edition; MF12 Edition; NC3
          Edition; NM1 Edition; NC Edition; NC14 Edition; MC1 Edition;
           MD1 Edition; NL1 Edition; NC14C Edition; NC4 Edition; CLFM
                            Edition; eBlast Edition

Barrington-area volunteers heading to Texas to repair homes for hurricane victim

BYLINE: By Bob Susnjara bsusnjara@dailyherald.com

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 566 words


Barrington-area volunteers heading to Texas to repair homes for hurricane
victims Barrington-area volunteers will leave next week for a 10-day mission to
help less fortunate Texas residents whose homes sustained significant damage
from Hurricane Harvey. What's called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief will
focus on the Houston area. The effort will be operated through the Barrington
nonprofit organization Build Team, which helps local families in need with
essential repairs so they can stay in their homes. John Dawson, who owns Dawson
Builders in Barrington and founded Build Team, will be among the roughly 20
volunteers planning to head to Houston on Friday, Nov.

10. He said the goal is to repair four or five homes for Harris County residents
who cannot afford the work. North Barrington philanthropist Vince Foglia's
family foundation will match the first $25,000 in donations for the rebuilding.
The money will go directly toward the construction and materials that'll be
purchased in Texas. "We know that 100 percent of the funds that we collect will
go toward fixing the homes," Dawson said Thursday. "We don't have any overhead.
There's no paid individuals in our organization. Everything is volunteer."
Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief volunteers will pay their own way to the
Houston area, with the donations covering only their meals while working there,
organizers said. The men and women will have different roles, such as
construction, errands, driving and cooking. Dawson, who has volunteered in
several rebuilding efforts after hurricanes and flooding, said he originally
planned to bring a few people to help in Texas. He mentioned he was looking for
some help to Barrington resident and longtime community volunteer Bob Lee, who
then assisted in assembling the much larger relief effort. Lee said he heard
from a number of people who were looking for a way to help the hurricane
victims. He said donors should be comfortable supporting the Barrington-area
effort because it's backed by community leaders whose work in the economically
distressed areas will be visible. "It's a great use of money," Lee said.
"There's no waste of it. And we know who's managing it." Dawson said the
Barrington group will be directed to the families in need by BakerRipley in
Houston, a 110-year-old nonprofit community development organization.
BakerRipley will find shelter for the volunteers, who plan to sleep on air
mattresses or in sleeping bags. Dawson said he hopes to provide more than
repaired homes to the Hurricane Harvey victims. "In a flood, you lose
everything," he said. "You lose your furniture and you lose your appliances. And
if we can raise enough money, then we'll do that part, too. First, we'll get the
house back in order, but if we have enough money, then we'll turn it back into a
home." About 40 community groups, businesses, nonprofit agencies and governments
in the Barrington area are backing the Hurricane Harvey rebuilding effort with
volunteers and other support. Barrington High School students are raising money
through the sale of special T-shirts, which cost $5, with an image of Texas and
"STAY HOUSTRONG" on them. Barrington High Associate Principal Heath McFaul said
along with the student-designed T-shirts, popcorn sales and dunk tanks with
administrators have been among other fundraisers. "It's really been a
whole-school effort," McFaul said.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com John Dawson of Dawson Builders in
Barrington shows a trailer loaded with tools and supplies. Barrington-area
volunteers are getting ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane
Relief, to repair homes for families affected by Hurricane Harvey in the Houston
area. Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com John Dawson of Dawson Builders shows
a trailer loaded with tools and supplies. Barrington-area volunteers are getting
ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief, to repair and
rebuild homes for some families affected by Hurricane Harvey in the Houston
Area. John Dawson of Dawson Builders in Barrington shows a trailer loaded with
tools and supplies. Barrington-area volunteers are getting ready for a mission,
called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief, to repair homes for families
affected by Hurricane Harvey in the Houston area. Joe
Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com John Dawson of Dawson Builders shows a trailer
loaded with tools and supplies. Barrington-area volunteers are getting ready for
a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief, to repair and rebuild
homes for some families affected by Hurricane Harvey in the Houston Area. John
Dawson of Dawson Builders in Barrington shows a trailer loaded with tools and
supplies. Barrington-area volunteers are getting ready for a mission, called
Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief, to repair homes for families affected by
Hurricane Harvey in the Houston area.Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com
Barrington High School Associate Principal Heath McFaul, left, and Bob Lee
unfurl a banner as Barrington-area volunteers get ready for a mission, called
Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief. About 20 volunteers will do construction
work and other jobs in the effort to repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims
in the Houston area. Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington High School
Associate Principal Heath McFaul, left, and John Dawson unfurl a banner as
Barrington-area volunteers get ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional
Hurricane Relief. About 20 volunteers will do construction work and other jobs
in the effort to repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston area.
Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington High School Associate Principal
Heath McFaul, left, and John Dawson unfurl a banner as Barrington-area
volunteers get ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief.
About 20 volunteers will do construction work and other jobs in the effort to
repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston area. Joe
Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington High School Associate Principal
Heath McFaul, left, and John Dawson unfurl a banner as Barrington-area
volunteers get ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief.
About 20 volunteers will do construction work and other jobs in the effort to
repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston area. Joe
Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington High School Associate Principal
Heath McFaul, left, and Bob Lee unfurl a banner as Barrington-area volunteers
get ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief. About 20
volunteers will do construction work and other jobs in the effort to repair
houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston area. Barrington High School
Associate Principal Heath McFaul, left, and John Dawson unfurl a banner as
Barrington-area volunteers get ready for a mission, called Barrington Regional
Hurricane Relief. About 20 volunteers will do construction work and other jobs
in the effort to repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston
area.Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief
will be an effort to repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston
area. Barrington High School students are selling these T-shirts as a fundraiser
for the effort. Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington Regional
Hurricane Relief will be an effort to repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims
in the Houston area. Barrington High School students are selling these T-shirts
as a fundraiser for the effort. Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington
Regional Hurricane Relief will be an effort to repair houses for Hurricane
Harvey victims in the Houston area. Barrington High School students are selling
these T-shirts as a fundraiser for the effort. Joe
Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington Regional Hurricane Relief will be an
effort to repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the Houston area.
Barrington High School students are selling these T-shirts as a fundraiser for
the effort. Joe Lewnard/jlewnard@dailyherald.com Barrington Regional Hurricane
Relief will be an effort to repair houses for Hurricane Harvey victims in the
Houston area. Barrington High School students are selling these T-shirts as a
fundraiser for the effort.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 865 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                            The Independent (London)

                              July 30, 2007 Monday
                                 First Edition

Global warming blamed for increase in hurricanes

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

LENGTH: 813 words


The record number of hurricanes and tropical storms in the North Atlantic over
the past decade can be linked directly to rising temperatures caused by global
warming, a study has found.

There are now about twice as many Atlantic hurricanes forming each year compared
with a century ago and the rise has generated an intense debate over whether
this is due to natural variability or man-made global warming.

A study by scientists at the US National Centre for Atmospheric Research in
Boulder Colorado has found that natural variability cannot explain the increase.
Instead, they have attributed the rise to warmer sea-surface temperatures caused
by greenhouse gases.

The conclusion runs directly counter to the official position of the US National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) - the US government agency charged
with monitoring hurricane activity - which stated in 2005 that the increase in
Atlantic hurricanes and tropical storms is due to "natural occurring cycles".
However in a study published in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society, Greg Holland and Peter Webster point out that the unequivocal NOAA
statement was made without any supporting references to the peer-reviewed
scientific literature.

When the two scientists did their own analysis of tropical cyclones - hurricanes
and storms - over the past 100 years they found no convincing evidence that
natural cycles could account for the dramatic increase seen in recent decades.

"We are led to the confident conclusion that the recent upsurge in tropical
cyclone frequency is due in part to greenhouse warming, and this is most likely
the dominant effect," the scientists say.

Their statistical analysis of hurricanes and tropical storms in the North
Atlantic found that there were two abrupt increases in intensity over the past
century - and each time the level remained elevated and relatively steady.

Between 1900 and 1930, there was an annual average of six tropical cyclones, of
which four were hurricanes and two were storms. Between 1930 and 1940, the
annual average increased to 10, with five hurricanes and five tropical storms.

Finally, in the period from 1995 to 2005, the yearly average rose to 15 tropical
cyclones, of which eight were hurricanes and seven were tropical storms.

At the same time, the average temperature of the sea surface in the North
Atlantic has increased by more than 0.7C. Sea surface temperatures are
understood to be a critical factor determining whether or not a tropical storm
or a more powerful hurricane forms over the ocean.

"These numbers are a strong indication that climate change is a major factor in
the increasing number of Atlantic hurricanes," Dr Holland said.

Hurricanes were relatively frequent in 2004, but the number and intensity of
those occurring in 2005 was unprecedented, with 28 named tropical cyclones and
14 hurricanes - of which seven were major. In July 2005 there were three
category 5 hurricanes - the most extreme with windspeeds greater than 155mph -
and two category 4 hurricanes.

By comparison, 2006 was far less active but the scientists believe this was due
in part to the emergence of an El Niño event in the Pacific Ocean that year.
Nevertheless, 2006 - with five hurricanes and four named storms - would still
have ranked above average a century ago. And, since 2002, a total of 29 tropical
storms and hurricanes have struck the United States - an average of seven named
storms to hit land per year.

"Even a quiet year by today's standards would be considered normal or slightly
active compared to an average year in the early part of the 20th century," Dr
Holland said.

The five costliest storms

KATRINA (2005)

The most costly hurricane in history - estimated damage $85bn. It formed over
the Bahamas on 23 August and crossed southern Florida and the Gulf of Mexico,
before striking the US on 29 August as a category 3 hurricane.

ANDREW (1992)

The second most destructive hurricane in American history in terms of cost.
Struck land as category 5, the top category, with windspeeds greater than
155mph, killing 23 people in the US and three more in the Bahamas.

WILMA (2005)

Started life in the Caribbean Sea, eventually moving across the Gulf of Mexico
to Cancun (pictured left), where it hit land with devastating consequences.
Wilma was the third category 5 hurricane to develop in 2005.

CHARLEY (2004)

Developed into a category 4 hurricane with wind-speeds up to 150mph. Hit
southwestern Florida just 22 hours after the northwestern part of the state had
been struck by tropical storm Bonnie - the first time a US state had been hit by
two tropical cyclones in a 24-hour period.

IVAN (2004)

The strongest hurricane of the 2004 season, reaching category 5. Formed around
Cape Verde and hit the island of Grenada, causing widespread destruction.
Jamaica and Grand Cayman, as well as the western tip of Cuba, were also badly
affected.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2007 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 866 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                           Canberra Times (Australia)

                    December 10, 2005 Saturday Final Edition

Heat rises on storm debate as scientists warm to link

BYLINE: The Canberra Times

SECTION: A; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 1204 words


I T WAS the year of the hurricane. It was also the year when scientists said
that global warming can increase the intensity of hurricanes. But it was not the
year when everyone could agree that Hurricane Katrina, which devastated New
Orleans in August, was at least in part the result of global warming brought on
by emissions of man-made greenhouse gases.

The 2005 hurricane season is nowofficially rated as the busiest on record by the
United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

The 2005 season included 26 named storms, of which 13 grew big enough to be
classified as hurricanes. Of these, seven turned out to be major hurricanes of
category three or higher on the five-point Saffir-Simpson scale. This was five
more major hurricanes than average for a typical Atlantic season.

Hurricane Wilma in October became the strongest Atlantic storm recorded,
breaking the previous record set in 1988.

It wasn't just strength, it was frequency.For the first time since 1953, when
scientists started to name tropical Atlantic storms, letters of the Greek
alphabet had to be used because meteorologists had exhausted the original list
of 21 alphabetically ordered names. The final tropical storm, Epsilon, formed
over the central Atlantic Ocean on the penultimate day of the hurricane season.

"This hurricane season shattered recordsthat have stood for decades -most named
storms, most hurricanes and most category-five storms," NOAA administrator
Conrad Lautenbacher said. "Arguably, it was the most devastating hurricane
season the country has experienced in modern times.

I'd like to foretell that next year will be calmer, but I can't. Historical
trends say the atmosphere patterns and water temperatures are likely to force
another active season upon us." The real record-breaker was Katrina, the most
destructive hurricane to strike the US in living memory. More than 1000 people
died and some estimates put the cost of repairing New Orleans and its flood
defences as high as $US200billion.

Some environmentalists were quick topoint the finger of guilt at global warming,
but not all scientists were convinced -not until some of them began to look at
the data more carefully. Until recently there was a fairly broad consensus among
meteorologists that global warming could not explain the general upsurge in
hurricanes recorded over the past couple of decades. People thought the increase
was just part of the normal long-term cycle driven by changes to the Atlantic
circulation system. Few believed that it was directly related to an increase in
sea-surface temperatures caused by climate change.

But then came a study by Kerry Emanuel,of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in Cambridge, who, in a letter published in the journal Nature,
described how he had formulated a new measure of hurricane destructiveness.

He compared changes in this measure of destructiveness, called "total
dissipation of power", with the rise in sea-surface temperatures recorded in the
Atlantic over the past 30 years.

Emanuel found that he could link anincrease in hurricane activity with rises in
ocean temperature caused by global warming and climate change. "My results
suggest that future warming may lead to an upward trend in tropical cyclone
destructive potential, and -taking into account an increasing coastal population
-a substantial increase in hurricane-related losses in the 21st century," he
said.

The study concluded that tropical stormswere lasting 60 per cent longer and
their wind speeds were up to 15 per cent higher.

"This work implies that global tropical cyclone activity is responding in a
rather large way to global warming."

It is not unreasonable to pose a linkbetween hurricanes and global warming,
given that sea-surface temperatures play a critical role in their formation.

By definition, a hurricane is a tropical cyclone, an area of intense low
pressure in the tropics surrounded by a violent, rotating storm.

In the Atlantic, such phenomena are called hurricanes, in the eastern Pacific
they are known as typhoons, and in the Indian Ocean they are known as cyclones.

"On the face of it, global warming canonly make things worse," science author
Fred Pearce said in the latest issue of New Scientist. "The initial pillar of
humid air generally forms only when the temperature of the sea surface exceeds
26C. As the oceans warm, larger areas will exceed the threshold. And every
degree above the threshold seems to encourage stronger hurricanes."

When Katrina formed, the temperature ofthe Gulf of Mexico was about 30C, which
encouraged the view that in a warmer world we can expect more violent
hurricanes. Real life is more complex, however. A warmer world could lead also
to a warmer atmosphere and this could diminish the critical difference in the
temperatures between air and ocean that helps hurricanes to form.

Another way global warming could killhurricanes is by generating stronger winds,
which could stir up the sea, thereby cooling surface temperatures. Stronger
winds could also disrupt the tall pillar of humid air needed for hurricane
formation. "With all these uncertainties and contra-dictions, it is not
surprising that different computer models have predicted everything from fewer
hurricanes to more hurricanes as global warming kicks in," Pearce said.

More fuel was added to the fire of thedebate in September when meteorologist
Peter Webster and his colleagues at the Georgia Institute of Technology in
Atlanta published data showing that the frequency of category four and five
cyclones -the two strongest types of hurricanes -had increased significantly
over the past 35 years.

Globally, category four and five storms climbed 57 per cent from the first half
of the period to the second, they found.

With the characteristic understatement of scientists treading in a controversial
area, they concluded, "This trend is not inconsistent with recent climate model
simulations that a doubling of carbon dioxide may increase the frequency of the
most intense cyclones, although attribution of the 30-year trend to global
warming would require a longer global data record and, especially, a deeper
understanding of the role of hurricanes in the general circulation of the
atmosphere and ocean, even in the present climate state." In other words, the
evidence is mounting that global warming can indeed affect the formation of
hurricanes but as yet no one can say for sure whether this is happening now. And
equally no one can say for sure that Katrina was made worse by greenhouse
emissions.

Previous hurricanes have, after all, killed far more people -the East Pakistan
hurricane of 1970 probably killed half a million.

Most climate scientists believe that it willtake far longer to assess whether
global warming is having a real impact on the frequency or intensity of
hurricanes.

Emanuel, for example, estimated that it could take a further 50 years to detect
an unambiguous trend in the intensity of hurricanes hitting the US.

But whatever the long-term trend, it is clear that more hurricanes than usual
are expected next year. In the words of one NOAA scientist, "We are in an active
hurricane era." -The Independent

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

           Copyright 2005 The Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty
                                    Limited


                          FOCUS - 867 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 20, 2011 Friday

Active hurricane season expected

BYLINE: Laura B. Martinez, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 681 words


May 20--Federal officials are predicting above-normal hurricane activity this
year with three to six major hurricanes forecast for the Atlantic season.

Overall, forecasters say there could be 12 to 18 named storms.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA, says of those
storms, six to 10 could become hurricanes with three to six of them being major
hurricanes.

Major hurricanes are classified as Category 3 or higher and have wind speeds of
111mph or more.

The forecast was announced Thursday at press conference at the NOAA Satellite
Operations Facility in Maryland.

"That outlook does not tell us exactly when or where any particular storm will
be and that underscores the importance of everyone having a plan and everyone
being prepared," said Jane Lubchenco, undersecretary of commerce for oceans and
atmosphere and NOAA administrator.

The Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 through Nov. 30.

Lubchenco said water temperatures in the Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico are
about two degrees above average. They were four degrees above average at the
same time last year.

Although the United States was lucky last year because it experienced no direct
hurricane hits, Lubchenco said this year could be different.

"We cannot count on having the same luck this year. and therefore it is vitally
important that we be prepared for any hurricanes that might emerge this year,"
she said.

Just a month into the 2010 hurricane season, South Texas area was bracing for
the first hurricane of the season. Hurricane Alex made landfall on June 30 in
Tamaulipas, Mexico, about 100 miles south of the Rio Grande. The storm spawned
tornadoes and brought flooding to many parts of the Valley.

Tropical Storm Hermine hit three months later, on Sept. 6, making landfall again
in Tamaulipas, this time 40 miles south of Brownsville.

Cameron County Judge Carlos H. Cascos said residents should always be prepared
regardless of predictions.

"We've been threatened when there has been little activity and we have been not
threatened when there is a lot of activity," Cascos said. "These storms, like we
know, are very, very unpredictable. ... But either way it is like preparing for
anything, we hope we are OK, but at the same time if something does hit at least
we've done what we need to be doing."

Craig Fugate, administrator with the Federal Emergency Management Agency, said
people who live along the coasts should start making preparations.

"Far too many people will not be prepared and will try to get ready in the last
minutes when the hurricane is threatening their community and won't have time,"
Fugate said. "Of all the hazards we deal with, hurricanes should be the least
surprising one."

Forecasts made earlier this year also predicted an active hurricane season.

William Gray, of the Department of Atmospheric Science at Colorado State
University, and forecasters with AccuWeather, both released reports last month
forecasting an above-average season.

Gray's forecast predicts 16 named storms with nine of those developing into
hurricanes. Of those nine, he predicts that five will become major hurricanes.

The probability of at least one major hurricane making landfall along the U.S.
coastline is 72 percent, according to NOAA. The probability of a storm striking
between the Florida Panhandle and Brownsville is 47 percent. The average in this
category is 30 percent.

Officials at AccuWeather forecast 15 named storms with eight becoming actual
hurricanes, and of those eight three could be major hurricanes.

One forecaster suggested that Texas could be affected this year, like it was
last, and the storms could strike early in the season. He suggested the storms
could come as early as mid-June.

lmartinez@brownsvilleherald.com

To see more of The Brownsville Herald, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.brownsvilleherald.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The Brownsville Herald,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more
information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110520-BV-Active-hurricane-season-expected-0520-20110520

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2011 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 868 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 15, 2017 Friday

Washington: U.S. Department of Labor Extends Hurricane Harvey Compliance
Guidance and Relief to Employee Benefit Plans Impacted by Hurricane Irma

LENGTH: 405  words



Washington: U.S.Department of Labor has issued the following news release:
The U.S. Department of Labor announced employee benefit plan compliance guidance
and relief for victims of Hurricane Irma that parallels that which it already
provided to victims of Hurricane Harvey regarding verification procedures for
plan loans and distributions, participant contributions and loan payments,
blackout notices, and group health plan compliance. The Hurricane Harvey relief
was announced on Aug. 30, 2017, in EBSA Release Number 17-1216-NAT.


The Department understands that plan fiduciaries, employers, labor
organizations, service providers, and participants and beneficiaries may
encounter issues complying with the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
(ERISA) over the next few months as the implications of Hurricanes Irma and
Harvey unfold. The guidance provided in this statement generally applies to
employee benefit plans, plan sponsors, employers and employees, and service
providers to such employers who were located in a county identified for
individual assistance by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) because
of the devastation caused by Hurricane Irma or Hurricane Harvey.
The above relief is in addition to the Form 5500 Annual Return/Report filing
relief already provided by the IRS in accordance with the Hurricane Harvey and
Hurricane Irma news releases listed on the IRS disaster relief website. See the
Treasury regulations under Internal Revenue Code § 7508A and Section 8 of Rev.
Proc. 2007-56, 2007-34 I.R.B. 388. The relief is also in addition to the
funding-related relief provided to defined benefit pension plans by the IRS, the
Department of Labor, and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation in IRS Notice
2017-49.
Contact Information
 The Department and IRS will continue to monitor the situation to address those
issues that are most important in helping individuals, employers and plan
sponsors recover from these hurricanes. For more information on Hurricane Harvey
and Hurricane Irma relief under ERISA, see "FAQs for Participants and
Beneficiaries Following Hurricanes Harvey and Irma," visit EBSA's Disaster
Relief pages for employers and advisers and workers and families, or contact the
Department's Employee Benefits Security Administration online at
www.askebsa.dol.gov or by calling 1-866-444-3272. Questions about IRS guidance
should be directed to the IRS at 1-877-829-5900.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 869 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 16, 2017 Saturday

Washington: U.S. Department of Labor Extends Hurricane Harvey Compliance
Guidance and Relief to Employee Benefit Plans Impacted by Hurricane Irma

LENGTH: 405  words



Washington: U.S.Department of Labor has issued the following news release:
The U.S. Department of Labor announced employee benefit plan compliance guidance
and relief for victims of Hurricane Irma that parallels that which it already
provided to victims of Hurricane Harvey regarding verification procedures for
plan loans and distributions, participant contributions and loan payments,
blackout notices, and group health plan compliance. The Hurricane Harvey relief
was announced on Aug. 30, 2017, in EBSA Release Number 17-1216-NAT.


The Department understands that plan fiduciaries, employers, labor
organizations, service providers, and participants and beneficiaries may
encounter issues complying with the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
(ERISA) over the next few months as the implications of Hurricanes Irma and
Harvey unfold. The guidance provided in this statement generally applies to
employee benefit plans, plan sponsors, employers and employees, and service
providers to such employers who were located in a county identified for
individual assistance by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) because
of the devastation caused by Hurricane Irma or Hurricane Harvey.
The above relief is in addition to the Form 5500 Annual Return/Report filing
relief already provided by the IRS in accordance with the Hurricane Harvey and
Hurricane Irma news releases listed on the IRS disaster relief website. See the
Treasury regulations under Internal Revenue Code § 7508A and Section 8 of Rev.
Proc. 2007-56, 2007-34 I.R.B. 388. The relief is also in addition to the
funding-related relief provided to defined benefit pension plans by the IRS, the
Department of Labor, and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation in IRS Notice
2017-49.
Contact Information
 The Department and IRS will continue to monitor the situation to address those
issues that are most important in helping individuals, employers and plan
sponsors recover from these hurricanes. For more information on Hurricane Harvey
and Hurricane Irma relief under ERISA, see "FAQs for Participants and
Beneficiaries Following Hurricanes Harvey and Irma," visit EBSA's Disaster
Relief pages for employers and advisers and workers and families, or contact the
Department's Employee Benefits Security Administration online at
www.askebsa.dol.gov or by calling 1-866-444-3272. Questions about IRS guidance
should be directed to the IRS at 1-877-829-5900.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 870 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 20, 2017 Wednesday

California Sends Urban Search and Rescue Teams to Support Hurricane Maria
Response

LENGTH: 398  words



Sacramento: Cal OES, The State of California has issued the following news
release:


At the request of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Governor
Edmund G. Brown, Jr. has approved the deployment of Urban Search and Rescue
(US&R) Task Force 2 (CA-TF2), Task Force 6 (CA-TF6) and Task Force 7 (CA-TF7)
through the California Governor's Office of Emergency Services (Cal OES) to aid
the response to Hurricane Maria.


The National Hurricane Center in Miami, Florida has declared Hurricane Maria
extremely dangerous as a Category 5 hurricane and issued Hurricane Watches and
Warnings for the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.
For this deployment to Hurricane Maria, CA-TF2 consists of 27 personnel from the
Los Angeles County Fire Department, CA-TF6 consists of 27 personnel from
Riverside City Fire Department and CA-TF7 consists of 27 personnel from
Sacramento City Fire Department.
This configuration of the US&R Task Forces was specified by FEMA for operations
in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands because it provides light, fast,
maneuverable, and easily transported urban search & rescue capabilities
consistent with hurricane conditions on the islands.
These teams will augment four larger State/National US&R Task Forces and the
FEMA US&R Incident Support Team (and a canine search team element of the
Riverside City US&R Task Force (CA-TF6) that are already in Puerto Rico awaiting
Hurricane Maria's landfall.
Since 1992, California-based US&R Task Forces have been deployed to a long list
of state, national, and international disasters including the 2007 Hurricane
Gustav, 2007 Hurricane Ike, 2012 Hurricane Sandy, 2010 Haiti Earthquake, 2011
Christchurch Earthquake in New Zealand, 2011 Japan Earthquake and Tsunami, the
2015 Nepal Earthquake, as well as most recently Hurricane Harvey and Irma.
Cal OES continues to monitor operations for Hurricane Maria and requests for
assistance under the Emergency Management Assistance Compact (EMAC). EMAC, which
includes the participation of all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto
Rico, Guam and the U.S. Virgin Islands, is a nationally recognized mutual-aid
system that provides the foundation for states to request and send resources
across their borders when impacted by a disaster.
In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.info

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 871 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 21, 2017 Thursday

California Sends Urban Search and Rescue Teams to Support Hurricane Maria
Response

LENGTH: 402  words



Sacramento: Cal  OES Governer,s Office of emergency service, The state of Taxas
has issued the following news release:


At the request of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Governor
Edmund G. Brown, Jr. has approved the deployment of Urban Search and Rescue
(US&R) Task Force 2 (CA-TF2), Task Force 6 (CA-TF6) and Task Force 7 (CA-TF7)
through the California Governor's Office of Emergency Services (Cal OES) to aid
the response to Hurricane Maria.


The National Hurricane Center in Miami, Florida has declared Hurricane Maria
extremely dangerous as a Category 5 hurricane and issued Hurricane Watches and
Warnings for the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.
For this deployment to Hurricane Maria, CA-TF2 consists of 27 personnel from the
Los Angeles County Fire Department, CA-TF6 consists of 27 personnel from
Riverside City Fire Department and CA-TF7 consists of 27 personnel from
Sacramento City Fire Department.
This configuration of the US&R Task Forces was specified by FEMA for operations
in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands because it provides light, fast,
maneuverable, and easily transported urban search & rescue capabilities
consistent with hurricane conditions on the islands.
These teams will augment four larger State/National US&R Task Forces and the
FEMA US&R Incident Support Team (and a canine search team element of the
Riverside City US&R Task Force (CA-TF6) that are already in Puerto Rico awaiting
Hurricane Maria's landfall.
Since 1992, California-based US&R Task Forces have been deployed to a long list
of state, national, and international disasters including the 2007 Hurricane
Gustav, 2007 Hurricane Ike, 2012 Hurricane Sandy, 2010 Haiti Earthquake, 2011
Christchurch Earthquake in New Zealand, 2011 Japan Earthquake and Tsunami, the
2015 Nepal Earthquake, as well as most recently Hurricane Harvey and Irma.
Cal OES continues to monitor operations for Hurricane Maria and requests for
assistance under the Emergency Management Assistance Compact (EMAC). EMAC, which
includes the participation of all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto
Rico, Guam and the U.S. Virgin Islands, is a nationally recognized mutual-aid
system that provides the foundation for states to request and send resources
across their borders when impacted by a disaster.
In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolution.com

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 872 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              May 26, 2015 Tuesday

Experts tie[#x2028]hurricanes to changes in climate [JUMP]Frequency of intense
cyclones,[#x2028]storm surge, rainfall on increase;
Frequency of intense cyclones, storm surge, rainfall on increase

BYLINE: KEITH MORELLI Tribune staff

SECTION: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1114 words



HIGHLIGHT: June 1 is beginning of hurricane season and we'll chat about
predictions and other assorted connected stuff.


TAMPA - Climate change may be triggering an evolution in hurricanes, with some
researchers predicting the violent storms could move farther north, out of the
Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico, where they have threatened coastlines for
centuries.

Hurricane season in the Atlantic Ocean begins Monday, and forecasters are
predicting a relatively quiet season. They say three hurricanes are expected
over the next six months, and only one will turn into a major hurricane.

Florida hasn't been hit by a hurricane in a decade, and researchers are
increasingly pointing to climate change as a potential factor.

There is a consensus among atmospheric researchers studying the connection
between global warming and hurricanes that centuries- old patterns may be
shifting, said Kerry Emanuel, professor of atmospheric science at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.

There are a few things we agree on, he said, and a few things we don't know much
about.

He said researchers generally agree that the frequency of high-intensity storms,
Category 3, 4 and 5, will increase as the planet warms. By how much? There's a
lot of uncertainty, he said.

The second generally accepted theory is that with rising sea levels, storm surge
could become more of a threat than wind. The sea level is going up and will
continue to go up, he said.

Rain also is expected to increase during hurricanes, he said. It's in widespread
agreement that as you warm the climate, hurricanes will rain a lot more.

Other theories of how climate change affects hurricane activity are still being
researched, he said, and there is some disagreement among scientists. One is the
frequency of less intense hurricanes, the Category 1 and 2 storms.

We don't know if that will go up or down, but it doesn't really matter, Emanuel
said. Eighty percent of the damage done by hurricanes over the past 50 years was
done by major storms anyway.

One emerging theory is that hurricanes appear to be reaching peak intensity
farther north, he said. Tropical cyclones around the globe are reaching peak
intensity closer to the poles, he said, meaning in the Northern Hemisphere,
farther north and in the Southern Hemisphere, farther south.

What this means for the Atlantic hurricanes is that they are gathering strength
farther north over open water and could increasingly take aim at targets north
of Florida, from the Mid-Atlantic to New York and Massachusetts.

That means that the Caribbean may see a decline in hurricanes, Emanuel said.

This year, meteorologists expect only one major hurricane to form in the
Atlantic basin between June 1 and Nov. 30, the Atlantic hurricane season. The
experts base their predictions on a moderately strong El Niño in the Pacific
Ocean and cooler- than-normal temperatures of the tropical Atlantic.

The National Hurricane Center will issue its official prediction Wednesday,
though other weather prognosticators have said all indications point to a
hurricane season less active than the historical norm.

Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project made its educated
guesses in April.

We anticipate that the 2015 Atlantic basin hurricane season will be one of the
least active seasons since the middle of the 20th century, said the project's
website. It appears quite likely that an El Niño of at least moderate strength
will develop this summer and fall. The tropical and subtropical Atlantic are
also quite cool at present.

We anticipate a below- average probability for major hurricanes making landfall
along the United States coastline and in the Caribbean.

The project's predictions say there likely will be seven named storms forming
this year, with just a 15 percent chance of a hurricane hitting anywhere along
the Gulf of Mexico coast.

Hurricane managers warn against complacency.

I've seen all the headlines; that it will be a slow season, a quiet season, even
some said it will be a boring season, said Dennis Feltgen, spokesman for the
National Hurricane Center in Miami. It's only slow, quiet and boring if you
don't get hit. If you do get hit, it's anything but a slow, quiet and boring
season.

He said that 1992 was considered a slow season. That is until Hurricane Andrew,
a Category 5 storm, swept over South Florida, causing billions of dollars in
damage.

In 1983, there were only four named storms, but one, Category 3 Hurricane
Alicia, caused extensive damage in Houston. Hurricane Betsy cut across Florida
in 1965 before causing widespread damage in Louisiana in what was considered a
below-average year.

The other side of the coin was in 2010, when a dozen hurricanes formed and none
hit the United States, Feltgen said. It doesn't matter how many storms are
floating around out there; you can get hit in slow years, and you may not get
hit in busy years.

People should prepare, he said, as if they are in a hurricane's sights.

Florida is in its 10th year without being hit by a hurricane with any strength,
Feltgen said. That's a remarkable streak. The last hurricane was Wilma in 2005.
Since then 3 million people have moved to Florida. That's 3 million people who
have never experienced a hurricane.

Lack of experience, complacency and denial is a triple threat.

You've got to have a hurricane plan in place, Feltgen said. If you've got a plan
in place, you will be a hurricane survivor. If you don't have a plan in place,
you will be a hurricane victim.

If a storm does hit Florida over the next six months, the state is ready to
render aid, at least pay to fix some of the damage.

Because it's been 10 years since a hurricane hit the state, emergency fund
coffers have been bumped up.

In 1993, in the wake of Hurricane Andrew, the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund
was created. Over the past 10 years, it has been making money and not spending
any.Estimates from last year's audit show nearly $13 billion is available for
the Atlantic hurricane season.

Emergency managers in Florida are preparing for the worst, like they do at the
outset of every season. Across the state this past week, county emergency
management officials participated in a statewide hurricane drill to test systems
and personnel.

We've updated all of our plans and tested some systems out, said Hillsborough
County Emergency Management Director Preston Cook. We're going to use social
media more this year. We have a robust team that will be doing that. We also
have an enhanced county website for folks to surf and get information about
stuff going on in the county.

The prediction that 2015 may be a slow hurricane season means nothing, he said.

You have to be ready, he said. It only takes one to be devastated.

[#x2028]kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 873 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            April 16, 2016 Saturday

Scientists predict average hurricane season;
That means 12 named storms, five hurricanes

BYLINE: Mike Clary; Sun Sentinel

SECTION: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 319 words

DATELINE: FORT LAUDERDALE


- The year's hurricane season will be near-average, with the formation of 12
named storms, including five hurricanes making landfall along the U.S. coastline
or in the Caribbean, according to a prediction released this week.

The chances of one major storm, with sustained winds of 111 mph or higher,
striking somewhere in the U.S. is 50 percent, according to scientists at
Colorado State University's Department of Atmospheric Science.

The seasonal outlook is based in part on an analysis of ocean water temperatures
and the strength of atmospheric phenomena called El Nino and La Nina, according
to forecasters. The waters of the far North Atlantic are quite cold, forecasters
wrote in their outlook, which tends to force atmospheric conditions that are
less conducive for Atlantic hurricane formation and intensification.

The six-month hurricane season begins June 1. But one out-of-season storm,
Hurricane Alex, is already in the books.

The first hurricane to form in January since 1938, Alex developed top winds of
85 mph before falling apart Jan. 15 about 1,000 miles off the coast of Morocco.
It did not affect the U.S.

An average hurricane season sees the formation of 12 named storms, six
hurricanes and two major hurricanes, according to forecaster Jack Beven at the
National Hurricane Center in Miami.

A storm earns a name when it becomes a tropical storm, with minimum sustained
winds of 39 mph. The storm gains hurricane status when winds speeds reach 74
mph.The last hurricane to make landfall in Florida was Wilma on Oct. 24, 2005.

Despite that relative calm, forecasters warn against complacency. Every year,
regardless of the various season forecast, you need to prepare the same way,
said Beven. If one storm hits you, you've had a busy season.

The next tropical storm to form will be named Bonnie.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will issue its seasonal
outlook in late May, Beven said.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2016 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 874 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            April 20, 2016 Wednesday

'Cold blob' tosses wild card into hurricane gamble [JUMP]Chillier waters in
North Atlantic may diminish risks;
Chillier waters in North Atlantic may diminish risks

BYLINE: KEITH MORELLI Tribune staff

SECTION: NATION & WORLD; Metro; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 851 words



HIGHLIGHT: A weakening El Nino in the Pacific may mean an active hurricane
season in the Atlantic; with some predictions saying five named storms may make
landfall either in the U.S. or the Caribbean


TAMPA - Six weeks before the start of the annual Atlantic hurricane season,
prognosticators have issued their first educated guesses about how many named
storms will form, how many will head this way and how many will make landfall.

While most forecasters agree the dwindling El Niño in the Pacific Ocean may bump
up the chances of hurricanes forming in the Atlantic, a big blob of unusually
cold water in the North Atlantic also may play a part in determining how many
storms form this year and how intense they may become.

Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project says this year's
hurricane activity will be about average. This comes after two years of
below-average named storms forming in the Atlantic on top of a 10-year period
during which Florida has not welcomed a single hurricane ashore.

We anticipate that the 2016 Atlantic basin hurricane season will have
approximately average activity, said the project's summary.

What kept the hurricanes at bay last year was a strong El Niño phenomenon, a
pattern of warm water along the equatorial part of the eastern Pacific Ocean
that creates atmospheric conditions that inhibit the formation of hurricanes in
the Atlantic.

But last year's El Niño is weakening, the summary says, and is likely to
transition to either neutral or La Niña (a cooling of the Pacific) conditions by
the peak of the Atlantic hurricane season.

The tropical Atlantic is warm, which could lead to more intense storms, but the
North Atlantic is unusually cold, the summary said, and that could thwart the
formation of major storms - depending on where the cold blob of water goes.

While shear-enhancing El Niño conditions are likely to dissipate in the next
several months, the far North Atlantic is quite cold, the summary said. These
cold anomalies tend to force atmospheric conditions that are less conducive for
Atlantic hurricane formation and intensification.

Meteorologists are watching that cold blob of water to see if it follows the
clockwise ocean currents, which could bring it to the tropics of the eastern
Atlantic, where many storms are born.

Hurricanes gain strength from the warm water in the tropics, and an influx of
cool water could mean storms may not turn into hurricanes as readily.

The cold blob, which has colder-than-normal surface temperatures, currently is
located east of Newfoundland and south of Greenland and may be the result of ice
melting in the Arctic Ocean. Climatologists say the melting has put a lot of
cold, fresh water into the North Atlantic. That water stays on the surface
because fresh water is less dense than salt water. Normally, cold water would
sink to the bottom.

Still, the summary said, scientists expect a near average probability for
hurricanes making landfall along the United States coastline and in the
Caribbean.

The project predicted 12 named storms will form this season, which starts on
June 1 and lasts until Nov. 30. Of those, five will become hurricanes, and of
those, two will become Category 3, 4 or 5 storms.

The project predicted a 50 percent chance that one major hurricane will make
landfall somewhere along the U.S. coastline and a 30 percent chance of one
hitting peninsular Florida. Chances a major storm will hit anywhere between the
Florida Panhandle and Brownsville, Texas, are about 30 percent.

Chances a hurricane will hit somewhere in the Caribbean were set at 40 percent,
the project summary said.

The National Hurricane Center in Miami won't make its predictions until May 27,
said center spokesman Dennis Feltgen, who urged people to make plans before it's
too late.

Even though the chances appear to be small, he said, it only takes one hurricane
to create a widespread disaster zone. So, all coastal residents, who may have
grown complacent, should be prepared, he said.

It's been going on 11 years now, Feltgen said. It's always difficult for
somebody to get their heads around something that may or may not occur,
especially this being the 11th year without any hurricanes in Florida. The last
one here was Hurricane Wilma in 2005, and that alone is mind boggling.

But the further away we get from Hurricane Wilma, he said, the closer we get to
the next hurricane, and we've got to be ready in case that date is going to be
in 2016.

Three million people have moved to Florida since Wilma, Feltgen said, and that's
a lot of inexperience.

Everyone in the state should make a hurricane plan and stock up beforehand on
nonperishables, water and batteries, he said.

Even during slow hurricane seasons, people should not be complacent, Feltgen
said.

The hurricane season of 1992 was considered a slow season, until Hurricane
Andrew, a Category 5 storm, swept over South Florida, causing billions of
dollars in damage.

In 1983, there were only four named storms, but one, Category 3 Hurricane
Alicia, caused extensive damage in Houston.Hurricane Betsy cut across Florida in
1965 before causing widespread damage in Louisiana in what was considered a
below-average year.

The last hurricane to directly hit Tampa was in 1921.

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2016 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 875 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

HURRICANE VEERS AWAY FROM U.S.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 321 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 6


Hurricane Gabrielle veered northward in the Atlantic today, taking its 130
mile-an-hour winds away from the United States mainland but threatening to
sideswipe Bermuda.

The hurricane caused swells of 5 to 13 feet from Maryland to Florida, said Bob
Sheets, director of the National Hurricane Center.

''We have a very large wind field around this hurricane,'' Mr. Sheets said.
''It's generating swells over almost the entire western Atlantic.''

Winds of at least 40 miles per hour stretched 550 miles across the storm's path
as it curved to the north out in the middle Atlantic, the forecasters said.

Most Powerful of Season

At 10:30 P.M., the hurricane's center was near 27 degrees north latitude and 60
degrees west longitude, or about 460 miles southeast of Bermuda. It was heading
north northwest at 15 m.p.h. and was expected to continue turning to the north.

The hurricane is the largest and most powerful of the season, rating below last
year's Hurricane Gilbert, which ravaged the Caribbean with winds of 155 m.p.h.

Mr. Sheets said that the course of Hurricane Gabrielle could not be predicted
with precision, but that it appeared the hurricane would graze Bermuda by Friday
with winds at the level of a tropical storm.

Bermuda ''may not get the core of it at all, but they are already getting 15- to
20-foot swells,'' Mr. Sheets said.

Far to the north, a storm dubbed Felix maintained its status as a minimal
hurricane, with winds of 75 m.p.h. The hurricane was drifting slowly out in the
Atlantic and was no threat to land, the forecasters said.

At 10:30 P.M. Felix's center was 37.5 degree north latitude and 47.5 degrees
west longitude, or about 850 miles from the westernmost Azores.

Satellite pictures indicated that it was drifting toward the north northeast at
less than 5 m.p.h.

Storms are named when their winds reach 39 m.p.h. and are classified as
hurricanes when they grow to 74 m.p.h.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map showing path of Hurricane Gabrielle

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 876 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Century of Deadly Storms

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 336 words


Following is a list of the worst Atlantic hurricanes of the 20th century.
Hurricanes were given names in 1954.

Sept. 8, 1900 - Galveston, Tex., 6,000 dead.

Sept. 16-22, 1926 - Florida and Alabama, 372 dead.

Oct. 20, 1926 - Cuba, 600 dead.

Sept. 12-17, 1928 - West Indies and Florida, 6,000 dead.

Sept. 3, 1930 - Dominican Republic, 2,000 dead.

Sept. 21, 1938 - Long Island and New England, 600 dead.

Sept. 12-16, 1944 - North Carolina to New England, 389 dead.

Aug. 30, 1954 - Hurricane Carol, northeastern United States, 68 dead.

Oct. 12-13, 1954 - Hurricane Hazel, Haiti and eastern United States, 347 dead.

Aug. 18-19, 1955 - Hurricane Diane, eastern United States, 400 dead.

Sept. 19, 1955 - Hurricane Hilda, Mexico, 200 dead.

Sept. 22-28, 1955 - Hurricane Janet, Caribbean, 500 dead.

June 27-30, 1957 - Hurricane Audrey, Louisiana and Texas, 526 dead.

Sept. 4-12, 1960 - Hurricane Donna, Caribbean, eastern United States, 148 dead.

Oct. 31, 1961 - Hurricane Hattie, British Honduras, 400 dead.

Oct. 4-8, 1963 - Hurricane Flora, Cuba and Haiti, 6,000 dead.

Oct. 4-7, 1964 - Hurricane Hilda, Louisiana, Mississippi and Georgia, 38 dead.

Sept. 24-30, 1966 - Hurricane Inez, Caribbean, Florida and Mexico, 293 dead.

Aug. 17-18, 1969 - Hurricane Camille, Mississippi and Louisiana, 256 dead, $3.8
billion in damage.

July 30 - Aug. 5, 1970 - Hurricane Celia, Cuba, Florida and Texas, 31 dead.

June 19-29, 1972 - Hurricane Agnes, Florida to New York, 118 dead, $4.7 billion
damage.

Sept. 19-20, 1974 - Hurricane Fifi, Hon= duras, 2,000 dead.

Aug. 30 to Sept. 13, 1979 - Hurricane David, Dominican Republic, Dominica and
Florida, 1,200 dead. Hurricane Frederic, the Bahamas, Alabama and Mississippi, 7
dead, $2.5 billion damage.

Aug. 4-11, 1980 - Hurricane Allen, Caribbean and Texas, 272 dead.

September 1988 - Hurricane Gilbert, Caribbean and Mexico, 400 dead.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 877 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                 July 14, 1997

Storms Cause Up to $ 26.5 Billion in Damage

SECTION: SPECIAL REPORT; Flood Services; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 250 words


During the average hurricane season, the National Hurricane Center in Miami
tracks 10 tropical storms that are assigned names, six full-blown hurricanes
that reach wind speeds of 111 miles per hour, and two major hurricanes

The most active hurricane season on record was 1995 when NHC tracked 19 tropic
storms, 11 hurricanes and six major hurricanes which caused $ 5.2 billion in
damages.  Ironically, the 1992 hurricane season was a "below average" year with
only four named hurricanes, but it included Hurricane Andrew which slammed into
the southern Florida coast and caused $ 26.5 billion in damages. Andrew was the
only hurricane to make land-fall that season.

Last year, Hurricane Fran was the most expensive storm to hit the mainland right
at the South/North Carolina border.  Fran caused $ 3.2 billion in damages.

Hurricane Activity during the Past Two Years
                     Tropical       Full          Major      Estimated Damage
Year                Storms n1  Hurricanes n2  Hurricanes n3    To Property
Historical Data n4          10              6              2  $ 4.5 billion
1995                        19             11              6  $ 5.2 billion
1996                        13              9              6  $ 3.6 billion
1997 estimate               11              7              3        na




n1 A tropical storm has sustained winds of 39 mph for at least one minute.

n2 A full hurricane has sustained winds of 74 mph for at least one minute.

n3 A major hurricane is classified as a category three storm or higher with
sustained winds of 111mph for at least one minute

n4 Data from 1871 to present.


Source: National Hurricane Center

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1997 Faulkner & Gray


                          FOCUS - 878 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1988, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Meteorologists Say the Hurricane Is Similar to a Monster Tornado

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words


Hurricane Gilbert, the mightiest storm to hit the Western Hemisphere in this
century, concentrates so much of its destructive energy into a narrow core that
meteorologists say the storm resembles a monster tornado.

The eye of the hurricane, as measured Tuesday by research aircraft operated by
the National Hurricane Center and the Air Force, was only 8 nautical miles
across. By comparison, the eye of an ordinary hurricane is 20 to 25 miles in
diameter.

Combined with record low barometric pressure in the storm's eye, the effect of
such a narrowing was to concentrate the hurricane's energy in winds surrounding
the eye, producing gusts of 200 miles an hour or more.

'Concentrated Winds' Blamed

Frederick J. Gadomski, a climate analyst at the Pennsylvania State University,
said the small eye was one of the main reasons Hurricane Gilbert was so
destructive.

''Its concentrated winds are cutting a tornado-like path of destruction,'' he
said. ''But unlike a tornado's swath, which is only a few hundred yards wide,
this hurricane's path of devastation is some 50 miles wide.''

Moreover, the storm is likely to carry clusters of tornadoes within its whirling
central structure. Tornado watches will be posted along with hurricane warnings
in Louisiana and Texas on Friday, when the storm is expected to leave the Gulf
of Mexico and roar into northeastern Mexico or the United States.

Meteorologists Are Surprised

Hurricane Gilbert caught meteorologists completely off guard.

''We were as surprised by the birth of this powerful hurricane as astronomers
were last year by the sudden flaring of a rare supernova,'' Mr. Gadomski said.

In common with other great hurricanes, Hurricane Gilbert coalesced abruptly from
a cluster of thunderstorms centered over warm ocean water. Although experts can
recognize the conditions under which hurricanes may form, they are still unable
to predict when or even whether the transition will take place, Mr. Gadomski
said.

Although the destructive effects of a hurricane result from its high winds and
the ocean water it may hurl at a coastline, meteorologists rank the magnitude of
hurricanes by the pressure of the air within the eyes, or centers, of these
whirling storms.

Air Pressure as Yardstick

Meteorologists say that measurements of wind speeds and other characteristics of
storms are inaccurate and difficult to interpret, and that the most dependable
gauge of a hurricane's strength is the air pressure in its eye; the lower the
pressure, the more powerful the storm.

On Tuesday night the pressure in the eye of Hurricane Gilbert was 26.13 inches,
the lowest ever recorded for a hurricane in the Western Hemisphere.

The only lower pressure in a hurricane, 25.69 inches, was recorded on Oct. 12,
1979, in the eye of Typhoon Tip as it roared across the Pacific Ocean between
Luzon in the Philippines and Iwo Jima in the western Pacific.

Small Eye Causes Concern

Barometric pressure is usually measured as the height in inches to which the
atmosphere will force a column of mercury in an evacuated tube. Pressure is also
reported in millibars, or thousandths of the standard air pressure at sea level;
one millibar is equivalent to .0295 inches of mercury.

The pressure within the funnel of a tornado is much lower than the pressure in
the eye of a hurricane, but a tornado, which is formed over land, is a much
smaller storm, though it can be very destructive.

The thin cross-section of Hurricane Gilbert's core has caused problems for
scientists.

''This eye is so small,'' Mr. Gadomski said, ''that one of the radio sondes
dropped into it by a research plane yesterday to measure pressure, temperature
and humidity missed the eye completely and plunged into the wall of the
hurricane, where it was destroyed.''

Experts agree that aside from Hurricane Gilbert's house-wrecking wind
velocities, the storm's main threat to the Gulf Coast is a ''storm surge'' - an
ocean wave up to 25 feet high that can be as devastating as a small tsunami.

Coastal Areas Endangered

Storm surge is caused partly by the raising of a column of ocean water under the
low-pressure eye of a hurricane, and partly by violent winds surrounding the
eye. As the hurricane moves over land it drags this high-water region a short
distance inland, inundating coastal buildings.

These effects may cause immense damage when the storm crosses the Gulf Coast.
However, there may be some consolation for farmers if the storm moves northward
through the Mississippi Valley, bringing desperately needed rain to parched
crops.

Why is Hurricane Gilbert so much more powerful than similar storms?

''If we could answer that question,'' Mr. Gadomski said, ''we would have been
able to forecast the storm, which we were not able to do.''

Warm Water Is a Factor

He suggested, however, that one factor may be that the water that spawned the
hurricane west of the Windward Islands was very warm.

Another essential condition is a ''divergence effect'' in the upper atmosphere
that draws air away from the top of the rising air column at the core of a
hurricane.

By constantly removing a heavy mass of air, this process keeps the air pressure
in the eye low enough to sustain a hurricane and permit it to gain force.

The destructive potential of a hurricane may be reduced or increased by factors
other than barometric pressure and wind speeds. The power of a hurricane drops
rapidly as it passes from ocean to land, particularly if there are mountains in
its path.

Some Deadly Storms Recalled

Loss of life to large hurricanes in this century has generally been reduced by
timely warnings, but this was not always the case.

A hurricane that smashed into the Gulf Coast city of Galveston, Tex., on Sept.
8-9, 1900, killed an estimated 6,000 people.

The deadliest cyclone on record occurred in 1970 in Bangladesh, where United
Nations experts put the death toll at about one million.

In the United States, one of the most destructive storms in the recent decades
was Hurricane Camille, which struck the coasts of Louisiana and Mississippi in
1969, killing 256 people.

''Hurricane Gilbert is at least the equal of Camille, and it may be even more
destructive,'' Mr. Gadomski said. ''Storm surge was one of the main effects of
Camille, and it may be this time, too.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of satellite picture showing Hurricane Gilbert (AP) (pg. A1);
diagram showing cross section of a hurricane (pg. A17)

                   Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 879 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Newly Formed Hurricane Takes Aim at Florida

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 396 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Aug. 22


The Atlantic season's first tropical storm strengthened rapidly today, turned
into a hurricane and then strengthened even more as it moved along a course
aimed directly at the South Florida coast.

At 5 o'clock this evening, the hurricane, named Andrew, was 615 miles east of
Miami, heading west at 15 miles an hour and picking up speed as it raced over
warm Atlantic waters toward the northwestern Bahamas, where a hurricane warning
was posted in expectation that the storm would hit there on Sunday.

Tonight a hurricane watch, which signifies the possibility of hurricane
conditions within the following 36 hours, was posted from Titusville, on
Florida's central coast, all the way to the state's southern tip and then west
to the Dry Tortugas.

Florida emergency agencies monitored the storm closely, and officials of the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration's launching complex at Cape
Canaveral began making hurricane preparations.

The National Hurricane Center in the Miami suburb of Coral Gables said that the
storm was packing winds of 100 m.p.h. and that it was expected to continue
strengthening and to remain on its westward course at least until Sunday.

Forecasters at the center cautioned that it was still to early to say with great
certainty where, or even whether, the hurricane would hit the American
coastline.

Fears of Complacency

But a continued westerly track would take the heart of the storm close to
Florida's biggest population center, the Miami-Fort Lauderdale area, which has
not been hit directly by a hurricane in 42 years.

The last hurricane to even badly brush Miami was Hurricane Betsy, which roared
ashore in the Florida Keys 27 years ago.

Fears of Complacency

The absence of hurricanes here since then has raised fears of complacency in
South Florida, where the population has grown tenfold since the 1950's. Experts
say that in some areas here, as much as 90 percent of the population has never
experienced a hurricane.

Hurricane Andrew was born as a tropical depression in the mid-Atlantic earlier
this week and skirted the Lesser Antilles before gaining strength north of
Puerto Rico, where it turned into a tropical storm, by definition a storm whose
sustained winds are at least 34 m.p.h.

Early today it grew into a hurricane -- that is, a storm with sustained winds of
no less than 74 m.p.h.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map/Diagram: "The Threat of Hurricane Andrew," shows formation of
Hurricane Andrew off coast of Flrida, and indicates its likely path and times.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 880 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HURRICANE MOVING INTO BARBADOS

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 314 words

DATELINE: BRIDGETOWN, Barbados, Aug. 3


A hurricane moved toward the Caribbean resort island of Barbados today, smashing
telephone poles and tearing the tops off palm trees.

The streets of Bridgetown, the capital, were deserted as the island of 250,000
braced for the first hurricane to strike Barbados since Hurricane Jeanette
killed 18 people in 1955.

Even before the center of the new hurricane, designated Allen, struck the
island, the outer winds knocked the Government radio station off the air.

Winds today reached 125 miles an hour near the center of the hurricane, the
first of the season, according to forecasters at the National Hurricane Center
in Miami. Hurricane-force winds extended outward 25 miles in all directions from
the center and gale-force winds extended 150 miles.

At 6 P.M. the hurricane was centered about 40 miles east of Barbados. It was
moving west at 20 to 25 miles an hour, but was expected to take a slight turn
west-northwest by tomorrow.

Carrington Ends Visit

Lord Carrington, the British Foreign Secretary, ended a two-day visit here only
hours before 50- to 70-mile-an-hour winds began tugging at shuttered stores and
flimsy roofs.

Hurricane-force winds were also expected to hit the islands of St.  Lucia and
St. Vincent. Gil Clark, a hurricane forecaster, predicted that St. Lucia would
get ''the worst of it.'' Gale warnings and hurricane watches were also in effect
for Guadeloupe, Grenada and Antigua.

Neal Frank, chief forecaster at the National Hurricane Center, said, ''At this
time the storm does not compare to some of the bigger storms, but it is still a
hurricane - a significant but not severe hurricane.''

''People in the islands need to get on with it,'' he said. ''People need to get
their shutters up and their boats in. They need to remember that they may have a
problem with a storm surge, which is the water and waves that come with the
hurricane.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Barbados

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 881 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 26, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR HURRICANE THREATENS MIDDLE OF EAST COAST

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words

DATELINE: CORAL GABLES, Fla., Sept. 25


A powerful hurricane described as ''one of the strongest on record in the
Atlantic'' churned toward the Eastern seaboard tonight with sustained winds of
135 miles an hour and a hurricane watch was posted from the Carolinas to
Virginia.

Meteorologists said atmospheric conditions might possibly steer Hurricane Gloria
harmlessly out into the Atlantic, but chances of such an abrupt shift in
direction diminished as the storm moved relentessly northwest.

The winds had diminised slightly, from 150 miles an hour recorded at 6 P.M., by
the National Hurricane Center, but the danger it posed had not.

''Gloria is a very dangerous hurricane,'' said Neil Frank, director of the
National Hurricane Center here.

Storm Moves Northwest

There was a 17 percent chance that the center of the storm would come within 65
miles of New York City by Saturday evening and a 13 percent chance it would pass
that close to Montauk on the eastern tip of Long Island, according to the
hurricane center.

''If it misses the Carolina coast the chances increase that it may strike the
New York-New England area,'' said Robert Case, a forecaster at the Hurricane
Center.

At midnight the hurricane was centered 28.7 degrees north latitude and 74.7
degrees west longitude, or about 460 miles south-southeast of Cape Hatteras,
N.C. ''Gloria is moving toward the northwest at 15 miles per hour and is
expected to gradually turn northward and increase forward speed Thursday,'' an
advisory said. Coastal residents and ships ''along the coast from the watch area
northward to New England should closely monitor the progress of this dangerous
hurricane,'' the advisory said.

A special telephone line was activated for information about the hurricane. The
number is 1-900-410-6622. A call costs 50 cents for the first minute and 35
cents for each additional minute.

Compared to Storm of 1938

When the winds of the hurricane were at 150 miles an hour, the storm was on the
borderline of Category 5, which is defined by winds of more than 155 miles an
hour. By late tonight it was on the border between Category 4, with winds of at
least 131 miles an hour, and Category 3.

The storm's potential was being compared to the unnamed 1938 hurricane that
accelerated quickly in northern waters and struck Long Island and the New
England coast, causing the loss of 600 lives. Many of the casualties occurred in
Providence, R.I., where the storm surge pushed a wall of water into the city.
That hurricane was a Category 3 storm.

The Carolina coast has been buffeted by several minor hurricanes in recent years
but has not experienced the battering of a major hurricane since 1954 when
Hurricane Hazel drove ashore, destroying virtually all the beach houses along
Long Beach, N.C. Hazel was a Category 4 storm.

''Gloria has all the destructive potential of Hazel and more,'' said Dr. Robert
Sheets, a member of the team of forecasters that manned the hurricane center's
banks of visual display screens, computing data fed from a variety of sources on
land and reconnaissance planes flying into the storm.

''While Gloria is presently moving toward the northwest at 15 miles per hour we
feel it is going to turn at some point and accelerate,'' Dr. Frank said. ''If
that happens tonight it could still miss the whole coast.''

Hurricanes off the the Carolina coast in late September usually weaken at sea if
they move slowly, he said. But the tendency is for the storms to pick up speed,
and the fast movement of the storm compensates for a loss of wind strength
around the eye of the hurricane, he explained.

Warning for Northeast

The 1938 hurricane had circular winds in the Category 2 class but it was moving
at 50 to 60 miles an hour, producing the impact of a Category 3 hurricane, he
said.

He said interests in the Northeast should follow the hurricane's movements
closely on Thursday to see if it would pose a threat to that region later in the
week.

''With the technology we have today we do a great job of observing a hurricane
but the real puzzle of forecasting their movement is understanding what the
atmospheric environment around a storm is doing,'' Dr. Frank said in an
interview.

''At present this storm on is on the east side of the Bahamas and we are getting
very little data other than the planes we send in with recording instruments.''

The New York City metropolitan area itself has not been hit by the full force of
a hurricane in this century, Dr. Frank added.

He said if Gloria stayed on its current track and struck the Carolina coast it
would lose hurriance force winds over the inland and possibly bring much-needed
rainfall to the Middle Atlantic states later in the week. ----New York Area
Action Governor Kean of New Jersey yesterday put the Emergency Management
Section of the State Police on standby alert in anticipation of possible damage
from Hurricane Gloria, while on Long Island, Nassau and Suffolk County officials
began gearing up their emergency plans.

Emergency coordinators in the New Jersey Counties of Cape May, Atlantic,
Monmouth, Ocean, Cumberland and Middlesex counties have been notified, Mr. Kean
said.

''We know the storm is unusually powerful and is heading in New Jersey's
direction,'' Mr. Kean said. ''It is essential for us at the state level to
mobilize our resources so we can react quickly.''

The Governor said several state departments, including health, transportation,
environmental protection and the national guard have also been alerted as have
the American Red Cross, the Salvation Army and the Corps of Engineers.

On eastern Long Island, Suffolk County's 10 towns and service providing agencies
were notified by the County Department of Fire, Rescue, and Emergency Services
to be on alert, Eric Kopp, a spokesman for County Executiye Peter Cohalan said.

In Nassau County, Sgt. Willard Krausch, a county police spokesman, said last
night the county was in the initial stages of preparation and officials were
keeping an eye on the storm. ---- #60 Ships Ordered to Sail WASHINGTON, Sept. 25
- The Navy said today that it had ordered more than 60 ships to sail from ports
in Norfolk, Va., and Charleston, S.C., to escape Hurricane Gloria.

A Navy spokesman, Ken Pease, said most of the ships would sail north to ride out
the storm at anchor in the Chesapeake Bay. He said the Navy had also ordered
hundreds of aircraft stationed at Norfolk moved into hangars or flown to
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio to avoid damage from the winds.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Neil Frank and Robert Case (AP); map of site of Hurricane
Gloria

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
