
                           FOCUS - 1 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Aberdeen Press and Journal

                            September 1, 2014 Monday

Hurricanes - not just strong winds

BYLINE: Jeremy Cresswell

SECTION: BUSINESS; ENERGY; Columns; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1005 words


From Sunday, August 10, to Monday, August 11, Scotland and the North Sea
experienced unseasonably windy and very wet weather from the remnants of
ex-hurricane Bertha. One rig in the Central North Sea saw wave heights climb
from about one metre to seven metres in just 18 hours as severe gales swept in.

Hurricanes can cause immense damage to the offshore oil and gas industry. In
August 2005, considerable damage was caused by Hurricane Katrina to the US Gulf
Coast.

At least 20 offshore oil platforms went missing, sank or went adrift. Production
was seriously affected with interruptions to supplies and an estimated
$100-150billion cost for repairs.

Weather disruption is not just around the hurricane track. Strong winds around
the hurricane generate high seas that produce long-period swells that can travel
thousands of miles across the Atlantic to our shores. These long period swells
can run into the North Sea, preventing rig-moves and barge work.

So what causes hurricanes? How do we forecast them - and how can we best prepare
ourselves to avoid their wrath?

What is a hurricane?

Hurricane is a name given to an intense low pressure system which forms in the
tropical Atlantic. The system has core winds that reach 74mph or more.

Hurricanes, also known as tropical cyclones, are triggered by hot sea
temperatures engaging with converging winds and little wind increase allowing
storm clouds to rise to considerable heights.

They form near the equator where there is sufficient force to spin the rising
column of air. The energy contained in a hurricane is huge. It is estimated that
the energy related to the winds is 1.5x1012 watts - equivalent to about half the
worldwide electrical generating capacity.

Fuelled by warm tropical waters, in the Atlantic, these storms typically form
off the coast of West Africa and track westward, before eventually turning
northward. Once they move away from the tropics into mid-latitudes, they can
gain in strength if they meet cold air, becoming intense and complex low
pressure systems with the potential for rapid development and movement.

Hurricanes are given names so that they can be easily identified. The names are
pre-determined using alternating male and female names.

How do we forecast hurricanes?

There is no getting away from it, these systems are extremely challenging to
scientists and forecasters. Met Office forecast models provide guidance on the
development and track of hurricanes and tropical cyclones.

Tropical cyclones have a different structure to the Atlantic storms that batter
our shores - and associated extreme weather can lead to widespread impacts to
both the public and business.

As a result, there are several designated regional hurricane forecast centres,
with the responsibility to ensure a single authoritative forecast is issued. In
a situation where health and safety is paramount and emergency services are
involved, it is essential that a single source of traceable guidance is provided
for a given area.

These centres are supported by specialist forecasting teams that have access to
a wide range of weather forecast data.

Early planning

Advances in weather forecast science mean that the Met Office is able to provide
predictions of hurricane activity ahead of the forthcoming season. Guidance is
provided on the likely number and intensity of hurricanes that are expected in a
particular area. The seasonal forecast issued earlier this year predicted
near-to-below average activity with a best estimate of six hurricanes during the
period of June to November 2014.

Such an outlook provides a general guide to overall activity. More detailed
background information can be provided to those who are planning strategically
in a given ocean basin, for example finance and re-insurance.

Probability of getting hit

Seasonal outlooks do not predict where the hurricanes are going to track and/or
make landfall. In a similar way to our Scottish weather, the precise track and
intensity of the storm are determined by the weather patterns in place at the
time.

Powerful computers take a close look at the weather patterns and analyse the
location of the hurricane. This enables assessment of the range of possible
tracks and intensities that could occur. The range of forecasts is known as an
ensemble.

The Met Office tropical cyclone tracking programme runs in real time on the Met
Office 15-day "ensemble". The software runs out to 15 days and identifies new
tropical cyclones up to 360 hours ahead.

These models can even identify the likelihood of hurricanes before they have
even formed. This gives enough time for operational managers to determine
exposure of assets to potential storms and to invoke severe weather action
plans.

Don't forget the waves

Even if a hurricane does not track towards the UK it does not mean we miss out
from its impact entirely. Hurricanes can create huge waves, which can travel
thousands of miles, creating low but long period swells that can track across
the Atlantic and spread into the North Sea. The presence of these swells can
prevent jack-up rig moves and cause difficulties to floating production, storage
and offloading units (FPSOs) and semi-submersibles.

Met Office wave modelling has advanced to the extent that by splitting waves
into over 600 elements we are able to predict when the swell from hurricanes are
likely to reach our shores.

Damaging, disruptive, yes, hurricanes are exactly that. Primarily they play an
important role in a global balancing act, ensuring our climate and weather
patterns by bringing the warmth and energy at the equator towards the poles.

When the effects of hurricanes are felt in the UK, this is often a sign that
autumn is on its way, but we're now better informed to make the most of weather
opportunities - gone are the days when the industry scurried back to port in
September for the winter months. Some good and quiet days are still out there
for us, we just need to be on our feet and keep a weather eye out.

John Mitchell is a metocean scientist at the Met Office

Follow @MetOfficeMarine

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ELGIN FLOODING: Most of Britain was hit by wind and rain as a result of
Hurricane Bertha

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PJ


                      Copyright 2014 Aberdeen Journals Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                           FOCUS - 2 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              April 5, 2013 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Weather alerts system changed after Sandy furor;
Hurricane watches, warnings weren't issued as storm barreled in

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, @USATODAYWeather, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 417 words


The National Weather Service plans to revise how it delivers hurricane warnings
following criticism of how it handled notifications last October as Superstorm
Sandy bore down on the East Coast.

The fact that the weather service did not issue hurricane warnings as deadly
Sandy roared ashore  caused some public confusion, and at one point led New York
City Mayor Michael Bloomberg to downplay the storm's ferocity as it neared the
coast.

It has also caused a bit of a furor in the weather and emergency management
community since then.

Because Sandy was technically forecast to hit land as a "post-tropical cyclone"
and not a hurricane, the National Hurricane Center did not issue its usual
hurricane watches and warnings as the storm approached the coast, instead
relying on several local weather service offices to issue "high wind warnings,"
"coastal flood warnings" and other watches and warnings.

The weather service announced Thursday that starting with the next hurricane
season, "the definitions of hurricane and tropical storm watches and warnings
will be broadened" to allow these watches and warnings to be issued or remain in
effect after a tropical cyclone -- or hurricane -- transitions to
post-tropical, "when such a storm still poses a significant threat to life and
property."

The weather service says the new system will "ensure a continuity of service by
allowing the National Hurricane Center to issue advisories during the
post-tropical stage."

The National Weather Service and the National Hurricane Center are part of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Two days before the storm hit, Bloomberg said at a news conference the storm
"will be less dangerous" than Hurricane Irene, which had hit the year before.
While Irene did some serious damage, Sandy's catastrophic storm surge devastated
coastal communities from New Jersey to Connecticut, causing billions of dollars
in damage.

Up until now, the hurricane center had always only issued warnings for
hurricanes and tropical storms, while local offices issues warnings for most
other weather phenomena.

"Our forecasters now have more flexibility to effectively communicate the threat
posed by transitioning tropical systems," said Louis Uccellini, the new director
of the weather service. "Sandy's forecast was remarkably accurate, and under a
similar situation in the future, forecasters will be able to choose the best
option to underscore the urgency involved."

The Atlantic hurricane season officially starts June 1.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Spencer Platt, Getty Images The historic boardwalk was washed
away when the Rockaway neighborhood in Queens, N.Y., was hit hard by Superstorm
Sandy in October.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: NATION

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                           FOCUS - 3 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                      June 2, 1988, Thursday, City Edition

7 hurricanes forecast for Atlantic this year

BYLINE: DAVID K. ROGERS

SECTION: METRO AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1906 words



Be prepared for a stormy introduction to an extremely ill-mannered    bunch -
Alberto, Beryl, Chris, Debby, Ernesto, Florence and Gilbert -    if the
prediction is right.

     Hurricane researcher William M. Gray said Wednesday that seven    Atlantic
hurricanes should swirl to life between today and Nov. 30, the    six-month-long
hurricane season, a sharp increase from the three that    formed in 1987.

     Tropical storm activity should start earlier this season, Gray    said, and
the storms have the potential for being more powerful and    more destructive
than relatively recent hurricanes.

     Gray said the hurricanes may be more destructive because conditions    are
ripe for the development of storms closer to the equator along the    West
African coast. Those storms historically have given rise to    hurricanes that
have been among the fiercest.

     If Gray is correct, the 1988 season should tie 1985 as the busiest
hurricane season this decade.

     Gray is professor of atmospheric research at Colorado State    University,
in Fort Collins. Wednesday's prediction marks the fifth    year he has publicly
offered a hurricane total for a given season.

     As with his earlier predictions, Gray studied four equatorial    weather
factors extending from the eastern Pacific Ocean to West    Africa.

     The seven hurricanes expected this year should arise from 11    tropical
storms strong enough to earn human names, Gray said, meaning    that they will
have winds of at least 39 miles per hour.

     Named tropical storms earn hurricane status once their    counterclockwise
winds sustain speeds of at least 74 mph.

     While Gray's four weather factors have been well documented through    the
years by weather researchers, Gray has concluded that their    interdependent
activity could serve as a guide to predicting    hurricanes.

     Gray has characterized his predictions as little more than an
interesting academic exercise. But emergency management officials and    other
people concerned about the tremendous human suffering and damage    associated
with hurricanes anxiously anticipate his annual prediction.

     Gray's prediction has proven so popular largely because it has    proven so
accurate. When including his mid-season update, which he    gives around Aug. 1,
Gray was right on the money in 1985 and 1986. In    1987, when he said at
mid-season that four hurricanes would form, three    actually came to life.

     According to Gray's anatomy of a hurricane season, the temperature    of
sea water in the eastern Pacific, barometric pressure in the    Caribbean basin
and prevailing directions of two upper-level winds all    help determine the
prevalence of hurricanes.

     Three of the four factors help Gray determine whether high-level    winds
will be strong enough to knock the tops off tropical storm    systems that, if
left unchecked, might normally develop into    hurricanes.

     Gray's descriptions of the four weather patterns he pays particular
attention to are relatively easy to understand. They include:         Sea water
temperature in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean. The    phenomenon, also
known as the El Nino, is a 12- to 18-month period when    unusually warm surface
water temperatures occur in the eastern half of    the equatorial Pacific.
Moderate to strong El Nino events occur about    once every five or six years.

     Weather researchers say that the water, which may be only one to    three
degrees warmer than normal, releases more energy at the ocean    surface. Air
warmed at the surface then rises to quickly strengthen the    tropical jet
stream aloft. Those winds tend to blow northeastward into    the Caribbean
basin, a prime site for tropical storm - and hurricane -    formation and
growth.

     The more intense the El Nino event, the stronger the winds that    inhibit
hurricane formation.

      High-level westerly winds over the Caribbean Sea. These winds,    about 7
1/2 miles aloft, blow predominantly from the west to the east.

 Stronger winds from an El Nino event can help strengthen these    high-level
winds.

     In general, Gray has said, hurricanes in the equatorial regions of    the
Atlantic will form from tropical storms only when these high-level    winds blow
very weakly. Weak westerly winds allow the storms to climb    almost vertically
and reach their full energy potential. Strong winds    tend to shear off the
tops of those growing Atlantic storms.

     Greater high-level wind strength, then, decreases the chances for
hurricanes.

      Higher-level winds over the equatorial Atlantic Ocean. These    winds blow
over the equatorial regions of the Earth at an even higher    l l altitude than
Caribbean winds, about 12 to 22 miles aloft.

     Every year or so, these winds shift direction, blowing    predominantly
from either the west or the east. In years when the winds    blow from the west,
they weaken the strength of other year-round    easterly winds that form belts
to the north and the south of the    equator.

     When the overall flows of these higher-level winds are from the    east,
they tend to cut the tops off tropical storms, decreasing    hurricane
formation. In contrast, westerly shifts disrupt and weaken    the surrounding
flows, allowing storms a greater chance to grow into    hurricanes.

      Barometric pressure in the Caribbean basin. When sea-level    barometric
pressures in the Caribbean basin are lower than average in    the spring and
early summer, it helps foster formation of tropical    storms.

     The storms almost always begin as low-pressure depressions, with    poorly
defined counterclockwise flow. As they gain strength,    depressions tighten
into storms as their internal wind speeds increase.

 Should they reach hurricane speeds, the counterclockwise flow becomes    better
defined, centering on the hurricane's familiar eye.

     Armed with weather measurements taken May 27, Gray then used simple
arithmetic and a lengthy formula to arrive at the number of hurricanes    he
expects to form this season.

     While all four weather factors carry the same weight in his    formula,
according to his research associates, subtle weather shifts    within each
factor will raise and lower his prediction total.

     Steven Hodanish, one of Gray's top graduate research students, said
Tuesday that the latest measurements indicate that an El Nino event    should
not be a factor this year. In addition, the higher-level    equatorial winds
should be relatively weak. Both of those factors    should contribute to
hurricane formation.

     But barometric pressures across the Caribbean appear very close to
normal, he added, indicating that they will not be much of a factor    this
year.



 William G. Gray, 58, professor of atmospheric research at Colorado    State
University, has spent more than 30 years researching tropical    weather. Since
1984, Gray has used information gathered from four    weather patterns along the
earth's equatorial belt to predict the    number of hurricanes and tropical
storms in a given hurricane season,    which begins June 1 and lasts for six
months. For 1988, Gray said    Wednesday, 7 hurricanes should grow out of 11
named tropical storms. In          effect, the weather patterns tell Gray
whether steady, high-level winds    over the Atlantic and the Caribbean will be
strong enough to slice off    the tops of towering tropical storms. If left to
build higher and    develop, tropical storms are more likely to transform
themselves into    hurricanes. In making his predictions, Gray uses sea water
temperatures    in the eastern Pacific, barometric pressure averages in the
Caribbean    basin and the prevailing speeds and directions for two upper-level
    winds, patterns that are explained below.



 Pacific sea water temperature rise - Also called the El Nino, it    occurs
irregularly but generally every five or six years. For 12 to 18    months, water
warmed a few degrees more than normal releases the extra    heat to the
atmosphere, where warmed air rises to give more strength to    high-level winds.

 If strong enough, those upper winds can lop off the    top of tropical storms
in the Caribbean and Atlantic, stunting    hurricane formation. This year, Gray
predicts, the El Nino should not    be a factor, increasing the potential for
hurricanes.



 Upper-level Caribbean winds - A measure of predominantly west winds    about 7
1/2 miles above the Caribbean basin. When strong enough, these    winds can also
help curtail hurricane formation by shearing off the    tops of Caribbean and
Atlantic tropical storms. These winds are    sometimes boosted by the winds
generated from the temperature increase    in Pacific sea water. This year,
although Gray says that he must wait    until his mid-season update to determine
their influence, these winds    may be weak enough to encourage hurricane
formation.



 Stratospheric winds - Steady winds 12 to 22 miles aloft over the    equator.
They shift direction every year or so, blowing predominantly    from the east or
west. When strongly from the east, they join with    other high-altitude winds
from the east to help cut off storm tops,    decreasing the chance of hurricane
formation. When westerly, they help    disrupt the other easterly winds,
increasing the potential for    hurricanes. This year, Gray says that these
winds are only weakly from    the east, favoring hurricane formation.



 Regional low pressure in Caribbean - When barometric pressure across    the
Caribbean basin is lower than average, it helps encourage    counterclockwise
flow within tropical depressions, which then can    escalate into tropical
storms, then hurricanes. All tropical storms and    hurricanes swirl in a
counterclockwise direction. Right now, Gray says,    barometric pressure within
the Caribbean basin is normal, neither    fostering or inhibiting hurricane
growth.



 William Gray's annual hurricane and named tropical storm forecast    begins
with a June 1 prediction, followed by and Aug. 1 update.

 1985- Prediction: 8 hurricanes, 11 storms.

        Update: 7 hurricanes, 10 storms.

        Actual: 7 hurricanes, 11 storms.

 1986- Prediction: 4 hurricanes, 8 storms.

        Update: 4 hurricanes, 7 storms.

        Actual: 4 hurricanes, 6 storms.

 1987- Prediction: 5 hurricanes, 8 storms.

        Update: 4 hurricanes, 8 storms.

        Actual: 3 hurricanes, 7 storms.



 William Gray's predictions for the 1988 hurricane season, which ends    Nov.
30.

 Hurricanes: 7, Named Storms: 11.



LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: COLOR CHART, David Williams; chart shows factors influencing the
formation of hurricanes, along with William M. Gray's predictions for years
1985-88

                            Times Publishing Company


                           FOCUS - 4 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                              May 13, 2016 Friday

'Amnesia' can amplify risk | As Florida's hurricane stories fade with the
passage of time, fears of devastation grow

BYLINE: Harold Bubil

SECTION: B; FL News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1066 words


HURRICANE SEASON

ORLANDO - This is the season when weather forecasters and emergency managers
tell Floridians, over and over, that they're at risk from tropical storms.

The problem is making them take the warnings seriously and do things that will
reduce the impact hurricanes can have on their lives and property. The effort
has become as important as forecasting itself.

The challenge is portrayed in photographs of Florida's beautiful scenery. It's
just so nice here, day after day, year after year. And with nearly 11 years
since the most recent hurricane landfall in Florida - Wilma in October 2005 -
"hurricane amnesia" has set in. People can't see it being any other way, experts
say. They cannot personally relate to widespread destruction.

"If you have never experienced it, it is difficult to imagine that happening,"
said Bryan Koon, director of the Florida Division of Emergency Management.

"If you have been through a hurricane or a flood, you know what it is like and
you can envision it. We live in Florida and have great weather the majority of
the time."

Millions of Floridians have little or no hurricane experience. For them, the
springtime storms and floods in other parts of the country are just reports on
TV. The tornadoes that hit Southwest Florida earlier this year were few and far
between, and didn't impact enough people to change the overall perception that
"it can't happen to me," said the speakers at the Governor's Hurricane
Conference here this week.

Dr. Rick Knabb, director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami, only has to
think back about seven months - to when Hurricane Joaquin was pummeling the
Bahamas with Category 4 winds for several days in October. Its outer bands of
clouds lurked off Florida's southeastern coast.

"I could not help but to walk out of the building at the hurricane center and
go, 'Wow, there it is. That's close,' " Knabb said. "I don't know how anyone
could look at what was happening last year and go, 'Ehh ... Florida doesn't have
a hurricane problem anymore.' What a reminder this was."

So forecasting and meteorology have become just half of the mission for
hurricane specialists. Communicating risk to the public is the other half.

"And that might not even be the right ratio," said Koon. "Forecasting technology
has grown by leaps and bounds. It is a matter of helping people hear that
message and take the appropriate action. That is the real challenge."

Forecasters "know scientifically how to make all that other stuff happen. The
rest of it is still a work in progress," he added.

Communicating hurricane risk has become a science of its own. Social science is
a key tool for "the Weather Enterprise," which is made up of NOAA's National
Hurricane Center, hurricane researchers, county emergency managers, television
meteorologists and private weather forecasters.

"How do people respond to the weather-warning process?" asked Dr. Laura Myers,
director of the Center for Advanced Public Safety at the University of Alabama,
during a speech at the conference. "Why do some people believe and others don't?
Why are some prepared and others are not? What do they hear?"

Those are the important questions as the Weather Enterprise encourages both
being prepared and staying prepared.

Hurricane amnesia is a widespread malady, Myers said. "People forget the
information they need to take the best action."

Even in the face of weather warnings, they tend to overlook risks and go about
their daily lives, Myers said, producing photos of cars abandoned in
floodwaters.

"The psychology of people - they are caught up in what they are doing and don't
want to believe it is going to affect them," Myers said. " 'What are the odds I
am going to have to do something about this?' Or, they feel compelled to do what
they do, like going to work."

Complacency is another dangerous emotion, and often results from alarms and
warnings that turn out to be false.

In response, the Weather Enterprise is honing its message to be clear and
consistent, as well as sober.

"What the message is dictates how people react," Myers said. "There is a
tendency to hype the message to get people's attention. Of course, what that
does is desensitize people. So we have to be very careful about hyping."

The companion to hyperbole is the distortion of the message, which can happen
because of the large degree of uncertainty in forecasting a hurricane's path,
intensity and effects, such as storm surge.

"We distort the message to try to convey the uncertainty, which only creates
confusion for the public," Myers said. "Can we give them the right
recommendations? Can we reach them to tell them what they need to do, how to do
it, and get them to take action?

"The benefits must outweigh the costs and inconvenience. People have to receive
a cue to action, or a precipitating force. There is a very fine line in trying
to convey this information. We have to get people to understand their
susceptibility. If there has been a lack of consistent severe weather, it is
going to make it hard to get the public to believe."

Knabb emphasized that residents of interior Florida must learn that hurricanes
are not just a problem for people with beachfront property. "The effects can go
far inland," he said. "A quarter of all fatalities have been from inland
flooding."

As director of the National Hurricane Center, Knabb (@NHCDirector on Twitter) is
in a position of leadership both by speech and by action.

"We try to get personal about it," he said, stressing the role of social media
in education and awareness. "I live in a hurricane zone, too." As a resident of
Westin, a western suburb of Fort Lauderdale that is 15 miles inland, he has
storm shutters and flood insurance. On Tuesday, at the prompting of his wife, he
has an appointment with his property insurance agent for an annual policy
checkup.

The Knabbs' tech-savvy 11-year-old son has the task of making a video inventory
of the family's possessions for insurance purposes.

It is in keeping with the Hurricane Strong initiative (#hurricanestrong on
Twitter) that provides the public with an action list of hurricane preparation
measures.

"I don't know when it is going to happen, but the hurricanes are going to come
back," Knabb said, noting that even in a light hurricane season "it only takes
one" storm to devastate and kill. "We have to be strong by controlling the
outcome, so we survive the event and overcome it."

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Oliverio Rojas and Martin Vera Villagomez walk through what is left of
their home in Immokalee after Hurricane Wilma ripped it apart in 2005. Wilma was
the last hurricane to make landfall in Florida, and millions of people living in
the state have little to no first-hand experience with the havoc a hurricane can
wreak. H-T ARCHIVE / 2005 When the weather is like this most of the time, with a
decade since the most recent hurricane to strike Florida, "hurricane amnesia"
can set in. It creates a communications challenge for hurricane forecasters and
emergency managers. HERALD-TRIBUNE ARCHIVE / 2013 / HAROLD BUBIL

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                           FOCUS - 5 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                              May 13, 2007 Sunday
                                  ALL EDITION

Get the most of your hurricane plans

BYLINE: BY TOM BURSE SNN NEWS 6/WEATHER FIRST CHIEF METEOROLOGIST

SECTION: HURRICANE GUIDE 2007; Pg. J14

LENGTH: 1177 words


Hurricane season is here again, and it's time to prepare in the event a major
storm hits our area.

The way we look at hurricanes and tropical storms changed in 1992 with Hurricane
Andrew. Florida had seen strong hurricanes prior to that fateful weekend in
August, but none had the impact Andrew did on a population so infused with
newcomers. Our population is diverse in many ways, and this diversity creates
challenges in storm preparation.

Some Florida natives may have become complacent about hurricanes. Residents from
non-hurricane areas of the country may not fully understand how important it is
to prepare for hurricane season. Others, such as seniors and non-English
speaking residents, may need special attention.

This year's hurricane forecast calls for a very active season. This original
2007 forecast will be updated throughout the season, and the outlook may change
if weather patterns change.

Consider the 2006 season. It was predicted to be an above-average season, but a
change in our weather pattern caused a decrease in activity, and the forecast
was eventually revised downward. It's conceivable this could happen this year.
Unfortunately, an additional meteorological/oceanographic event has taken place
that gives more support to the current "very active" forecast.

There has been rapid dissipation of El Nino. This scenario, although not the
only factor, means more hurricanes are possible. In fact, according to hurricane
expert William Gray, "Landfall probabilities for the 2007 hurricane season are
well above their long-period averages."

Whether it's 10 hurricanes or one, we must prepare well. After all, if we only
get one hurricane this season, but it hits here, it's a "major season" for us,
no matter how many storms we end up with in the Atlantic Basin.

The following questions and answers provide insight into the nature of
hurricanes. In the event of a hurricane, the staff of the Herald-Tribune
Newspaper, SNN News 6 and HeraldTribune.com will deliver an array of weather and
storm-related information. Be sure to check our new Web site, IbisEye.com.

Here's to a season of safety and preparedness.

Q What is IbisEye.com?

A An interactive Web-based software tool that allows users to see current
weather, hurricane advisories, track storms past and present, obtain storm-surge
information, and use a tool called "Risk Estimator."

In my 25 years as a meteorologist, I've forecasted and covered many storms. My
first hurricane experience was Elena in 1985. Since then, we've seen a quantum
leap forward in our ability to forecast these storms, thanks to improved
technology. Computers have become significantly more powerful, and have
increased our ability to get more detailed information from around and from
within a hurricane.

Q Can you think of another technology that has been invaluable in forecasting
hurricanes?

A The space program's satellites. Satellite technology has been an invaluable
tool in forecasting all types of weather, but none as pronounced as with
hurricanes. The quality of satellite imagery has improved over the years, not
only can we see the storms, but we can also use other scientific tools from the
satellite to provide important storm details. Also, the only reporting stations
in the middle of the Atlantic are ships moving through shipping lanes, which are
extremely few and far between.

Now, satellites can show us where the storm is when there is no other way to
know.

We're all concerned about the damage the next hurricane might cause.

To the experienced meteorologist or disaster-preparedness professional, all
storms are not alike. They do have a few things in common, but storms seem to
have a personality of their own.

A meteorologist can usually look at an area and determine if the damage was
caused by a tornado or straight-line winds. A tornado leaves a distinct pattern
in its wake. A hurricane also has its own damage signature.

Q What direction does a hurricane spin?

A Counterclockwise. A hurricane is a low-pressure system, and air circulates
counterclockwise around a low.

But a hurricane is a very intense low-pressure system where the speed of the
wind increases closer to the eye.

As the storm is drawn inward and gets tighter, the wind increases just like an
ice skater, whose arms are pulled in close to her body to increase her spin
velocity.

By knowing the direction of the wind, we can calculate damage patterns, as well
as determine the need to evacuate particular areas and make storm-surge
predictions.

Despite this, when it comes to examining storm damage after a hurricane, the
damage patterns weren't always indicative of uniform straight-line winds.

This led researchers to closer scrutiny of weather conditions around and within
the eye wall of recent hurricanes -- with astounding results.

They found small, intense storms within the storm -- misocyclones -- around the
eye wall, which may account for some of the intense damage patterns seen within
a larger damage area.

Misocyclones were found along the inner edge of the eye wall of Hurricane Isabel
in September 2003, and it appears they were also part of bigger storms, such as
Hugo in North Carolina andHurricane Andrew in Florida. Research on this
phenomenon is ongoing.

So how active will this season actually be, and will we be hit?

That's the question we're most asked every year at this time.

Truthfully, the experts, such as Gray and those at the National Hurricane Center
in Miami area, are very good at making these predictions, but we're talking
about weather, and the one thing you can count on is that weather is always in
flux and always changes.

Q What is another variable that experts need to consider when making their
predictions for the hurricane season?

A Saharan dust.

Tropical waves, the genesis of tropical storms, move off the west coast of
Africa before starting their long journey across the Atlantic.

The activity generated on the African continent is dependent on the abundance or
lack of rain.

In a year with less rain, there may be fewer waves in the atmosphere leaving the
continent. There may also be more dust blown into the atmosphere due to drought
conditions.

As that dust is pushed into the atmosphere, it is transported across the
Atlantic. Occasionally, we will see some of that dust in our sky, creating hazy
conditions.

It's now known that dust clouds moving across the Atlantic can have an effect on
hurricane development. Saharan dust can block some of the sunlight from hitting
the ocean. In turn, the ocean will cool a bit.

Warm ocean water provides energy for storms to develop, so cooling water can
inhibit storm development.

Knowing the weather patterns in Africa, and whether it's going to be a normal or
wet season versus a drought, is very important to long range hurricane
predictions.

Q Is there a low, moderate or high likelihood of tornadoes when a hurricane
approaches?

A High. Tornadoes come from severe thunderstorms, and severe storms within a
hurricane are normal.

Also, hurricanes and tornadoes spin, which is another factor creating a high
probability of tornadoes during a hurricane.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
 COURTESY PHOTO Tom Burse, left, and Justin Mosely are the SNN News 6/WEATHER
FIRST team.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: QA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                           FOCUS - 6 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Star Phoenix (Saskatoon, Saskatchewan)

                           September 21, 2004 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

The biggest storms on Earth: Deadly hurricanes strike more often

BYLINE: Paul Loong, The Canadian Press

SECTION: WHAT'S HAPPENING?; Pg. B8

LENGTH: 1326  words


Hurricanes are back - perhaps for a long, long time. Meteorologists confirm what
we may have guessed from watching the news: these monster storms have been
lurching ashore from the Atlantic and wreaking havoc in North America more often
in recent years.

"It really changed dramatically in 1995," says Peter Bowyer at the Canadian
Hurricane Centre in Dartmouth, N.S.

That was the year when more than two decades of relative calm in weather
patterns came to an end - and an increase in hurricanes began. "In terms of both
tropical storms and hurricanes, the last 10 years have been the busiest on
record," Bowyer says.

He notes, however, that more intense hurricanes occurred back in the 1950s when
the active storm weather was comparable to the present.

Weather experts say that traces of terrifying storms can be found throughout the
ages. Geological evidence of marine life far inland, for example, suggests
powerful hurricanes caused storm surges that flooded vast tracts of land with
sea water.

Experts believe that Canadians and Americans born in the '70s, '80s and early
'90s have grown up in a lull as far as hurricanes are concerned. But now we are
experiencing first-hand how frequently hurricanes can strike, and how ferocious
and destructive they can be.

"The clear trend is that hurricanes are on the rise in the Atlantic," Bowyer
says.

Longterm forecasters, such as those at the University of Colorado who have a
good track record of being correct, say the hurricane upsurge is expected to
continue for another one to two decades.

David Phillips, senior climatologist at the Meteorological Service of Canada in
Toronto, says hurricanes, "the biggest storms on Earth," seem to behave in a
cyclical pattern - active through the 1950s, quiet from the mid-'70s to the
mid-'90s.

But nothing about the weather is completely neat and tidy. Devastating
hurricanes came ashore even during the supposedly quiet decades. Hurricane
Andrew, for instance, killed 55 people in the United States and Caribbean and
caused more than $26 billion US in damage in 1992.

Climate changes may cause some of the cyclical changes, says Phillips, but he
also thinks that changes caused by people might be part of the reason we are so
attuned to the impact of hurricanes nowadays.

"When you take a look at the '50s and '60s, the newspaper accounts of real
brutal, frequent hurricanes making landfall in the southeastern part of the
United States, it really discouraged development down there," he says.

"But during the '70s and '80s, as people accumulated wealth and were looking for
more recreational time or earlier retirement... people were attracted to the
sunbelt."

Condos and hotels were built right on the oceanfront. Outer islands were
developed. Lots more people moved into the hurricane zone during a period of
relative tranquility in the weather.

Now that hurricanes are back, Phillips says, "there are more targets there for
these monster storms. Those little hits of the past have become major blows...
We're greater targets, we're more exposed.

And Bowyer has also noticed a few new unusual things about the hurricanes
churning off the U.S. coast.

"We've seen hurricane Alex this year strengthen to a Category 3 hurricane
farther north than has happened before. We saw hurricane Ivan strengthen to a
level of intensity that has never been seen in a hurricane as far south as that.
We saw earlier this year the very first hurricane on record in the south
Atlantic, south of the Equator. That's never happened before."

CATEGORIES:

Category 1

Weak. Wind speeds 118-153 km/h. May damage trees, shrubs, poorly built signs;
may cause minor flooding.

Category 2

Moderate. Wind speeds 154-177 km/h. Trees may be blown down, signs, roofs and
marinas damaged. Residents along coastal shores may be evacuated.

Category 3

Strong. Wind speeds 178-210 km/h. Most signs blown down, structural damage to
some buildings, mobile homes may be destroyed. Serious flooding possible.
Residents along coastal shores and a few blocks inland may be evacuated.

Category 4

Very strong. Wind speeds 211-249 km/h. Extensive damage to roofs, wiindows,
doors. All mobile homes destroyed. Flooding up to 10 km inland. Residents within
500 metres of shore may be evacuated.

Category 5

Devastating. Wind speeds 250 km/h and higher. Severe damage to all buildings,
extensive shattering of glass. Residents within 16 km of shore may be evacuated.

Names:

Weather forecasters name hurricanes to help identify storms and keep them
separate as they track them across the ocean. In the Second World War, U.S.
military meteorologists named storms after their wives or girlfriends. Men's
names were added to the list in the 1970s. The name of the first storm of the
season begins with A, the second B, and so on. The letters Q, U and Z are not
used and the names are English, French or Spanish - the languages spoken where
hurricanes hit.

CANADA'S NOTABLE HURRICANES:

1954 HAZEL

The weather forecast on Oct. 15, 1954 was "rain tonight." But it had been
raining steadily in Toronto for a few days, so no one paid much attention.

By dawn the next morning, the most deadly hurricane in Canadian history had
swept through the city, killing 81 people and dumping millions of tonnes of
water. One entire street on the banks of a river was swept away, its homes and
owners carried into Lake Ontario.

Hurricane Hazel turned sleepy rivers and creeks into raging torrents. Throughout
the night and following days, rescuers roamed the flooded areas in boats,
looking for survivors stranded on roofs and hanging from trees. It was the worst
flooding in Toronto in 200 years; thousands of families were left homeless. The
bodies of several victims turned up months later on waterfronts in New York
state. Other victims were discovered buried under mounds of silt along river
valleys.

Called "the most erratic hurricane in history" by the U.S. Weather Bureau, Hazel
had already caused much deadly havoc in the Caribbean. Almost 1,000 were killed
in Haiti. Weather officials had been tracking its progress but issued only
low-key bulletins that raised few alarm bells in Ontario, which seldom sees
hurricanes.

But Hazel was not a typical hurricane. The storms usually lose power the farther
they get from the Atlantic Ocean and few of them make it over the Allegheny
Mountains in northeastern United States. But Hazel met up with a cold front from
the Rockies and picked up speed instead.

2003 JUAN

A year ago this month hurricane Juan, the worst storm to hit the Maritimes in
memory, cut a 180-kilometre-wide swath of destruction through Nova Scotia,
southeastern New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island.

Packing sustained winds of 150 kilometres an hour and gusts that peaked at 231
km/h in Halifax harbour, Juan killed seven people, knocked out power to over
300,000 others for upwards of two weeks, and uprooted an astonishing 100 million
trees.

It also shattered the innocence of many Maritimers, who more often than not view
warnings of approaching storms with complacency, even disdain.

"Oh, gosh, what a sense of helplessness," recalled Havey Whidden, a 49-year-old
dairy farmer who huddled in the basement of his Stewiacke, N.S., home, while he
listened to Juan lift up his grain silo and send it crashing on top of his
milking barn.

Sustained by warmer-than-usual water that prevented it from diminishing in
strength as it tracked north from the Caribbean, Juan reached Nova Scotia as a
Category 2 hurricane - three notches lower than Category 5 monsters like Ivan or
Floyd.

Making landfall just west of Halifax shortly past midnight, the fast-moving
storm pummelled Atlantic Canada's largest city before moving inland. It cut
through Nova Scotia's dairy heartland, damaging 50 farms before tracking north
to P.E.I. At the Charlottetown Yacht Club, it dumped boats around like a washing
machine and then continued north over the Gulf of St. Lawrence, swamping a
fishing boat off Anticosti Island and killing two crewmen before eventually
petering out.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphic/Diagram: Anatomy of a hurricane;
Colour Photo: (Hurricane Juan.);
Colour Photo: AP Photo; (A dock being washed out.)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                           FOCUS - 7 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Victoria Advocate (Texas)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           December 1, 2016 Thursday

Water temperatures protected Crossroads through hurricane season

BYLINE: Ismael Perez, Victoria Advocate, Texas

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 679 words


Dec. 01--The 2016 hurricane season ended Wednesday without significant storms
hitting the Texas Gulf Bend.

The season was close to what the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
predicted for the region.

The agency makes two predictions a year and John Metz, a meteorologist for the
National Weather Service in Corpus Christi, said the organization predicted a
near normal season on both occasions.

"The first prediction takes place at the beginning of the season in May," Metz
said, "and then they update the forecast around the first of August."

The last prediction indicated a range of 12 to 17 named storms, five to eight
hurricanes and two to four major hurricanes.

This season resulted in 15 named storms, seven hurricanes and three major
hurricanes.

"With their numbers, they actually were pretty on track, if not slightly above
normal," Metz said.

Metz defines a normal hurricane season as having 12 storms, six to seven
hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

The Texas Gulf Bend receives a major hurricane every 71/2 years, he said.
Hurricane Ike, a Category 4 storm, was the last to hit the Texas coastline eight
years ago, making landfall in Galveston, Metz said. The hurricane killed 195
people.

Metz said there is no specific reason why the Texas Gulf Bend has not been
impacted in recent years.

"As a system is approaching, our area, patterns in the water temperature change
from week to week and might send the hurricane toward another direction," Metz
said. "We have been very fortunate by chance."

The National Weather Service credits the neutral phase of the ocean water
temperature for the near normal hurricane season.

"The neutral phase means the water temperature isn't too warm to attract
hurricanes or too cold to keep the weather calm, you're kind of in the middle,"
Metz said. "We are transitioning toward cooler water temperatures, and it most
certainly will play a significant factor for the winter."

While next year's hurricane season is too far away to predict, National Weather
Service officials said the cool water temperatures will have an effect on
Crossroads weather for the winter.

The cooler water temperatures will cause calm weather patterns in Texas, making
December through February warmer and dryer than normal, Metz said, but not
ruling out cold spells or any precipitation.

Regardless of what the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicts,
Victoria officials maintain daily contact with the National Weather Service to
keep track of weather patterns in the area.

"We had a quieter season than what was anticipated," said Rick McBrayer,
emergency management coordinator for Victoria County's Office of Emergency
Management. "However, that doesn't mean we let our guard down when it comes to
preparation."

The Office of Emergency Management serves as a coordinating body between all the
first responding agencies in the area.

"When people think about first responders, they immediately picture police and
firefighters," McBrayer said. "But an example of other first responders would be
the American Red Cross, American Electric Power Co. and the Salvation Army."

Preparation, response and recovery are roles the other branches of first
responders have, and McBrayer said they are all auxiliary pieces that come into
place during a tragedy.

Capt. Laura Martin, minister and administrator at the Salvation Army in
Victoria, said the organization helps people recover from bad situations,
whether it is assisting someone with a place for a the night or serve them a
meal.

"We would give them a voucher to go to our own thrift store, and they would pick
out whatever clothes, shoes or household goods they may need," Martin said. "We
just appreciate being part of a system that does so much for the community."

McBrayer emphasized the importance of being prepared even when the weather is
calm and said people are the first responders when it comes to personal
responsibilities.

___ (c)2016 Victoria Advocate (Victoria, Texas) Visit Victoria Advocate
(Victoria, Texas) at www.victoriaadvocate.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20161201-VI-Water-temperatures-protected-Crossroads-through-hurricane-season-120
1-20161201

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VI


                        Copyright 2016 Victoria Advocate


                           FOCUS - 8 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              July 4, 2010 Sunday

Tropical forecasts an inexact science

BYLINE: Charlene Vandini, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1121 words


July 04--HARLINGEN -- The hurricanes and tropical storms that have reached the
Rio Grande Valley during the last decade are evidence of the inexact science of
tropical weather forecasting.

Barry Goldsmith, the National Weather Service's Warning Coordination
Meteorologist in Brownsville, wrote in an e-mail that the reliability of
forecasting a storm's intensity has remained about the same for the last 20
years.

"Timing when a cyclone will intensify rapidly remains even more elusive," he
wrote.

Track errors remain a big issue for storms with small inner cores, where all the
big wind damage occurs. Hurricanes Dolly and Alex are examples of storms with a
small inner core with the potential for strong wind damage, he wrote.

"For a hurricane watch or warning two to three days out, confidence for small
storms that

may rapidly intensify is low, which means people must prepare for the potential
for a

worse-case scenario," Goldsmith wrote.

"If our confidence is high about an unknown ultimate landfall, such as Alex,
being ready for the worst is the only mode of preparedness."

The National Weather Service is improving its ability to forecast storm
intensity and tracks.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the weather service's
parent agency, has embarked on a program to improve meteorologists' ability to
forecast the strength of tropical cyclones.

Begun in 2008, a record-setting year for tropical cyclones, the Hurricane
Forecast Improvement Program's goals are "to reduce the average errors of
hurricane track and intensity forecasts by 20 percent within five years and 50
percent in 10 years with a forecast period out to seven days," according to the
program's Web site.

Days after Hurricane Alex dealt the Valley a glancing blow, meteorologists are
reviewing storm data to determine Alex's intensity. Originally rated a Category
2 storm at landfall, it could be changed to a Category 3 storm, Goldsmith said.

Of the six named storms for which warnings and watches were issued for the
Valley since 2000, two didn't form in the tropics and one wasn't classified as a
hurricane until after the fact.

The National Hurricane Center's archives list six tropical cyclones -- the
general name for tropical storms and hurricanes -- that have reached the South
Texas-northern Mexico region: Tropical Storm Beryl in 2000, Tropical Storm
Bertha in 2002, Hurricane Erika in 2003, Hurricane Emily in 2005, Hurricane
Dolly in 2008 and last week's Hurricane Alex.

Beryl, which made landfall about 90 miles south of Brownsville on Aug. 15, 2000,
was a tropical storm for about a day, and the hurricane center has "no
meaningful statistics" for it.

Bertha and Erika grew from "non-tropical formations." They didn't originate in
the Cape Verde hurricane-breeding area off the West African Coast.

Bertha formed from a low-pressure trough near the mouth of the Mississippi
River, according to the hurricane center's official reports. After a first
landfall in Louisiana on Aug. 4, 2002, it wobbled back into the Gulf of Mexico
and made a second landfall east of Kingsville on Aug. 9, 2002.

Erika was born from a "deteriorating low pressure area" southwest of Bermuda
that collected itself into a tropical depression near the Bahamas and then made
a beeline across the Gulf of Mexico in almost a straight shot to make landfall
40 miles south of Matamoros on Aug. 16, 2003.

Valley residents who don't remember a "Hurricane" Erika aren't wrong. It wasn't
declared a hurricane until after it was gone. Meteorologists at the Brownsville
weather service office reported stronger winds and "a post-storm review of the
Doppler data revealed winds in excess of (97 mph)...near the time of landfall."
Thus, "Erika has been posthumously upgraded to a hurricane," according to the
official National Hurricane Center report.

Hurricane Dolly began as a tropical wave off western Africa on July 11, 2008. It
moved rapidly across the Atlantic, entered the Caribbean Sea on July 17 where
hurricane hunters found a "well-defined circulation."

"For unknown reasons," the archives state, Dolly became disorganized, but then
reorganized and became a Category 2 hurricane with 86 mph winds on July 23,
shortly before its first landfall on South Padre Island.

Dolly's winds were about 80 mph at its second landfall at Port Mansfield, making
a Category 1 storm at that time.

The hurricane center's official report on Hurricane Dolly states, "It cannot be
determined, however, whether Category 2 winds impacted the Texas coast during
the few hours prior to landfall."

The weather service has already improved its ability to better forecast tropical
storms and hurricanes.

In the case of Erika, if the weather service had had the instruments in 2003
that it has now, forecasters would have known at the time that Erika had
strengthened to a hurricane, Goldsmith said.

Among the improvements of the last seven years, he said, the weather service
hurricane hunter planes now have more sensitive dropsondes, small instruments
that are dropped from the aircraft to measure storm conditions as it falls to
the ground.

The dropsondes contain a global positioning receiver and sensors to measure
temperature, air pressure and humidity.

This data is transmitted to a computer on the plane and compiled to provide a
description of the current conditions of the tropical cyclone, Goldsmith said.

Texas Tech University's meteorology program contributes to information gathering
by data from "wind sticks" that are battery-powered instruments planted in the
ground to measure wind, he said.

There is also the addition of the expanded networks of weather data gathering
and better methods of estimating storm activity based on more past knowledge, he
said.

Data from cyclones like Alex, Charley, Humberto, Wilma, Ivan, Rita at Key West
and beyond, and Katrina just before landfall in Florida will help.

Goldsmith is optimistic that high-resolution data from satellite, aircraft,
radar and the surface will improve the ability of research to improve
forecasting.

Computer technology is rapidly improving, which will allow fine-scale data and
atmospheric physics to be processed, he said.

"Fine-scale detail of a small tropical storm's 'engine' is perhaps the most
difficult meteorological puzzle we have to solve," Goldsmith said.

To see more of the Valley Morning Star, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.valleystar.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more
information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail
services@mctinfoservices.com, or call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States,
call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100704-HR-Tropical-forecasts-an-inexact-science-20100704

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HR


                       Copyright 2010 Valley Morning Star


                           FOCUS - 9 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           The Ledger (Lakeland, FL)

                             June 01, 2006 Thursday

A NEW CATEGORY FOR SUPER HURRICANES?

BYLINE: DIANE LACEY ALLEN The Ledger

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 837 words


LAKELAND -- Before the monstrous Hurricane Katrina slammed Louisiana and
Mississippi last year, it strengthened into a jaw-dropping Category 5 -- the
benchmark for the most destructive hurricanes on the Saffir-Simpson rating
scale.

Katrina grew well beyond the 156 mph that put it into the highest possible
category. Before its run in the Gulf was over, its winds intensified to 175 mph.

Today, as hurricane season begins, forecasters warn of another active season.

The latest prediction from William Gray's team at Colorado State University
calls for 17 named storms for the 2006 season. Nine storms are expected to
become hurricanes, and five of those are expected to have winds of 111 mph or
greater.

Meteorologists continue to debate whether global warming is fueling more
powerful storms. But the past two seasons have seemingly turned the Atlantic and
Gulf into hurricane machines.

Whether this year will bring more super storms remains to be seen, but science
publications and bloggers have posed another question: Is it time to add a
Category 6 to adequately describe storms with winds of at least 175 mph?

Hurricane forecasters have no ''Finger of God'' to denote a killer storm as
Hollywood did in the weather-cult classic ''Twister.''

But the real-life Fujita Scale, which ranks tornadoes by the amount of
destruction caused, has a theoretical ''F6.'' Such a rating is reserved for the
''inconceivable tornado'' with winds of 319 mph to 379 mph.

Gray's hurricane forecast for this season, which runs through the end of
November, says there is an 82 percent chance that at least one major hurricane
will make landfall in the U.S. this season. There is a 69 percent chance a major
hurricane will strike the East Coast, including the Florida peninsula, and a 38
percent chance one will strike the Gulf Coast, according to the forecast.

The prediction follows the 2005 season, which was the most destructive in
recorded history, with 28 named storms, 15 hurricanes and seven intense
hurricanes.

Katrina was the costliest and one of the five deadliest hurricanes to strike the
United States, according to a National Hurricane Center report.

If weather gurus were to expand the Saffir-Simpson scale, Category 6 would
probably start at 175 mph. And storms like Katrina would make the cut.

But some weather experts wonder whether the idea of a Cat 6 is little more than
fodder for a movie plotline. A recent film, after all, pushed the survival
envelope to ''Category 7: The End of the World.''

''I'm not sure what that does more than terrify people further,'' said Mark
Johnson, a University of Central Florida statistics professor who helps run a
Web site that projects storm damage.

''I don't really know if it would make that big a difference. When you're
talking at Category 5, you're already talking about a catastrophic hurricane.
What's more than catastrophic?'' said Jennifer Colson, a meteorologist with the
National Weather Service in Ruskin.

There is also a concern that adding a category would put a Category 3 storm,
which at 111-mph-plus is considered a major hurricane, in the middle of the pack
and conceivably could convince people that a strong storm is ''average.''

''It might,'' said Colson. ''It's really hard to say what people's perception of
it might be. Certainly, we've had so much activity the past two years. People
say, 'Well, I've been through this category storm and it wasn't that bad.' The
more you're through it, the more it kind of deadens your senses to it ... It's
always our concern, even with thunderstorms.''

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Hurricane
Center do not have plans to change the present Saffir-Simpson scale.

''That doesn't mean it won't happen down the road,'' said Dennis Feltgen, a
meteorologist and public affairs officer with the NOAA National Weather Service
headquartered in Silver Spring, Md. ''But right now, there are no plans.''

And there's no real rush, says Jay Baker, a behavioral geographer with Florida
State University.

''Until we start seeing a lot of Category 5 hurricanes making landfall and start
seeing a difference between 175 mph storms and 155 mph storms ... I don't see
any advantage to an additional category,'' said Baker.

Only three recorded Cat 5 hurricanes have made landfall in the United States.
They were the Labor Day Hurricane of 1935, Hurricane Camille in 1969 and
Hurricane Andrew in 1992, according to NHC statistics. Katrina, which was a
Category 5 in the Gulf, weakened before landfall.

But storms fluctuate in strength -- and categories.

''I kind of prefer numbers rather than a category,'' said UCF's Johnson. ''It's
not just wind speed, but also the influence of the waves and storm surge.''

Feltgen says it doesn't matter where a storm ends up being classified.

''A hurricane is a hurricane is a hurricane,'' he said. ''They are as deadly as
a Category 1 as a Category 5.''

Diane Lacey Allen can be reached at diane.allen@theledger.com or 863-802-7514.
Material from The Associated Press was used in this story.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: WEB PUBLICATION


             Copyright 2006 Lakeland Ledger Publishing Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 10 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                           November 28, 2015 Saturday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

HURRICANE-FREE; TIME TO WORRY?

BYLINE: AYANA STEWART, TIMES STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 680 words



HIGHLIGHT: Florida goes 10 years without a major storm, but experts fear
complacency in the future.


Warren Faidley hasn't been to Florida in 11 years.

For the Arizona-based storm chaser and extreme weather expert - and for the rest
of us - that's a good thing.

"I'd rather not see big, destructive hurricanes," Faidley, 57, said. "It doesn't
bother me at all that it hasn't happened."

Monday marks the end of the 2015 hurricane season, making this Florida's 10th
year without a hurricane making landfall. The last hurricane to hit the state
was Wilma, a Category 3 storm that struck South Florida in 2005.

Faidley said he followed Hurricanes Ivan and Frances in 2004 but hasn't made the
trip to Florida since.

"It's been quite a long time," he said.

National Hurricane Center spokesman Dennis Feltgen said the decade-long streak
is "remarkable."

An average hurricane season has 12 named storms, with six hurricanes and three
major hurricanes. This year, there were 11 named storms, with four hurricanes
and two major hurricanes.

A storm that measures Category 3 or higher on the Saffir-Simpson hurricane
intensity scale is considered a major hurricane. To reach Category 3 status, a
storm must have wind speed of 111 to 129 mph.

Hurricane Fred hit Cape Verde islands in September, and Hurricane Joaquin
flooded parts of the Bahamas in October. During the latter storm, a cargo ship
carrying 33 crew members sank.

Hurricanes Danny and Kate both weakened before making landfall. Tropical storms
Ana and Bill were the only storms to make landfall in the United States this
year.

"It was forecast to be a below-average season, and that's exactly how it turned
out," Feltgen said.

One close call locally was Tropical Storm Erika, which could have potentially
hit Florida in late August. The storm broke up in the Caribbean before it hit
the United States, but it killed dozens of people and caused millions of dollars
in damage in Dominica.

We can thank the El Nino effect for being a major player in the below-average
season, according to Feltgen. The weather pattern is marked by unusually warm
temperatures in the Pacific Ocean and suppresses hurricane activity in the
Atlantic Ocean.

Looking ahead at the coming winter months, local meteorologists are expecting
cooler weather and more rain because of El Nino.

Meteorologist Tyler Fleming said forecasters are monitoring the possibility of
more severe weather this winter.

"A lot of our wintertime tornadoes happen during strong El Nino years," said
Fleming, who works for the National Weather Service in Ruskin. "That's something
we're looking out for."

WTSP 10Weather chief meteorologist Jim Van Fleet said winter tornadoes are a
concern.

"Historically, we have our biggest tornadoes in the state of Florida in an El
Nino winter," he said. "This El Nino now is the strongest we've had on record."

He said the majority of tornadoes in an El Nino winter happen when people are
sleeping, between 11 p.m. to 5 a.m. He recommends buying a weather radio instead
of relying on a cell phone in case a tornado hits.

"A lot of people take for granted that they have alerts on their phone and will
be woken up," he said. "You may never get the alert on your phone."

Having a long stretch with no serious weather can be dangerous.

With longtime residents thinking Florida is safe from hurricanes and new
residents not prepared for a storm, the next hurricane in the state could have
alarming consequences.

"You've got complacency, denial and inexperience, and that's the triple threat,"
Feltgen said.

Fleming remembers the 2004 hurricane season, when Hurricanes Charley, Frances
and Jeanne all hit Polk County after decades of inactivity.

"It only takes one storm to change your life forever, no matter how quiet it's
been recently," he said.

Feltgen said it isn't a question of if a big storm will hit, but when.

"I guarantee you that record is going to come to the end," he said. "Our luck is
going to run out."

The National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration will announce next year's storm
predictions in May.

"We've got to be prepared that it could happen in 2016," Feltgen said.

Contact Ayana Stewart at astewart@tampabay.com or (727) 445-4153. Follow
@AyanaStewart.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - DOUGLAS R. CLIFFORD - Times: Bob Landry of Clearwater pedals
through rain on the Pinellas Trail in September.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2015 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 11 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                       TELEGRAM & GAZETTE (Massachusetts)

                      August 15, 2005 Monday, ALL EDITIONS

Numbers say we are due for some major hurricanes;
 Forecasters can't be positive, but they're posting warnings

BYLINE: Bill Fortier; TELEGRAM & GAZETTE STAFF

SECTION: NEWS; THE FLOOD OF 1955; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 900 words


The numbers are already eye-popping and weather forecasters say round two of
this year's hurricane season is about to get started in earnest.

So far this year, the National Hurricane Center has named nine storms.

"At this stage of the season we normally have two," said Frank C. Lepore, public
information officer for the National Hurricane Center.

Going back to 1871, an average tropical storm seasonwhich peaks on Sept.10sees
10 named storms, six of which are hurricanes and two of them major hurricanes
with winds of 110 mph or higher.

The National Hurricane Center recently predicted that when this tropical season
ends Nov. 30, between 18 and 21 storms will have formed, with nine to 11 of them
becoming hurricanes with winds of 74 mph or higher. Between five and seven of
those hurricanes will have winds of 110 mph of higher, making them at least
category 3 storms on the Saffir-Simpson scale that measures hurricane intensity.

Meanwhile, Colorado State University's William Gray, widely regarded as the
country's leading long-range hurricane forecaster, is predicting a total of 20
storms. According to a press release issued Aug. 5, Mr. Gray is calling for 10
of those to be hurricanes, with six reaching major status.

In recent years, Joseph Bastardi, AccuWeather.com's chief hurricane and
long-range forecaster, has become increasingly prominent in hurricane
forecasting. He is predicting on AccuWeather's professional Web site that New
England could receive a direct hit by at least one hurricane this season.

Using among other tools comparisons to previous years to arrive at his
forecasts, Mr. Bastardi has stated in his daily column that atmospheric weather
patterns and warm ocean temperatures this year are very similar to 1954, when
two category 3 hurricanes lashed New England. Although not as destructive to
Central Massachusetts as the twin hurricanes Diane and Connie in 1955, Hurricane
Carol struck the New England coast at Block Island in late August 1954 with
winds clocked at 135 mph, and less than two weeks later Hurricane Edna hit Cape
Cod with winds gusting to 120 mph.

Mr. Lepore said factors this yearunusually warm water in the Atlantic Ocean,
lack of wind shear that can tear apart hurricanes as they travel across the
ocean toward the East Coast, and a continuous stream of low pressure systems
leaving Africaall mean trouble.

"While there is no such thing in meteorology as a certainty, our forecasters say
there is about a 95 percent chance of the numbers they are calling for being
realized," Mr. Lepore said.

David R. Vallee, science and operations officer in the National Weather Service
office in Taunton, said the Atlantic Ocean is 2 to 3 degrees warmer than
average, all the way from Africa to the East Coast. For example, on the south
coast of Cape Cod and south of Montauk Point, Long Island, water temperatures
are near 75 degrees, according to NWS observations, compared to a normal of
about 70 degrees,

Hurricanes need water temperatures of 80 degrees or higher to sustain themselves
or intensify, forecasters say.

"While the temperatures south of us won't allow that to happen, what it does
mean is a storm heading in this direction wouldn't weaken as quickly as it would
if the water was colder," Mr. Vallee said. He likens the factors on the weather
table this season to the Red Sox run to the World Series title last year.

"Remember when people said the Red Sox were made to win the World Series," he
said. "It's hard to predict what a weather pattern is going to be, but what we
do know is this is a hurricane season that is built to build hurricanes. We have
the very warm water, we have the very light wind shear ... Does that mean New
England will get a hurricane? No. But the seeds are there."

What is needed is a weather pattern that steers a storm with heavy rain and high
windssomething far worse than, for example, the remnants of tropical storm
Cindy, which brought nearly 3 inches of rain to Worcester in 12 hours last
monthnorth into New England.

Mr. Vallee explained that in late August and early September the weather pattern
usually starts changing to allow cooler air and the jet stream to flow south. If
that happens and there is a storm in the Bahamas, the jet stream would scoop up
that storm and force it north and the area could be in jeopardy of getting hit
with its first hurricane since Bob struck in mid-August, 1991.

Hurricane activity runs in decadeslong cycles, Mr. Vallee said. The years from
the late 30s until the early 60s were very busy hurricane years that were
followed by decades of lesser activity. Now the proverbial tropical storm engine
is revving up again.

"Hurricane Gloria and Hurricane Bob don't really count," he said. "But what
we're saying is that the tropics are really getting more active and it is all
related to warmer ocean water."

He added that long-range forecasts don't indicate any change from that trend.

"So, you might say we ain't seen nothin' yet."

And that is not good news for Peter Judge, the public information officer for
the Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency.

"In Florida, the large numbers might be more worrisome than for us here in New
England," he said. "But all it takes is one storm."

Mr. Judge stressed that while wind and coastal flooding are major concerns,
flooding caused by tropical systems are also a real concern for inland areas.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; THE ASSOCIATED PRESS; Professor William Gray of Colorado State
University talks recently about space imaging of Hurricane Ivan.

               Copyright 2005 Worcester Telegram & Gazette, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 12 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                             May 29, 2010 Saturday

Forecast compares to 2005 with Katrina;
Experts say technology and theory mean fewer 'surprises'

BYLINE: DANA TREEN

SECTION: Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1373 words


The hurricane season of 2005, which brought Hurricane Katrina, was possibly one
of the most ill-predicted years on record.

In May that year, government forecasters said it would be an above-normal
season, with 12 to 15 tropical storms. Seven to nine would become hurricanes,
they said.

By the end of the season, 2005 was marked as the first season with 28 named
storms, the first with 15 hurricanes and the first with four Category 5
hurricanes, the strongest ranking possible.

The season shattered records and was the most devastating year for the United
States in modern times, the administrator of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration said at the time.

This week, NOAA predicted a season that may spawn as many as 23 named tropical
storms, including up to seven major hurricanes. NOAA predicted that eight to 14
storms would strengthen into hurricanes, with top winds of 74 mph or higher.
Three to seven of those could become major storms that reach Category 3 or
higher - meaning they bring sustained winds of at least 111 mph.

Greg Holland, director of the earth systems laboratory at the National Center
for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., has been studying hurricanes for 35
years.

"The season's not looking good," Holland said before the NOAA outlook was
released Thursday.

He said predicting above-normal or below-normal seasons is about all that can be
expected in any year. Beyond that, too many variables come into play that have
an effect on how storms develop and act.

"Given 2004, we could have never predicted the 2005 season," he said.

That doesn't mean advances have not been made.

Better forecasting has been helped by advances in sensors that can be dropped
into storms to scan conditions and by the availability of satellite images that
add additional data.

Scientists have increasingly been able to predict hurricane tracks with greater
accuracy but still have difficulty explaining sudden strengthening or weakening
in storms, Holland said. Now, studies of the outer fringes of storms and their
overall structure are providing information about why storm strengths shift. In
the past, studies concentrated on the interior of the hurricane and its eye but
revealed less.

"There will be a lot less surprises," he said.

Since the mid-1980s, hurricane predictions have gotten the biggest boost from a
couple of things: a theory that was initially scoffed at and leaps in
technology.

A lot of modern predictions rely on theories developed by William Gray, a
meteorologist and professor at Colorado State University who issued his first
forecast in 1984.

Now considered the dean of hurricane forecasting, his methods of making
predictions by studying what happened in past seasons to deduce a theory flew in
the face of the scientific method that said the theory should be developed
first, then applied to the evidence.

"The scientific community was not kind to him," said Steve Letro, the
meteorologist in charge of the National Weather Service office in Jacksonville.
"They called it voodoo meteorology."

One discovery was that a weather condition called El Nino, which warms waters in
the eastern Pacific, transfers that heat into thunderstorms that pump the warm
air into the atmosphere where it travels across the Caribbean. If it collides
with a developing hurricane in the eastern Atlantic, the moving warm air can
shred the storm's top, causing it to fall apart.

Another condition, called a Bermuda High, is a clockwise rotation of air over
the Atlantic that can steer hurricanes, sometimes to the south into the Gulf of
Mexico, or spin them north toward the North Atlantic and Nova Scotia.

The position of the Bermuda High, which has other names, and its ability to
redirect hurricanes is one factor that steers storms away from Northeast
Florida, though it is not a fail-safe system. Close brushes are not uncommon.
Once every three years, a storm center passes within 50 miles of Jacksonville,
Letro said.

If the high is east of the coastline, a hurricane may begin to move northward,
or "recurve" without touching land.

"Jacksonville is located pretty much at the latitude that storms, when they
approach this area, are starting to turn northward," Letro said.

The high, however, is not stationary and can move east or west without much
warning, he said.

Ten or 15 years ago, a forecast 24 hours ahead of landfall that was within a
90-mile range was considered fairly accurate, Letro said.

"The average 24-hour error for a hurricane forecast now is about 60 miles," he
said.

Those kinds of improvements mean that this year warnings of approaching storms
will come earlier, said First Coast News chief meteorologist Tim Deegan.

"Hurricane watches are coming out 48 hours in advance instead of 36," he said.
Warnings, which were posted at 24 hours will now be announced at 36 hours.

Those changes are possible because of improvements in predicting a storm's path,
Deegan said.

"The accuracy is increasing one to two miles a year," he said.

Holland, of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, said the most
important tool for forecasters remains time. As the season progresses, it
becomes easier to tell what is going to happen.

"You've got to wait for nature to get going, and nature is going now," he said.

dana.treen@jacksonville.com, (904) 359-4091

STORM GLOSSARY

HURRICANE: An intense tropical weather system of strong thunderstorms with a
well-defined surface circulation and maximum sustained winds of 74 mph or
higher.

TROPICAL STORM: An organized system of strong thunderstorms with a defined
surface circulation and maximum sustained winds of 39 to 73 mph.

TROPICAL DEPRESSION: An organized system of clouds and thunderstorms with a
defined surface circulation and maximum sustained winds of 38 mph or less.

HURRICANE WIND SCALE: The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale is a 1 to 5
categorization based on the hurricane's intensity at the indicated time. The
scale provides examples of the type of damage and impacts in the United States
associated with winds of the indicated intensity. The following table shows the
scale broken down by winds:

Category Wind speed (mph) Damage

1 74-95 Very dangerous winds will produce some damage

2 96-110 Extremely dangerous winds will cause extensive damage

3 111-130 Devastating damage will occur

4 131-155 Catastrophic damage will occur

5 More than 155 Catastrophic damage will occur

TROPICAL STORM WATCH: Tropical storm conditions are possible within the
specified coastal area within 48 hours.

TROPICAL STORM WARNING: Tropical storm conditions are expected somewhere within
the specified coastal area within 36 hours.

HURRICANE WATCH: Hurricane conditions are possible within the specified coastal
area. Because hurricane preparedness activities become difficult once winds
reach tropical storm force, the hurricane watch is issued 48 hours in advance of
the anticipated onset of tropical-storm-force winds.

HURRICANE WARNING: Hurricane conditions are expected somewhere within the
specified coastal area. Because hurricane preparedness activities become
difficult once winds reach tropical storm force, the hurricane warning is issued
36 hours in advance of the anticipated onset of tropical-storm-force winds.

STORM SURGE: The onshore rush of sea or lake water caused by the high winds
associated with a landfalling cyclone and secondarily by the low pressure of the
storm.

LA NINA: Defined as cooler than normal sea-surface temperatures in the central
and eastern tropical Pacific that affect global weather patterns. La Nina
conditions recur every few years and can persist for as long as two years.

EL NINO: A periodic warming of surface ocean waters in the eastern tropical
Pacific. These conditions affect weather patterns across the world. El Nino
episodes occur roughly every four to five years and can last up to 18 months.

Source: National Weather Service; National Hurricane Center

COMING SUNDAY

Sunday's Times-Union will include a handy "Storm Watch" hurricane and disaster
guide with key tips, contacts and safety information.

For the online "Storm Watch" guide go to www.jacksonville.com/stormwatch.

STORM COVERAGE

In case of a hurricane or tropical storm, Jacksonville.com will have constant
live coverage, updating you with important information from across the First
Coast.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
BOB SELF/The Times-Union Angela Enyedi keeps her eyes on her computers as
assistant warning coordination meteorologist for the National Weather Service
office near Jacksonville International Airport. Federal officials predict up to
seven major hurricanes this season. Storm Watch section for 2010 Hurricane and
Disaster Guide Letro

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 13 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

             November 30, 1996, Saturday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

Hurricane season took it easy on Florida

BYLINE: KELLY RYAN

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 790 words



Weather watchers seem to be saying the same thing about the 1996 hurricane
season: It was no 1995.

"Everything is less than '95," said Karl Loeper, a weather specialist  with the
National Weather Service. "As far as Florida goes, this year was a  breather."

Hurricane season, which began June 1, ends today. In all, there were 13  named
storms, nine of which became hurricanes. Six of the hurricanes were  considered
major storms, with winds in excess of 110 mph.

It was the eighth most active season on record in 110 years, causing at  least
136 deaths in the Caribbean, Central America and the United States.  Hurricanes
are blamed for about $ 3.5-million in damage to the U.S. alone,  Loeper said.

In an average year, there are 9.3 named storms. This year was the first  since
1961 that there were six major hurricanes. Usually, six hurricanes form  in a
season, with only two developing into at least a Category 3 storm on the
Saffir-Simpson scale that measures hurricane strength.

In 1995, there were 21 tropical storms that caused about $ 7.7-billion in
damage. Of those storms, 11 became hurricanes.

The only storm this year that brought its fury to Florida was Tropical  Storm
Josephine. Its 70-mph winds closed the four major bridges across Tampa  Bay and
it caused flooding from Charlotte to Levy counties.

Damage is estimated at $ 130 million, with more than 4,000 homes flooded in  the
state. The American Red Cross reported that more than 70 percent of those  homes
were in Pinellas, Hillsborough, Pasco, Hernando, Citrus, Manatee and  Sarasota
counties.

In 1995, four storms made landfall in Florida.

Though 1996 paled in comparison to 1995, it still was an above-average year  for
hurricane activity, said hurricane specialist Lixion Avila of the National
Weather Center in Miami.

"We had two hurricanes that hit the U.S.," he said of 1996. "Last year  was a
record year. It's not fair to compare."

Both hurricanes that hit the United States pummeled seaside communities near
Wilmington, N.C.

Hurricane Bertha, blamed for more than 10 deaths and about $ 250-million in
damage, lasted from July 5 to July 14, packing top sustained winds of 115 mph.

Hurricane Fran, however, was the deadliest storm in the U.S, blamed for 34
deaths. Fran formed Aug. 24 and lasted through Sept. 6, with winds blowing up
to 120 mph that knocked out power across portions of North Carolina.

Hurricane Eduard, the most intense storm with winds up to 145 mph, brushed  Cape
Cod and Nova Scotia but did not make a direct hit.

Researchers soon will begin analyzing what 1997 holds in store. Renowned
hurricane forecaster and Colorado State University professor William Gray is
expected to announce his predictions soon.

Last year, he said 1996 would see 10 tropical storms, but later he raised  that
number to 11. He predicted seven hurricanes, up from six, and three with  winds
higher than 110 mph, up from two.

For Florida, the hurricane season distinguished itself by hanging around  until
the bitter end. Hurricane Marco, the last named storm, fizzled out days  ago.

"It actually started early and ended late," Loeper said. "Now we'll have  to
worry about frost for the next couple of months."

A review of the named storms of the 1996 hurricane season

Here's the National Weather Service's list of all the major tropical storms  and
hurricanes it has named and tracked in the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of  Mexico
this year:

                                        Highest sust.

      Storm               Date            winds (mph)

1. Tropical Storm Arthur     June 17-21           35

2. Hurricane Bertha          July 5-14           100

3. Hurricane Cesar           July 25-28           70

4. Hurricane Dolly           Aug. 19-23           70

5. Hurricane Edouard         Aug. 21-Sept. 3     125

6. Hurricane Fran            Aug. 24-Sept. 26    100

7. Tropical Storm Gustav     Aug. 27-Sept. 2      40

8. Hurricane Hortense        Sept. 4-15          120

9. Hurricane Isidore         Sept. 24-Oct. 1     100

10. Tropical Storm Josephine Oct. 4-8             60

11. Tropical Storm Kyle      Oct. 11-12           45

12. Hurricane Lili           Oct. 15-27          100

13. Hurricane Marco          Nov. 18-26           75

Sources: Scripps Howard News Service, National Weather Service, Purdue
University

- Information from Times files and the Associated Press was used in this
report.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

GRAPHIC: COLOR CHART; BLACK AND WHITE CHART; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; chart
showing Atlantic storms from 1996, with a drawing of storm paths and a speeding
hurricane (ran CITY & STATE, METRO & STATE); chart showing Atlantic storms from
1996, with a drawing of storm paths and a speeding hurricane (ran TAMPA &
STATE); William Gray (ran TAMPA & STATE)

                    Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 14 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              June 15, 2012 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

At 100, weather expert has seen it all;
Co-created scale that categorizes hurricanes' force

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 678 words


Born a few months after the Titanic sank, meteorologist Robert Simpson has seen
firsthand some of the worst weather disasters in the nation's history.

After all, his several decades of service included seven years as director of
the National Hurricane Center, where he stood watch over killer storms like
Hurricane Camille in 1969 and Hurricane Agnes in 1972.

But now as he nears 100, it's clear that his biggest contribution may have been
the hurricane wind scale that bears his name.

Released in the  1970s, the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale -- with its
categories from 1 to 5 based on wind speed -- has become  a mainstay for the
news media and the public whenever hurricanes threaten the coasts, and will
again throughout this year's hurricane season.

"I was amazed at how well it was received," Simpson recalls when reached by
phone at his apartment in Washington, D.C. Simpson co-created the scale with
Herbert Saffir, a wind engineer colleague who died in 2007.

"I knew something of its kind was needed," he says, especially after the savage
ferocity of Hurricane Camille, which hammered the Gulf Coast with 190-mph winds
in 1969, killing hundreds.

"Camille caused so much damage and led to widespread concern over the whole
nation," Simpson says.

He notes  that meteorologists were then swamped for specific information during
approaching hurricanes.

"It's hard to imagine modern hurricane warnings without a Saffir-Simpson
ranking," says meteorologist Robert Henson, author of Weather on the Air: A
History of Broadcast Meteorology. "There's something very powerful about a
1-to-5 rating system. It's intriguing that both tornadoes and hurricanes are
ranked in this way."

The Fujita tornado intensity scale, developed by University of Chicago
meteorologist Ted Fujita, ranks tornadoes from EF-1 to EF-5.

"I once heard the financial meltdown of 2008 described as a Category 5 storm,"
Henson says. "That tells you something about how deeply the Saffir-Simpson scale
has penetrated the consciousness of the American public."

Simpson, who will turn 100 years old this November, is still consulted
occasionally about the scale. "I'm retired, except I attend meetings as I can,"
he says.

In April, Simpson presented a paper at the American Meteorology Society's
Tropical Meteorology Meeting in Florida about the history of the scale.

"The brilliance of the Saffir-Simpson scale is its simplicity," says senior
scientist Greg Holland of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, adding
that "it communicates information in a way that immediately involves the real
level of risk."

At one time, the scale also included storm surge and barometric pressure values
in addition to wind speed, but those have since been removed from the scale,
says hurricane specialist James Franklin of the National Hurricane Center. Storm
surge, he says, is tremendously variable and cannot be tied into wind speed.

"The Saffir-Simpson scale has had enormous impact on communicating the hurricane
threat over the years," Franklin says. "It is an incredibly efficient way to
convey the danger from a hurricane's strongest winds."

Simpson first got interested in hurricanes at the age of 7, when one hit his
hometown of Corpus Christi, Texas, in 1919.

As a young meteorologist with the U.S. Weather Bureau (the precursor to the
National Weather Service), he flew his first flight into a hurricane in July
1945, only two years after the very first deliberate flight into a hurricane.

A long career in meteorology followed, with stops as director of the National
Hurricane Research Project in the late 1950s and as director of the hurricane
center from 1967 to 1974.

Simpson retired from the government in 1974 and established a private weather
consulting firm with his wife, Joanne Simpson, who was the first woman to
receive a doctorate in meteorology. Joanne died in 2010.

Holland marvels at Simpson's longevity and career: "It is quite simple," Holland
says. "There is no living person who has had the same level of impact on
meteorology, be it scientific, forecasting or communicating information."

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo By H. Darr Beiser, USA TODAY Retired: Robert Simpson became
interested in hurricanes at age 7, when a storm struck his Texas hometown.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 15 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             June 1, 2016 Wednesday

Overcoming storm uncertainty | Inexperienced populace and forecast flaws are
challenges

BYLINE: Harold Bubil

SECTION: A; FL News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1940 words


HURRICANE SEASON

Forget Erika, remember Joaquin.

That is the message from weather experts as the 2016 hurricane season begins
with predictions of an average or slightly above-average year for storm
activity. Most seasonal outlooks call for a dozen or so named storms, about a
half-dozen of them hurricanes.

After a quiet 2015, in which most westbound tropical storms were dismantled by
wind shear in the upper atmosphere created by a strong El Niño phenomenon,
conditions are expected to be more favorable for hurricane survival this season.
El Niño - a large area of warm water in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean -
is going away and is expected to be replaced by La Niña conditions around the
peak of the season in early September.

But the benign La Niña - cooler water in the eastern tropical Pacific - is
expected to be counterbalanced by cooler water off the Atlantic coast of Africa.
The latter condition will inhibit the formation of "Cape Verde" hurricanes, say
many climate scientists, including Dr. Phil Klotzbach of Colorado State
University.

However, hurricanes that do develop will have a better chance of surviving the
trip westward, thanks to the dissipation of El Niño.

So for forecasters at the National Weather Service, cyclone experts at

the National Hurricane Center, TV meteorologists and emergency managers for the
state's 67 counties (collectively dubbed "the Weather Enterprise"), the emphasis
is, as always, on preparation and vigilance.

After all, while the chances of a hurricane hitting any particular Florida
community are relatively low, "it only takes one" to make it a bad season, they
say. Hurricane Andrew in the quiet 1992 season stands out as Example A. It was
the first hurricane of the season, striking Homestead on Aug. 24, and it changed
Florida more than any disaster since the 1926 "Great Miami" hurricane. You pay
much more for homeowners' insurance, and your newer house is built to much more
stringent codes, largely because of Andrew.

Forecasters also are using social science and social media to hone their
communications. A clear, consistent message is essential, says Dr. Rick Knabb,
director of the National Hurricane Center, so as not to confuse the public while
still motivating people to take the simple steps that will prepare them both for
a hurricane impact and a speedy recovery.

An inexperienced state

Florida has added roughly 2.4 million residents since its most recent hurricane
landfall - Wilma in October 2005 - and for many more than that, the storm still
fresh in their memories is Tropical Storm Erika last August.

Florida Power & Light estimates that 40 percent of its customers have never
experienced a hurricane. Charlotte County Emergency Manager Wayne Sallade, who
is retiring this year after 29 years on the job, says 60 percent of his county's
residents lived elsewhere during the tumult of the 2004 hurricane season, when
Hurricane Charley inflicted major damage on Punta Gorda, Charlotte Harbor,
swaths of Port Charlotte and Arcadia as it crossed the state.

"If you are from Ypsilanti, Schenectady or Moline, you don't know anything about
hurricanes," said Sallade after he delivered his final address to a
standing-room-only crowd at the annual hurricane expo and symposium in the
Charlotte Event and Conference Center May 21 in Punta Gorda. "That is why we
have to continue to offer this event to people."

The problem with Erika, from an educational standpoint, is that it was a dud.

Despite winds that never exceeded 50 mph, Erika prompted Gov. Rick Scott to
declare a state of emergency, and, with the entire peninsula within the
forecasters' "cone of uncertainty" for its potential path, South Florida was set
on its ear. While the wind was never forecast to exceed 60 mph in South Florida,
the governor was worried about the potential for flooding.

But a tropical storm warning was never issued. After causing a lot of flood
damage and dozens of drownings in Dominica, Erika fizzled near eastern Cuba.

Although the "state of emergency" is an administrative tool that permits the
governor to transfer certain authority to the director of the Florida Division
of Emergency Management, many Floridians reacted as if it were a siren. Now, as
the new season begins, members of the Weather Enterprise worry that this false
alarm could have desensitized newcomers to true risks of hurricanes.

"The state went off the deep end," said Dennis Feltgen, NOAA's communications
director, at the National Hurricane Conference in Orlando this spring. "There
was a lot of misinformation going out over the airwaves and in print. At one
point, we thought we were losing control of our message."

The hurricane center's preparations for this season have focused on sending
clear, consistent messages and making full use of social media; it has several
Twitter accounts. To offset the numbing effect Erika may have had on Floridians'
vigilance, officials point instead to Hurricane Joaquin last October. Joaquin
formed northeast of the Bahamas, was not affected by wind shear, and actually
tracked southwestward, squatting on the island nation for two days before
reversing course and spending itself over the North Atlantic.

The Category 4 storm's outer bands could be seen from Miami, reminding longtime
South Florida residents of past hurricanes and teaching newcomers that, with
slightly different atmospheric conditions, they could have been the victims of
Joaquin's 155 mph winds.

The messaging efforts of Knabb and his staff at the hurricane center in Miami
isn't made any easier by the fact that, although great strides have been made in
forecasting, errors in predicting storms' track and intensity occur with
embarrassing frequency. "Forecast uncertainty" is an oft-spoken phrase by
professionals.

Knabb said the 2015 season "showed us that we haven't even solved the
track-forecast problem."

"Forecast uncertainty with hurricanes boils down to this reality: I can't tell
you, exactly, where the center of the hurricane is going to come ashore. I can't
tell how strong or how big, exactly, it is going to be when it gets there," he
said. "The problem is, you need to know those things in order to know how much
wind or water, or both, you are going to get at your house, and that is what we
really are after, right? What are the impacts going to be where you live?"

Cones of anxiety

To communicate the possible impacts, new graphics are being introduced that go
well beyond the curving lines that meteorologists used to draw on maps for TV
weather reports.

In the past decade, the "cone of uncertainty" has grabbed the public's
attention, but even that has come into question because people tend to focus on
the black line in the middle of the cone, rather than understanding that the
hurricane could strike anywhere within it.

In fact, it might better be labeled the "Cone of Probability."

"You can look at a cone five days out and people start to panic when there is no
need to," said Tom Lee of The Weather Channel during a National Hurricane
Conference panel discussion, "because other influences can come into play and
divert" the storm.

TV meteorologist Craig Setzer of CBS4 in Miami said the cone's credibility is
undercut by "uncertainty with forecast and intensity." Noting that Erika's
five-day forecast called for it to be a hurricane off the coast of Florida, he
added that "there was a tremendous amount of uncertainty. The product is
constrained by the forecaster's forecast, which is subjective." Even when the
eye of the storm is within the cone, "it doesn't explain the weather outside of
the cone."

"We know that the cone has serious limitations," said Knabb on the same panel
discussion. "It is one of the reasons we have introduced these new
hazard-specific products - the wind-speed probabilities and the potential storm
surge flooding map that is going operational this year.

"What we are trying to do is create useful, snazzy, beneficial new products to
distract everybody from saying, 'I'm in the cone. ... I'm out of the cone. I'm
good. ... I'm bad.' We also realize we can't leave the cone graphic the way it
is forever."

But a refined Cone of Uncertainty is likely to remain a key communications tool,
Knabb said. "We still need something that is the basic forecast briefing
graphic. There is never going to be one graphic that is going to convey
everything."

The most important new product - the forecasting graphic that will be shared
with the media and public - for the 2016 season is the Potential Storm Surge
Flooding Graphic. This map will show the height of inundation above normally dry
ground that is expected within storm-surge areas.

"It will greatly increase the consistency of the message for decision-making and
communicating in the media," Knabb said, "because you will be able to see where
the storm surge could occur."

A prototype storm surge watch/warning graphic is still in testing and is
expected to become "operational" in 2017.

"The two together will revolutionize the way in which we evacuate in this
nation," Jamie Rhome, the NHC's storm-surge specialist, told the Herald-Tribune.
"Before that, the emergency managers were having to deduce their risk
themselves," using calculations that were "time-consuming, difficult and
error-prone. Now, they will have a quick way to assess their risk, which will
free them up to do other things - execute their jobs."

The hurricane center also is testing a "wind timing" graphic that shows when
hurricane-force winds can be expected to arrive at a given point on the map. It
already has a Wind Speed Probability graphic.

"We want to provide wind-arrival timing information that incorporates the
uncertainty," Knabb said.

Beyond the categories

Another issue hurricane forecasters are addressing is the public's fixation on
the storm's category on the Saffir-Simpson scale.

Hurricane Andrew was one of just three Category 5 hurricanes to ever make U.S.
landfall, while Hurricane Charley was a Category 4.

Charley, however, created no storm surge. In the past 50 years, half of all
direct cyclone fatalities in the U.S. have been caused by storm surge.

"People focus too much on the category and not enough on the individual hazards,
Knabb said. "In the last decade of activity, no major hurricanes of Category 3
or stronger have hit the U.S. But look how many major impacts we have had, from
tropical storms to Category 1 and 2 hurricanes, to post-tropical cyclones
(Sandy) and everything else.

"That has highlighted why it is so important to be hazard-specific" in
forecasting "because the category is so poor at telling you the entire story. A
slow-moving, large tropical storm can be a disaster that the lack of even a
hurricane category slapped on it will not even come close to conveying. There
are many other characteristics of the cyclone itself that determine the local
impacts."

They include the size of the storm, its track, its ability to generate a storm
surge, its direction relative to the point of landfall, the shape of the coast
at landfall and the population of the affected area.

Using Hurricane Joaquin, which struck the Bahamas but contributed to flooding in
South Carolina, as an example, Knabb said that "focusing on the characteristics
or status or the location of the cyclone is not always going to tell you what
the local impacts are going to be. At the end of the day, that is what the focus
of risk communication and decision-making has to be."

"It is surprising how complex the hurricane problem is," said Setzer, the Miami
TV meteorologist. "It is surprising that, as much as we know, there is still so
much that we can't quantify and communicate."

"Every hurricane," said Knabb, "is different."

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Craig Fugate, administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
right, talks about the status of Hurricane Joaquin as it moves through the
eastern Bahamas as he and Rick Knabb, director of the National Hurricane Center,
participate in a media briefing on Oct. 1. The Associated Press FILE This
satellite image taken Oct. 2 shows Hurricane Joaquin over the Bahamas. NOAA via
The Associated Press

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 16 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                             October 5, 2015 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

JOAQUIN FORECASTS HELPED THE EAST COAST BREATHE EASIER;
ASK THE WEATHER GUYS

BYLINE:  STEVEN A. ACKERMAN and JONATHAN MARTIN , UW-Madison department of
atmospheric and oceanic sciences

SECTION: LOCAL; ASK THE WEATHER GUYS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 293 words


Q: Is hurricane forecasting improving?

A: There are two important components of hurricane forecasting: the hurricane
track (or where it is going) and hurricane intensity (or how and if its winds
are increasing). Track forecasts have improved over the last two decades;
intensity forecasts have not improved.

In 1992, when Hurricane Andrew hit Florida, the average three-day forecast error
in hurricane track was about 300 miles. Today, a six-day forecast of the typical
hurricane track error is now less than 200 miles, more accurate than the
three-day forecast was 23 years ago.

The improvement in hurricane track is due to a number of factors. We now have
better and more satellite observations, new observations from drones carrying
weather instruments, and more aircraft with better instruments observing
hurricanes.

Super computers that are faster improve forecast models by allowing more energy
and dynamic processes to be incorporated more explicitly into the forecast. Due
to improved observations, we can include better descriptions of the initial
state of the atmosphere into the models, which leads to more accurate
predictions of a storm's behavior.

Forecasting the intensity of a hurricane hasn't improved much in the last two
decades, so work remains to be done in that area. This lack of improvement is
likely a result of our lack of understanding of the physics that control these
massive weather systems.

Hurricanes are complex, large and powerful, which makes them difficult to study.
While we still lack the ability to accurately forecast hurricane intensity, our
understanding of how hurricanes evolve, how they interact with dust outbreaks
from Africa, and how a new eye begins to develop around the old eye of a
hurricane, has grown substantially.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Steve Ackerman and Jonathan Martin, professors in the UW-Madison
department of atmospheric and oceanic sciences, are guests on WHA radio (970 AM)
at 11:45 a.m. the last Monday of each month.

GRAPHIC: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration This satellite image
taken Friday at 11:45 a.m. shows Hurricane Joaquin, bottom center, pounding the
Bahamas and a deepening low pressure system on the U.S. East Coast. Millions
along the coast breathed a little easier Friday after forecasters said Joaquin
would veer out to sea instead of joining up with a drenching rainstorm that is
bringing severe flooding to parts of the Eastern Seaboard.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2015 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 17 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                             October 7, 2016 Friday
                             Politifact.com Edition

RUSH LIMBAUGH WRONG THAT LACK OF HURRICANES DIMINISHES CLIMATE CHANGE ARGUMENT

BYLINE: ALLISON GRAVES

SECTION: POLITIFACT; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 1305 words


Says "11 straight years of no major hurricanes striking land" in the United
States "bores a hole right through the whole climate change argument."

- Rush Limbaugh on Wednesday, October 5th, 2016 in a radio show broadcast

* * *

The Ruling: PANTS ON FIRE!

As Hurricane Matthew threatened the east coast of Florida, conservative radio
host Rush Limbaugh cast a far-flung conspiracy about the deadly storm's hype.

Limbaugh, who lives in Palm Beach County, used his radio show to decry what he
sees as the politicization of storms by the left to validate climate change. At
the time, Hurricane Matthew was a Category 4 storm.

Limbaugh accused the Obama administration of "playing games" with hurricane
forecasting to push climate change. Hurricane forecasts come from the National
Hurricane Center. The center is controlled by the National Weather Service,
which falls under the administration's Commerce Department.

Limbaugh recalled how former Vice President Al Gore, author of An Inconvenient
Truth, said after Hurricane Katrina devastated New Orleans that the world could
expect more destructive hurricanes because of climate change.

"And then what happened? We had 11 years of no hurricanes -- 11 straight years
of no major hurricanes striking land in the United States, which just bores a
hole right through the whole climate change argument," Limbaugh said on his
radio show Oct. 5. "They want people to think this way: Hurricane reported. Must
be climate change."

Limbaugh has made similar and wrong arguments in the past, such as when he said
the media made up polar vortexes to reinforce global warming.

His latest theory about U.S. hurricane landfalls amounting to "a hole right
through" the validity of climate change is also wrong.

A history of hurricanes

The last major hurricane to hit the United States was Wilma, which pummeled
Florida's west side as a Category 3 storm in 2005. Wilma was a Category 5 storm
at its peak while at sea and the most intense hurricane reported anywhere until
Hurricane Patricia hit Mexico in 2015.

As Hurricane Matthew approached, Brian McNoldy, a senior research associate at
the University of Miami's Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science,
tweeted Oct. 5 it has been 4,000 days since the last major hurricane hit the
United States (or approximately 10.9 years).

A "major" hurricane means the storm is a category 3, 4 or 5, said Dave Nolan,
another professor of the Rosenstiel School.

To be a Category 3 hurricane, winds at the surface must exceed about 115 mph
(100 knots) somewhere in the storm. "Major" does not refer to size, damages or
fatalities - it's about intensity, as measured by maximum wind speed, Nolan
added.

Hugh Gladwin, an associate professor in the department of Global and
Sociocultural Studies at Florida International University, said Limbaugh added
that storm surge and amount of damage are also factors and some would argue more
important than wind speed. If those factors are considered, it is possible that
Hurricane Sandy, the destructive 2012 storm that disrupted the East Coast, could
qualify as a major hurricane.

Conflating weather with climate

Limbaugh uses the stretch without hurricanes to make a case against climate
change, but experts said that's all wrong.

"This has nothing at all to do with climate change," Nolan said. "Hurricanes are
extreme events with a lot of variability from year to year, so they can't be
used to indicate long term trends about climate."

He also said Limbaugh's U.S.-centric take on climate change ignores weather
events from around the world. An example of these events include super typhoon
Haiyan, which was the most intense typhoon to ever hit the Philippines, and
Hurricane Patricia, one of the strongest ever to hit Mexico.

Suzana Camargo, a professor of ocean and climate physics at Columbia
University's Lamont Doherty Earth Institute, said the Atlantic only corresponds
to about 13 percent of the global number of tropical cyclones (hurricanes), with
about 30 percent of the tropical cyclones occurring in the western North Pacific
(where they are called typhoons).

Point being, the lack of hurricanes hitting the United States is a localized
issue, and doesn't speak about the global issue of climate change.

"The relationship between climate change and major hurricanes is complicated and
there is not much agreement on it among meteorologists," Gladwin said.

Some researchers at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or
NOAA, compiled research on global warming and hurricanes in 2015 and concluded
that a warming climate, by heating the oceans, will make hurricanes more
intense.

But explicit connections have not been determined.

"It is premature to conclude that human activities - and particularly greenhouse
gas emissions that cause global warming - have already had a detectable impact
on Atlantic hurricane or global tropical cyclone activity," reads NOAA's
analysis.

Nolan said that science has changed course in the last 10 years. Between
1990-2005 some papers suggested that global warming will lead to more and
stronger hurricanes, and we can already see this effect over the last 40 years.
Since then, academic consensus has emphasized global warming will probably make
fewer hurricanes, but some of them will be stronger, and we can't see any trend
at all in the historical record.

Limbaugh mischaracterizes Gore as an example of a liberal who has associated
more hurricanes with climate change. Gore points to research that oceans have
gotten warmer and have led to more intense hurricanes, but both Nolan and
Gladwin said Gore never said there would be more hurricanes.

Either way, Limbaugh fails to make the case that the 11-year stretch without
major hurricanes hitting the United States disproves climate change.

"It's not valid to look at the number of landfalling major hurricanes in the
United States to say anything about climate change, since random changes in
atmospheric steering currents, unrelated to climate change, are partially
responsible for the 11-year U.S. major hurricane drought'," said Jeff Masters,
the director of meteorology at Weather Underground.

Our ruling

Limbaugh said the fact that the United States went 11 straight years without
major hurricanes "just bores a hole right through the whole climate change
argument."

It doesn't. There are several major flaws in his line of reasoning. First,
looking only at major hurricanes that hit the United States ignores storm
activity around the world. Second, storm frequency does not strictly correlate
with rising temperature. Third, many other data points prove that climate change
is real.

Limbaugh's argument is inaccurate and ridiculous. We rate it Pants on Fire.

* * *

About this statement:

Published: Friday, October 7th, 2016 at 3:44 p.m.

Researched by: Allison Graves

Edited by: Katie Sanders

Subjects: Climate Change

Sources:

Email interview, Dave Nolan, professor in the Rosenstiel School of Marine and
Atmospheric Science at University of Miami, Oct. 6, 2016

Email interview, Suzana Camargo, professor of ocean and climate physics at
Columbia University's Lamont Doherty Earth Institute, Oct. 7, 2016

Email interview, Aly Mousaad Aly, assistant professor of the Department of Civil
and Environmental Engineering at Louisiana State University, Oct. 7, 2016

Email interview, Hugh Gladwin, associate professor in the department of Global
and Sociocultural Studies at Florida International University, Oct. 7, 2016

Email interview, Jeff Masters, director of meteorology at Weather Underground,
Oct. 7, 2016

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, "Global Warming and Hurricanes:
An Overview of Current Research Results," Sept. 30, 2015

The New York Times, "Where Are the Hurricanes?" July 15, 2016

PoltitFact, "Limbaugh: 'Polar vortex' is made up, yet still proof the ice caps
aren't melting," Jan. 8, 2014

Tweet, Brian McNoldy

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: VIDEO: Part of St. Augustine were flooded because of Hurricane Matthew.
(Miami Herald) PHOTO (2)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2016 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 18 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    September 6, 1996, Friday, ALL EDITIONS

SPECIAL REPORT: HURRICANE FRAN;
Q&A HURRICANE FRAN;
Facts about these furious storms: What they do and why

BYLINE: Bill Hendrick; STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 05B

LENGTH: 1124 words


Q: Hurricane Fran has been classified as a Category 3 storm. What exactly does
that mean?

A: As with tornadoes, meteorologists have devised scales to measure the
intensity of hurricanes. Categories range from 1 (minimal) to 5 (devastating).
Winds in a Category 1 hurricane range from 74 to 95 miles per hour, Category 2
is from 96 to 110, Category 3 is from 111 to 130, Category 4 from 131 to 155,
and Category 5 is over 155.

Q: Are Category 5 storms common?

A: No, they are rare, according to Kent Frantz, a meteorologist at the U.S.
National Weather Service in Atlanta.

Q: What are the costliest hurricanes in terms of damage in U.S. history?

A: Andrew in 1992, Hugo in 1989, Betsy in 1965, Agnes in 1972 and Camille in
1969 each caused more than $ 400 million in damages.

Q: What have been the most intense hurricanes in history?

A: A category 5 hurricane devastated the Florida Keys in 1935, before storms
were named. Camille in 1969 also was a category 5, with winds reported to exceed
200 miles per hour. Category 4 storms hit the Florida Keys and south Texas in
1919 and Florida in 1928. Hurricane Andrew also was a Category 4 storm.

Q: On average, how many hurricanes hit the United States every year?
A: Three.
Q: Is it true that the number of hurricanes is increasing every year?

A: No, it just seems that way, probably because of increased media attention,
Frantz says. But last year was the most active year since 1933, with 21 named
tropical storms, including 11 hurricanes.

Q: But isn't global warming having an impact?

A: No, Frantz says. "People who look at this sort of thing have noted there was
a hurricane drought in the '70s and '80s in the U.S. These things run in 40-year
cycles. Many people have been predicting hurricanes would increase in the '90s
and the first decade of the new millennium. The cycle is partly due to the
frequency with which low pressure systems come off the coast of Africa and go
into the Atlantic breeding ground for hurricanes."

Q: Speaking of breeding grounds, why do so many storms form in the Caribbean
area?

A: The location. The entire Gulf coast and East Coast are vulnerable because
systems tend to form and then move westward. Hurricanes form over warm bodies of
water. Warm water is what drives the hurricanes, the fuel. The warm air provides
the lift required for storms to develop. Hurricanes are massive areas of
convection. To sustain that, you need constant lift, and warm water provides
that, just like heat rises. That's why a hurricane, when it moves inland,
diminishes quickly and turns into a low pressure system, because it has lost its
major source of energy."

Q: How can a hurricane change the ecosystem of a barrier island, or of the coast
itself?

A: "It's the erosion feature," Frantz says. "The storm surge itself completely
inundates an island, and literally wash everything away. You can have erosion
with the pounding waves. And the wind can destroy vegetation and trees, so the
wildlife really suffers if you have no way of getting off a barrier island."

Q: What do experts mean when they use the word "surge?"

A: A surge is very dangerous, but it's nothing like a tidal wave, says Dr. Orrin
Pilkey, a coastal geologist at Duke University. In essence, the water level
rises, and water surges over what is the normal shoreline. When it ebbs back to
the sea, a surge will carry away anything in its path.

Q: Do all hurricanes have surges?

A: "In a hurricane, surges are inevitable," Pilkey says. "A surge is a rise in
the elevation of the sea. You don't want to look on it as a wave rushing onto
the shore. Basically, in a general sort of way, the wider the continental shelf,
the larger the potential for storm surge. In a surge, first your feet get wet,
then water is over your ankles, then the next thing you know there's shrimp to
your knees. A storm surge will do nothing but get buildings wet. But it's the
waves that are dangerous."

Q: What causes a storm surge?

A: Dr. Robbie Thieler, also of Duke, says surges are caused in part "by the very
high winds that are whipping up the sea, and the low pressure at the center of
the hurricane. Because of that low atmospheric pressure, the water bulges up
under the hurricane. The story is pushing this dome of water with it. When the
hurricane begins to arrive on shore, like Hugo and like this one, where there
are embayments or indentations in the shoreline, it's trouble. The water comes
into this embayment and there is no place for it go to. You get a funneling
effect, very, very high storm surges.

"We will see a much higher storm surge from Fran than we saw from Bertha rece
ntly. You'll see a very rapid rise in water level because this very large wall
of water is being pushed into a funnel-shaped feature."

Q: Are we going to see a lot of flooding in the Carolinas and Virginia, which
are already pretty water-logged?

A: Yes, says Pilkey. He compares Fran to Hurricane Hazel, which followed the
same path in 1954, west to Raleigh, then up through Virginia.

"Hazel was big and it was very damaging and this has all the markings of another
Hazel. The potential of damage is an order of magnitude greater because so much
is more built on the shoreline."

Q: Should we expect this hurricane to spawn tornadoes?

A: "Most spawn tornadoes as they move inland because you're getting a rapid
spindown of the system, various little vortexes start spinning down," Pilkey
says. "The small tornadoes will pop out after the eye of a hurricane moves
inland, usually within the first 50 to 100 miles, and then they'll taper off.
But you can expect strong, gusty winds all the way to the Appalachians" in
western North Carolina.

Q: What was the deadliest hurricane in history?

A: According to Michael R. Smith of WeatherData Inc. in Wichita, Kan., a
hurricane that hit Galveston, Texas on Sept. 8-9, 1900, killed more than 6,000
people. The costliest in terms of destruction was Andrew, which caused $ 16
billion in damage in 1991. Hugo in 1989 caused $ 5.9 billion in damages in the
United States and another $ 2 billion in the Caribbean. Thirty-five people were
killed by Hugo, including 29 in South Carolina.

Q: How do meteorologists forecast hurricanes?

A: "It's a combination of using satellite imagery and hurricane hunter aircraft,
along with some new tools, including a specially equipped business jet that
flies around the perimeter of hurricanes, and weather buoys that are dropped in
the path of hurricanes. These radio information back, and it is put into
computers that simulate the atmosphere. Then human beings integrate it all and
make forecasts as to where the storms are going to hit land."

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution


                          FOCUS - 19 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                           The Sunday Times (London)

                             July 21, 1996, Sunday

Caribbean wind up

BYLINE: Mark Hodson

SECTION: Features

LENGTH: 1377 words


Hurricanes hardly ever happen or do they? MARK HODSON discovers why
holidaymakers are so confused

Iris, Luis, Marilyn. The names sound innocent enough, but they will bring back
frightening memories for those Britons whose Caribbean holidays were ruined by
last year's devastating hurricanes. At least 13 islands suffered serious damage;
the worst hit was Antigua, where palm trees were uprooted, boats were tossed
miles inland and bungalows were swept into the sea. And, with Hurricane Bertha,
this year's season has already begun.

Last year, the Caribbean was battered by a total of 11 hurricanes, five of which
were classified as major'', with gusts of more than 110mph. According to the
National Hurricane Center in Miami, 1995 was the worst hurricane season for 62
years and the second worst since records began in 1871. According to experts,
such as Professor Williams Gray, an expert in climatology at Colorado State
University, this year is expected to be another bad one.

Officially, the Caribbean hurricane season runs from June 1 to November 30, but,
in practice, the period of highest risk is limited to a few weeks from the end
of August to the middle of September. Last year, three hurricanes struck in
rapid succession during this period.

Within this three-week danger zone, one week in particular should be watched:
September 11-18. Eight years ago, on September 13, Hurricane Gilbert tore
through Jamaica and the Cayman Islands. The following year, on September 17,
Hurricane Hugo caused devastation from Guadaloupe all the way to Puerto Rico.

Although the National Hurricane Center has an impressive track record of
anticipating the movements of tropical storms, and a new high-altitude
Gulfstream jet to make predictions even more accurate, such

information will be of little use to the thousands of holiday-makers whose
holidays must be booked weeks or months ahead.

In the face of such a dilemma, many travellers will turn for guidance to travel
agents or tour operators. But what sort of advice can they expect to receive? In
the days following the arrival of Hurricane Bertha, I posed as a

holidaymaker and contacted travel agents, tourist boards and tour companies to
ask whether the middle of September would be a good time to visit the Caribbean
in general, and Antigua in particular. Some of the advice I received was
alarming.

My first stop was the Caribbean Tourism Organisation in London, which
confidently told me: Yes, September is a good time to go to the Caribbean.'' I
asked about the hurricane season and, after a brief pause, was told: It's July,
August and early September, but it depends on the individual island. The best
time to go is probably the end of September.''

Last year's destruction has done little to rock the confidence of staff at the
Antigua Tourist Board, where I was assured that the beginning of September would
be an ideal time to visit. When I then brought up the subject of hurricanes, a
spokeswoman said: Wherever you go in the tropics, there are storms. It's a
chance you take, but it's not a regular occurrence.''

Among tour operators, I found a vast discrepancy in the quality of advice. One
of the worst was Cosmos.  The weather in September will be fine,'' I was told
when I rang the reservations hotline.  You never get any problems with the
Caribbean. September is as good a time as any.''

When I asked if there was a risk of hurricanes, the man from Cosmos said: No.
They can come at any time of the year. There was one just recently, but that
wasn't a massive one.''

A telephone operator at British Airways Holidays was similarly unhelpful.
Although she was able to tell me the best time to visit (January to April), when
asked about the hurricane season, she laughed and said: You don't have a
hurricane season as such. They either happen or they don't. That's

in God's hands, you could say. It could happen any time.''

I also drew a blank at Kuoni, where an operator appeared to read to me from a
weather chart: Average rainfall in September is six inches but that will just be
short, sharp showers. Six inches is not that much, really.''

Are there any other dangers or things to watch out for?''

I asked.

No, that's it,'' she said.  No problems.''

At Tradewinds, an operator assured me that early September would be a good time
to visit, but when I asked about hurricanes she revised her advice, saying: The
end of September might be better. The hurricane season is generally August to
September. There has been one every year for the past four years. Some have been
very minor, but last year everybody had to be evacuated from Antigua.''

Some of the best advice came from Thomson, where a saleswoman wasted no time in
warning me about the possibility of tropical storms. She said: September is the
rainy season, to be honest with you, and there have been hurricanes heading that
way and there will possibly be hurricanes in the area. Places such as Barbados,
Jamaica and the Dominican Republican will be safe, but Antigua had a major storm
last year.'' She added that the hurricane season runs from about July to the end
of October''.

Even staff at specialist tour companies could not be relied on to give the full
picture. At Caribbean Connection, which charges up to Pounds 4,000 for a week in
Antigua, an operator said rain was likely in September, but failed to mention
hurricanes until prompted, then went on to claim wrongly that the hurricane
season runs from April to December. She said: Hurricanes can happen at any time
during the rainy season. The last two devasta- ting hurricanes have hit in
September, but they were 10 years apart. One happened last year, so I can't see
another one happening this year.'' (A triumph of hope over experience?)

At Simply Caribbean, another upmarket company, the advice was both candid and
sound: September is not the best time: it is still the hurricane season. In all
honesty, if you can make an alternative date, later would be better. It makes it
stressful for you if you have booked and paid for a holiday and are constantly
watching the weather forecast. There has already been one hurricane this year.''

At a branch of Lunn Poly, a sales representative referred to a weather chart,
which showed rainfall in Antigua increasing from September into October and
November.

I would say early September would be better than late September,'' she
concluded. I asked about the hurricane season and was told: That's usually in
August.''

A man at Thomas Cook also referred to a weather chart but arrived at a different
conclusion: The weather is okay in September, but it is usually the beginning of
the hurricane season, so it is not a good time

to go. A lot of people go out in the spring April or May.''

Cruises, too, can be blown off course by hurricanes. At Cunard, I was advised to
avoid the beginning of September if I could: It is the rainy season and the
hurricane season runs from about June to September, so there is a risk there.''

So far, so good, but the next remark was rather less scientific: They've already
had one hurricane this year,'' I was told, so chances are they won't have
another one.''

Company brochures tend to make little mention of hurricanes, although Thomson,
again, was a worthy exception. British Airways Holidays, in its Caribbean
brochure, has a brief disclaimer in small print on page 89: Occasionally in the
tropics, severe storms and even hurricanes can occur at any time. These, of
course, cannot be predicted, but generally they are more prevalent between
August and November.'' Others carry no mention whatsoever of tropical storms,
simply referring to adverse weather conditions'' as one of several potential
problems for which they will not be held accountable.

Contact: Antigua Tourist Board (0171-486 7073), British Airways Holidays
(01293-723161), Caribbean Connect-ion (01244-341131), Carib-

bean Tourist Organisation (0171-233 8382), Cosmos (0161-480 5799), Cunard
(01703-634166), Kuoni (01306-742222), Simply Caribbean (01423-526887), Thomson
(0171-707 9000) and Tradewinds (01706-219111). Lunn Poly and Thomas Cook have
branches nationwide.


LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1996 Times Newspapers Limited


                          FOCUS - 20 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                             June 22, 2006 Thursday

Making the most of hurricane season

BYLINE: By Suzanne Plank

SECTION: TRAVEL

LENGTH: 936 words


The backdrop picture on my iBook desktop is a Caribbean dreamscape: plush talcum
beach, deep azure sky, intense turquoise sea, shady palm arching into the frame
just so. . . . I snapped this shot from my hammock on the beach in Tulum,
Mexico, last year. It was midday in mid-October in the middle of the worst
hurricane season on record.

Between storms - even in the worst years - hurricane season in the tropics can
be strung with sparkling sun-studded days. Though most travelers will choose to
stay out of hurricane season's capricious - and potentially dangerous - way,
others might want to risk the threat of inclement weather for the benefit of the
affordable, crowd-free vacations that are available this time of year. The North
Atlantic hurricane season spans six months, from June 1 to Nov. 30. (This year's
hurricane season arrived on time and settled in quickly, already unpacking
Tropical Storm Alberto on the Gulf Coast.) Hurricane season occupies a
convenient time - the summer months, when many individuals and most families are
able to travel - and a desirable place, the paradisiacal Caribbean tropics,
where many of these people dream of vacationing. The principal cause of the
dramatic weather that defines hurricane season is warm water. Warm sea-surface
temperatures help create the necessary atmospheric conditions that spawn
tropical storms and hurricanes. Sea-surface temperatures steadily increase over
the summer months, reaching their peak from August to October; it is at this
time, therefore, that hurricane season is at its most active and intense. Last
year, conditions - including unusually high water temperatures (linked, many
scientists suspect, to global warming) - conspired to make hurricane season 2005
the most prolific in recorded history, spawning 28 named storms in all, seven of
which became major hurricanes. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration predicts that 2006 will be slightly less extreme than 2005, with
four to six major hurricanes on the horizon. Travelers to the tropics should
realize, though, that a prediction for an active hurricane season is not a
forecast for perpetually stormy skies - as I learned last October in Tulum. You
can heighten your chances for clear skies by traveling early (June, July) or
late (November) in the season. And you can travel to the southern Caribbean,
outside the main hurricane corridor: The islands of Trinidad and Tobago, for
example, experience many fewer storms; the same is true for the ABC islands
(Aruba, Bonaire and Curaçao), as well as the Venezuelan island of Margarita. If
you are willing to gamble on a trip to more volatile northern Caribbean
locations, the payoffs this time of year can be huge in terms of privacy gained
and money saved. Most snowbirds flock to the Caribbean when the weather at home
is bad and conditions in the tropics are assured to be Corona-ad perfect.
Beaches teem with tourists during the high season (December-May). In contrast,
even the most popular spots in the Bahamas, Jamaica, the Virgin Islands and
Mexico's Riviera Maya area are accessible and crowd-free during hurricane
season. Furthermore, as the risk of bad weather rises, the price of travel
lowers, so that travel now is dramatically less expensive than in the other half
of the year. From lavish resorts to humble inns, rooms are 30 percent to 50
percent less expensive during hurricane season, with September averaging the
lowest rates of the year. Airfares to tropical locales are lower now too;
restaurant prices are cheaper; and even street vendors sell their wares for
less. Another alternative is to take a cruise: Passage on liners is much less
expensive during hurricane season, with the added advantage that a ship can
circumnavigate tropical storms. Stay safe: If you do decide to visit the
Caribbean during hurricane season, remember that generally speaking, there is at
least a three-day warning period before a hurricane makes landfall, which gives
travelers time to evacuate a threatened area. Also bear in mind that in the vast
majority of cases, it is not the high winds that kill during a hurricane but the
storm surge, which causes flooding and landslides, so it is imperative that you
seek high ground as far from the beach as possible. If for some reason you are
unable to leave, or choose to stay in a hurricane's path, local officials will -
forcibly, if need be - direct you to the nearest designated storm shelter.
Though chances are very slim that the dates and destination of your trip will
coincide with a hurricane's landfall, you'll enjoy yourself most if you're
prepared for the worst.

     ·    Consider getting travelers' insurance before you leave. For about 7
          percent of your total trip cost you can find policies that will cover
          unexpected expenses caused by emergencies. Make sure your policy
          includes specific hurricane coverage.



     ·    Check airline policy. Many - but not all - airlines waive
          flight-change fees for customers affected by a hurricane.



     ·    Check hotel policy. Only some hotels and resorts will reimburse fees
          or offer alternate dates for stays missed due to a hurricane.



     ·    Bring just-in-case necessities: water-purification tablets, energy
          bars, a flashlight, a first-aid kit and a can opener (during Hurricane
          Wilma, evacuees were given cans of tuna - but no opener!).



     ·    Check local weather reports daily, and/or go online for updated
          storm-watch info. One excellent source is Weather Underground
          (http://www.wunderground.com).


While hurricane season sojourns in the Caribbean are not for everyone, you may
find yourself enjoying all the riches of the high season - at low-season rates.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Caribbean vacationers kayak through mangroves on Bahamas' Out Islands.
You'll encounter fewer fellow travelers in hurricane season.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 21 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             May 31, 2017 Wednesday
                                 FIRST EDITION

Hurricane's feared 'storm surge' will now get its own set of alerts;
Mound of water that washes ashore is the deadliest event

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, @usatodayweather, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 518 words


Storm surge -- the deadliest threat from hurricanes -- will get its own set of
alerts for the first time when the season officially starts Thursday, the
National Weather Service said.

Storm surge is the massive mound of water that builds up and comes ashore as a
hurricane moves over the Atlantic Ocean or Gulf of Mexico. It has accounted for
about half of  hurricane deaths  since 1970, the National Hurricane Center said.
Storm surge caused most of the 1,200 deaths when Hurricane Katrina struck the
Gulf Coast in 2005.

Storm surge watches and warnings will be separate from hurricane alerts because
hurricane-force winds and storm surges don't always occur at the same place or
the same time, said Rick Knabb, former director of the hurricane center and now
an  expert at the Weather Channel.

In addition, preparing for hurricane-force winds is different than for storm
surge, he said. For storm surge, people should evacuate, while for wind, they
can stay in place in a strong structure as long as it's away from flood-prone
areas, Knabb said.

A "storm surge watch" will be issued when flooding is possible,  and a "warning"
will be issued when flooding is expected. Every  city along the Gulf Coast or
East Coast is at risk of storm surge, the hurricane center said.

In addition to being the deadliest threat, surge is also typically the most
destructive part of a hurricane. When Hurricane Sandy hit in 2012, storm
surge-induced flooding measured as high as 9 feet above ground in parts of New
York and New Jersey, leading to billions of dollars in damage.

The damage occurred even though Sandy spun ashore as the equivalent of only a
Category 1 hurricane, with winds of about 80mph, and was downgraded below
hurricane status shortly thereafter.

Storm surge flooding does not include floods caused by the heavy rain from the
hurricane, such as what happened in North Carolina last year during Hurricane
Matthew. It also has nothing to do with tsunamis, large ocean waves generated by
offshore earthquakes that are not related to weather.

Also new for this year: Meteorologists will begin issuing "potential tropical
cyclone" watches, warnings and advisories for disturbances that could threaten
land within 48 hours. "You might see our advisories a little sooner for
something trying to form on our doorstep," Knabb said.

Another update: The size of the cone of uncertainty, which has been steadily
shrinking each year in the weather service's track forecast graphic, is going to
get a little smaller again. "We continue to get a little bit better every year
with our track forecasting," Knabb said.

Still, he said, people should focus more on the storm's potential hazards than
on the center of its track or the forecast cone.

NOAA predicts an unusually active 2017 hurricane season for the Atlantic Basin,
with five to nine hurricanes expected to form before the season ends Nov. 30.
One tropical storm already formed in the Atlantic: Arlene, which spun harmlessly
in the middle of the ocean in April.

The next named storms will be Bret, Cindy, Don, Emily, Franklin and Gert.

Contributing: Rick Neale, Florida Today

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo David J. Phillip, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2017 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 22 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                              April 3, 2009 Friday

The early hurricane outlook isn't bad

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: A; ARTICLE; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 748 words


Hurricane season might be a little less stressful than weather forecasters
anticipated, as shifting global weather patterns reduce chances for an abnormal
number of storms this year.

In a reverse of conditions that prevailed in recent years, cooling seas off the
west coast of Africa and warming oceans near the Pacific equator should hamper
hurricane development this season, according to atmospheric scientists at
Colorado State University.

The scientists will announce their latest hurricane season predictions Tuesday.

"We were thinking that this coming 2009 season would be above average. Now we're
not so sure," said William Gray, head of the university's Tropical Meteorology
Project, recognized as one of the more reliable hurricane forecasting
institutions.

A cooling Atlantic reduces heat available to fuel massive hurricanes moving from
Africa toward the Americas. Shifts triggered by a warmer equatorial Pacific
increase chances that winds will snuff out tropical disturbances before they
develop into storms.

Weather forecasting -- especially predicting long-term hurricane development --
is an inexact, error-prone science, even for the most reliable models.

Hurricanes are also so powerful that just one can cause widespread damage. As
the six-month hurricane season approaches, emergency managers stress the need to
prepare for a major storm, regardless of the forecasts.

April normally brings a flurry of hurricane predictions, in anticipation of the
June 1-Nov. 30 season.

Besides Colorado State University, the University College in London, the Weather
Research Center and other meteorologists weigh in on how they think the
hurricane season will progress.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration releases its forecasts May
21, when weather forces that affect hurricanes are more pronounced and
predictable.

"A lot of times, conditions in place now can change substantially as you get
into the spring and late spring," said Gerry Bell, NOAA's lead seasonal
hurricane forecaster. "You just have so much more skill in the forecast and so
much more confidence in late May."

In December, Gray and his colleague, Philip Klotzbach, predicted seven
hurricanes and 14 named tropical storms would churn through the Atlantic and
Gulf of Mexico this year.

On Tuesday, they plan to scale back that prediction, closer in line with
average. Gray said he could not divulge exact numbers until then.

The average hurricane season, based on storms from 1950 through 2000, brings 5.9
hurricanes and 9.6 named storms.

In December, Klotzbach and Gray thought the Atlantic would continue warming,
fueling more hurricanes. They also thought La Niña conditions, a phenomenon in
which cooler seas near the Pacific equator shifts the jet stream, would persist.
The shift calms Atlantic westerly winds that tend to knock out tropical
disturbances, especially off the African coast, before they cycle into
hurricanes.

Now, the Atlantic is cooler than expected and La Niña is tapering off.

Gray said the biggest driver behind his upcoming forecast is cooler water off
Africa.

Most of the intense storms that affect the United States form off the west
African coast, when water temperatures reach to 80 degrees or higher.

Since 1995, Atlantic sea surface temperatures have been climbing, as part of a
long-term cycle. The current cooling does not erase the warming trend, which
generally leads to heightened hurricane activity in the Atlantic. But it could
offer some respite this year, Gray said.

Bell, with NOAA, said the present cooling is typical with La Niña and can change
rapidly as summer approaches. Last year, the Atlantic cooled before the
beginning of the hurricane season, but warmed significantly, fostering a higher
than average hurricane year.

Bell also said the sea temperature cycle in the Pacific is variable this time of
year and very difficult to predict.

"Forecasts of the El Niño and the La Niña tend to be weak throughout spring and
summer and that is one reason why seasonal forecasts don't have even more
skill," Bell said.

While most forecasters agree the La Niña is weakening, the jury is out on
whether the seas will warm enough to bring El Niño conditions.

An El Niño would be better news for the hurricane-weary because it would produce
more wind shear to knock out storms. A weak, unanticipated El Niño arose in
September 2006, just in time to calm that year's hurricane season.

"Whether an El Niño is going to form this year or not, we're a little undecided
on that," Gray said.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 23 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                            December 2, 2013 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

We answer your weather questions

BYLINE:  STEVEN A. ACKERMAN and JONATHAN MARTIN , UW-Madison department of
atmospheric and oceanic sciences

SECTION: LOCAL; ASK THE WEATHER GUYS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 351 words


The 2013 Atlantic hurricane season officially ended on Saturday. It was the
least active year in 30 years. There were only 13 tropical storms, two
hurricanes and no major hurricanes. The two hurricanes that formed were very
weak. In an average year, there are 12 tropical storms; six or seven go on to
become hurricanes and two of those reach major hurricane intensity.

A tropical storm is a rotating weather system with low pressure, strong winds
and a storm center with heavy rain producing thunderstorms arranged in a spiral
pattern. When the highest sustained winds in a tropical storm reach 74 mph, the
storm is reclassified as a hurricane if it is over the Atlantic Ocean or a
typhoon if over the Pacific Ocean. When the sustained winds reach 97 mph the
storm is considered a major hurricane.

Typhoons with winds above 150 mph are called super typhoons.

In late May and early June of 2013, the seasonal forecasts were predicting seven
to nine hurricanes. Why was the forecast so far off? For one reason, seasonal
forecasts are difficult to make. While the spring and early summer surface
pressure and sea surface temperature suggested an aboveaverage season, there
were conditions that were not forecast and likely helped this hurricane season
to be below average.

During the hurricane season, drierthannormal air blew off the deserts of Africa
into the tropical waters where hurricanes form. This dry air can weaken or
inhibit the formation of hurricanes.

In addition to this dry air, the average temperature structure was less
conducive to thunderstorm development. These are likely two conditions that made
this a below normal season. The coming year will bring forth research studies
seeking to provide a complete explanation of this unexpected below-average
season.

Steve Ackerman and Jonathan Martin, professors in the UW-Madison department of
atmospheric and oceanic sciences, are guests on WHA radio (970 AM) at 11:45 a.m.
the last Monday of each month.

Have a question?

Look for Ask the Weather Guys on Mondays.

Send questions to: justaskus@ madison.com; Just Ask Us, P.O. Box 8058, Madison,
WI 53708.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Associated Press archives Wave watchers check out the ocean in August
2009 near Peggy's Cove, Nova Scotia, during Hurricane Bill. That hurricane
brought a steady downpour and fierce winds to Nova Scotia, knocking out power,
canceling flights and drawing curious onlookers. No storm in the Atlantic grew
powerful enough to be classified as a major hurricane this year.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 24 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         Contra Costa Times (California)

                            October 17, 2005 Monday

Senators call for hurricane forecasting upgrade

BYLINE: By Debbie Cenziper; KNIGHT RIDDER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. F4

LENGTH: 1148 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


Leading members of Congress are vowing to strengthen America's hurricane program
with money for modern equipment and break-through research, saying improvements
are a matter of "life and death" for millions of people living along the
nation's coastlines.

"There is simply no excuse ... not to give (the National Hurricane Center) the
instrumentation and the equipment in order to have accurate forecasting," said
Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Fla. "The administration has got to stand up and say that
this is their priority. We in Florida know that accurate forecasting is often a
matter of life and death."

The lawmakers' comments come in response to an eight-month Knight Ridder
investigation, published last week, that detailed how chronic lapses in weather
-observing equipment and research have compromised hurricane forecasts.

The series revealed that buoys, weather balloons, radars, ground sensors,
dropwindsondes and specially rigged hurricane hunter planes -- crucial links in
the country's warning system -- failed forecasters during nearly half of the 45
hurricanes that struck land since Hurricane Andrew in 1992.

The head of Florida's congressional delegation, Rep. Clay Shaw, is calling for
hearings in Washington and Miami to determine how much money is needed to shore
up the program.

The veteran Republican said he is "profoundly concerned" about the gaps,
particularly at a time when the United States is experiencing busier, deadlier
hurricane seasons.

"Now more than ever, I believe it is of paramount importance to have accurate,
functioning and effective weather-observing equipment," Shaw wrote in a letter
to House Science Committee Chair Sherwood Boehlert.

Boehlert, a New York Republican, could not be reached for comment late last
week, but issued a brief statement: "We want to see ... hurricane programs get
as much funding as possible," he said in an e-mail to Knight Ridder. "And we're
looking at determining the seriousness of their unmet needs."

In addition to breakdowns in weather-observing equipment, Knight Ridder reported
that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has refused requests to
significantly increase funding for the Miami-based Hurricane Research Division,
which supports the Hurricane Center. The division has lost top scientists and
has been operating with a base budget that hasn't topped $3.5 million in more
than two decades.

Senate Appropriations Chairman Thad Cochran said he was troubled by the lack of
funding and promised to push for more support.

The Senate has proposed increasing the 2006 budget for NOAA, which oversees the
National Weather Service and the Hurricane Center, from $3.9 billion to $4.5
billion. Included in the increase: four additional forecasters for the Hurricane
Center and $3 million for research on hurricane intensity.

None of those increases are in the House's proposed budget, however, which cuts
NOAA's funding to $3.4 billion. In the coming weeks, those differences will have
to be ironed out.

The National Weather Service and the Hurricane Center, Cochran said, "simply
need more funds."

While the Senate's budget shows some increase, there's no money for most of the
upgrades forecasters and researchers say are needed to improve predictions: a
second Gulfstream jet to fly in the environment around a hurricane, more flight
time on NOAA's existing hurricane hunter planes, a fully funded Hurricane
Research Division, and money for more scientists to complete a state-of-the-art
computer system now in the works that could potentially revolutionize
forecasting.

Those additions could come in a supplemental funding bill that's expected within
weeks from President Bush. Congress will have the opportunity to add to the
bill.

After the 2004 hurricanes, Congress allotted $20.7 million for forecasting
equipment, including new buoys and upgraded equipment on hurricane hunter
planes. But forecasters and researchers said the money was nowhere near enough
to fully upgrade the nation's hurricane warning system.

All told, that would take an estimated $350 million, which includes some annual
costs, according to NOAA officials and public records.

Cochran, whose home state of Mississippi is still recovering from the
devastation wrought by Hurricane Katrina, is waiting to see what the White House
proposes.

"We need to do better," the Republican senator said. "We need to modernize this
system."

Hurricane Center Director Max Mayfield said he could not comment on budget
issues, saying he must work through NOAA's budget process.

Several other lawmakers, meanwhile, pledged to take on the issue.

U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, D-Fla., said she's particularly concerned
about the use of hurricane hunter planes.

Knight Ridder found that NOAA has diverted its two turboprop planes, specially
equipped to monitor hurricanes, on unrelated research missions for weeks at a
time during hurricane season. Next summer, in fact, one of the planes is slated
to go to Texas to study air pollution.

The newspaper also reported that NOAA has granted just 250 hours of flight time
for hurricane reconnaissance on the high-flying Gulfstream jet -- not nearly
enough to get a fix on threatening storms in busy hurricane seasons.

The jet was flown only once before Hurricane Katrina made landfall in South
Florida.

Researchers say if the jet had been flown more often in the early stages,
forecasters may have been able to detect the steering currents that unexpectedly
pushed Katrina deep into south Dade.

Wasserman Schultz said she plans to rally other members of Congress to ensure,
"the National Hurricane Center is taken off of the back burner and made a
priority within the NOAA and the federal budget."

UPDATE

GEORGE TOWN, Cayman Islands -- A tropical storm warning was in effect Sunday for
the Cayman Islands and residents began preparing for the worst. The U.S. Gulf
Coast could be affected later in the week, forecasters said.

The system could become Tropical Storm Wilma, which would make it the 21st named
storm of the season, tying the record for the most storms in an Atlantic season,
the National Hurricane Center in Miami said.

The only other time so many storms have formed since record keeping began 154
years ago was in 1933, when Franklin D. Roosevelt was president and the United
States was in the midst of the Depression.

At 8 p.m. EDT, the depression was centered about 150 miles southeast of Grand
Cayman, forecasters said. It was moving west-northwest near 2 mph and had
sustained winds near 35 mph. Depressions become tropical storms when their winds
reach 39 mph.

Long-term forecasts show the storm would likely move west and north, putting the
storm in the Gulf of Mexico on Thursday or Friday. Forecasters said water
temperature and other conditions were favorable for it to become a significant
hurricane.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

             Copyright 2005 Contra Costa Times (Walnut Creek, CA)
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 25 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                             

                              June 7, 2010 Monday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

ON HURRICANES, ABRAMS SEES LOTS OF HOT AIR

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HUFF DAILY NEWS TV EDITOR

SECTION: TELEVISION; Pg. 64

LENGTH: 444 words


STEPHANIE ABRAMS makes a living making predictions.

However, the Weather Channel meteorologist isn't a big fan of the long-range
hurricane predictions that come out each season suggesting how many storms may
develop.

"I can't stand the predictions," says Abrams, who this week, along with the rest
of the Weather Channel team is part of a "Hurricane Week" programming package.
"I do not focus a lot of time on them."

For the record, forecasters are predicting a busier-than- average hurricane
season.

But as Abrams sees it, the numbers mean little if people who live in
hurricane-prone regions don't plan ahead. And if predictions for storms don't
come true, it could be even worse, because that can create a false sense of
security.

Abrams and her on-air cohort, Jim Cantore, will be on the air live from the New
Orleans region today to talk about the devastating impact of Hurricane Katrina
there five years ago.

The two will hopscotch the country, hitting previous hurricane hot spots, such
as Florida's Gulf Coast, where Abrams will be Wednesday.

Viewers, Abrams says, are intrigued by the potential destructive power of
hurricanes.

"It's what got me into weather in the first place," says Abrams. "How in the
world - it's rain and wind - can it cause so much damage?"

Hurricanes also show that no matter how much power people have, there's not
enough to topple Mother Nature. "We have no control over it," she says.

Besides moving Cantore and Abrams around the country, the network will air
special episodes of "Storm Stories" tied to hurricanes.

Abrams knows a thing about hurricanes, having grown up in Florida and later
covering them at the scene during her seven years with the Weather Channel.

"My goal, when I'm out there, is to get people prepared ... to try to show
people how powerful it is."

She focuses less on the strength of a hurricane and more on reminding people to
have water and supplies on hand.

And no, she's not trying to be a daredevil by standing outside in a storm,
either. Every hurricane season, news operations around the country send
reporters into the storms - and some stay in them dangerously long.

"I'm not concerned about me getting hurt," she says. "I'm concerned about other
people getting hurt. I know what can happen. I know what the waves can do."

Even so, she's been in the middle of storms and has had her boss call to ask if
she should move inland. On one occasion, she and her crew spent 20 hours in a
parking garage, with no restrooms, to wait out a storm.

"When stuff starts flying around, that's when we go inside," she says. "It's not
worth my life. I don't think I'm superhuman, I don't think I'm a Superman."

rhuff@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Stephanie Abrams' "hurricane Week" will look at the impact of Hurricana
Katrina.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Daily News, L.P.


                          FOCUS - 26 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 Guardian.com.

                           September 7, 2013 Saturday

Atlantic hurricane season: so far, so calm as weather defies forecasts

BYLINE: Tom Darttheguardian.com

LENGTH: 465 words

ABSTRACT

Despite NOAA's forecast of 'an extremely active season this year', hurricane yet
to form as season enters its second half

FULL TEXT

So far, so calm: despite predictions that this year's Atlantic hurricane season
would be unusually busy, the season has entered its second half and a hurricane
is yet to form.

On 23 May, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) said it
was "forecasting an active or extremely active season this year", because it was
expecting bad weather in west Africa that would move westwards;
warmer-than-average water temperatures in the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea;
and the absence of El Nino, the phenomenon that produces unusually warm water
temperatures in the tropical Pacific Ocean and affects Atlantic weather
patterns.

The federal agency said there was a 70% likelihood of 13 to 20 named storms
producing seven to 11 hurricanes, of which three to six could be major. Even
NOAA's revised outlook, issued on 8 August, anticipated three to five major
hurricanes.

The hurricane season began on 1 June and ends on 30 November. So far this year
there have been seven named storms, causing more than a dozen deaths in Mexico.

Dennis Feltgen, a spokesman for the National Hurricane Center, told Reuters that
since records began in 1851, the first Atlantic hurricane of the year has formed
after 4 September only 17 times. An average year would have seen the development
of three hurricanes by early September. Last month was the first time since 2002
that August passed without a hurricane. If the first hurricane of 2013 gathers
after 8am ET on Wednesday, it will be the latest debutant to form since the
satellite tracking era began in the mid-1960s.

However, Feltgen warned that the quiet opening half of the season was no
guarantee of a hurricane-free second period and that there is still ample time
for forecasts to be proved right. "We are at mid-point of the six-month
hurricane season. It is a mistake to believe that the second half of the season
would resemble the first half," he said.

Hurricane Sandy, which last year killed more than 180 people and caused immense
damage in the US, Canada and Caribbean, did not develop into a hurricane until
23 October. It made landfall as a storm along the New Jersey coast six days
later.

13 September will mark the five-year anniversary of Hurricane Ike arriving at
the Texas coast. It was blamed for about 200 deaths in the US and Haiti and
caused widespread property destruction, becoming the third-costliest hurricane
in US history, after Sandy and Katrina, which hit the Gulf coast in 2005.

The latest forecast from the National Hurricane Center indicates that a system
currently moving west over Africa has an 80% chance of developing into an
Atlantic tropical cyclone over the next five days.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies
                              All Rights Reserved
                  Registered in England and Wales. No. 908396
   Registered office: PO Box 68164, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1P 2AP


                          FOCUS - 27 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                 Cayman Net News, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 16, 2010 Tuesday

Active hurricane season predicted

BYLINE: Cayman Net News, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1134 words


Mar. 16--Multiple weather forecasters have predicted a hurricane season with an
"above normal" threat of significant storms, due to a weakening of the El Nino
phenomenon that influences both the number and intensity of storms annually. One
exception to the early forecasters is the US National Hurricane Center in Miami,
which will announce its predictions in May.

AccuWeather.com Hurricane Center meteorologists, led by Chief Long-Range
Meteorologist and Hurricane Forecaster Joe Bastardi, released their early
hurricane season forecast for the Atlantic Basin this month, calling for a much
more active 2010 tropical season, particularly on the US coastline.

"This year has the chance to be an extreme season," said Mr Bastardi, who
forecast seven landfalls in the US, five of which will be named storms, and two
or three of those will be "major" hurricanes.

The Meteorologist is calling for 16 to 18 tropical storms in total, 15 of which
would be in the western Atlantic or Gulf of Mexico, and therefore are a threat
to land. A "typical" season has about 11 named storms.

Mr Bastardi had accurately predicted that the 2009 Atlantic hurricane season
would be a year far below the average, with 11 tropical depressions forming and
only nine of those becoming tropical storms, the lowest number of named tropical
storms or hurricanes since the 1997 season.

The 2010 season is different, according to Mr Bastardi, for a number of reasons.
In addition to the rapidly weakening El Nino, the ocean temperatures in the
Atlantic are warmer compared to last year, and tropical storms draw their energy
from warm water.

The trade winds from Africa are also weakening, thus reducing the amount of dry
air being injected into the tropics from Africa and contributing to higher
humidity levels, which provide additional upward motion in the air, also fueling
tropical storm development.

Mr Bastardi compared weather conditions from a number of years to the upcoming
season in terms of storm setup, including 1964, 1995, and 1998, all of which
resulted in major storm impacts in the US.

Ken Reeves, director of operational forecasting and a member of the forecast
team at AccuWeather, agreed that the forecasting team is seeing conditions
similar to those in other years when more storms came ashore. He said a
semi-permanent trough could draw storms toward land, but he also said "a lot can
happen" between now and the height of the season.

"There is intense pressure from everyone in the media to ask us the numbers,"
said Mr Reeves. "The numbers are not really what people should focus on. It's
going to be a busy year in the Atlantic basin."

The AccuWeather report is similar to the predictions of Colorado State
University's Tropical Meteorology Project, making its initial forecast for the
2010 season in December that called for 16 named storms with as many as eight of
those becoming hurricanes, five of them major.

"We foresee an above-average Atlantic basin tropical cyclone season in 2010,"
said Dr William M Gray, professor emeritus of atmospheric science at CSU, "and
anticipate an above-average probability of US and Caribbean major hurricane
landfall."

A commercial weather site, WSI Inc., a member of the Weather Channel group that
provides weather information to CNN, FOX, NBC, Bloomberg television and owns
Intellicast.com, also predicted in January an active hurricane season in 2010
with a total of 13 named storms, seven of which will become hurricanes, three of
them major. A month after that prediction, the online Commodity Weather Group
called for 11 storms, five of which will become hurricanes.

The Atlantic hurricane season officially begins on 1 June and continues through

30 November. These dates were selected because 97 percent of hurricane activity
occurs during this six-month period.

The Cayman Islands has had two major hurricane strikes in recent years:
Hurricane Ivan, which devastated Grand Cayman in September 2004, and Hurricane
Paloma, which caused corresponding damage in Cayman Brac in November 2008.

Hurricane Management Cayman Islands is already focused on hurricane preparedness
education, making presentations to schools. Simon Boxall, spokesperson for HMCI,
says that they will go to any business, church, or civic organization to give a
presentation.

"Preparation is vital," he said, "and we can greatly reduce the impact of
hurricanes if we take a number of simple steps to get ourselves ready."

Another resource for residents that can help guide them through the planning
process, according to HMCI Deputy Director of Preparedness, Mr Omar Afflick, is
the Cayman Prepared website, particularly at the Residents Kit icon.

"Although hurricane season does not officially begin until 1 June," said Mr
Afflick, "it is definitely not too early to start getting ready now. In fact,
current economic realities mean that for a lot of us, it is way too expensive to
wait to the last moment to buy a stock of batteries, canned goods, flashlights
and all the other items that you need to have on hand during hurricane season.

"It is also far less stressful to plan ahead," he said.

Of special importance is the necessity for new residents to learn about the area
in which they are currently living, particularly how high they are above sea
level and the property's flooding history, giving them a "better understanding"
of safety issues and the time to plan accordingly, said Mr Afflick.

In addition, all Cayman Islands residents need to decide well before the
hurricane season as to whether or not they plan to stay in their own home or
seek shelter elsewhere during the storm. If residents plan to evacuate, then
arrangements need to be made early, and that includes making arrangements for
pets, since they are not allowed in government shelters.

"With various entities publishing their forecast for the 2010 hurricane season,"
said Mr Afflick, "HMCI is urging residents to take hurricanes seriously and
prepare.

"The threat from this hazard is real in the Cayman Islands, and it makes no
sense to wait to the last minute to take precautions and to get ready."

To access the Residents Kit on the Cayman Prepared portal, go to
www.caymanprepared.ky and click on the icon, Residents Kits. To arrange a
hurricane preparedness presentation for a school, business, church or civic
organization, contact Simon Boxall at 956 2027.

Bloomberg News contributed to this report.

To see more of the Cayman Net News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.caymannetnews.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Cayman Net News, Grand Cayman,
Cayman Islands Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100316-1CY-HURRICANES-20100316

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CY


          Copyright 2010 Cayman Net News, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands


                          FOCUS - 28 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                              The Herald (Glasgow)

                               September 11, 2004

How Mother Nature gives birth to a monster like Ivan the terrible;So what
triggers a hurricane and is global warming a factor? Beth Pearson meets the
researchers working flat out to learn from the latest trail of devastation

BYLINE: Beth Pearson

SECTION: Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1484 words


The arrival of hurricane Ivan to Jamaica has been anticipated for more than a
week. In a few months, Chris Landsea hopes to understand it. A researcher at the
hurricane division of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in
Florida, Landsea will be analysing data gathered from Gulfstream research
flights that will depart every 12 hours, at 5.30am and 5.30pm GMT, throughout
the weekend, while a lower-altitude aircraft will depart today at 2pm GMT.

"We're pretty much working round the clock," says Landsea, who was aboard
research flights on Monday and Tuesday. "We don't have the operational
forecasting duties that the national hurricane centre have, but we're busy, too.
A lot of the data is collected automatically onboard the flight. We'll be
looking at the data for the next few weeks

or months."

Among the instruments onboard are GPS-sondes which are dropped out of the
aircraft to receive signals from satellites and send a signal back to the
aircraft. This is tracked every half second and enables researchers such as
Landsea to construct wind profiles, as well as letting the pilot know where it's
unsafe to fly. Radars are used to map areas of the storm and analyse capillary
waves on the surface of the sea, which helps estimate surface wind, while probes
and buoys are dropped into the ocean to chart layers of water temperature.

Gary Barnes, professor of meteorology at the University of Hawaii, is a veteran
of such flights. "It's really exciting," he says. "In meteorology the research
community is divided between those who like to play with their models and those
who go out and get rained on. I've always been thrilled to be the latter kind of
guy.

"We usually take around a dozen people on these flights and we're usually out
there for nine or 10 hours, so it's a long and gruelling day. The aircraft have
got every bell and whistle: it's cutting-edge research."

For all the sophistication, much is still unknown about hurricanes. What we do
know is that they form where certain weather systems encounter areas of the sea
where the water temperature is warm, which acts as an energy source that
''spins" up the hurricane. The warmth of the water can also influence the
intensity of the hurricane, yet is not the sole trigger. This is a combination

of other, geographically variable, atmospheric factors.

Tropical cyclones and typhoons are the same, as are their basic structure, but
each has its own unique shape. Dr Chris Merchant of the institute of meteorology
at the University of Edinburgh has worked in long-range hurricane prediction.
"The eye is the area at the centre of a hurricane where you have apparently
little wind," he says. "You have the high wall, which is an area where the winds
are highest, and you have circulation around that central eye, then as you go
further out from that centre of action the winds die off, swirling around
usually radially, but you do get up and down winds as well.

"The details vary between hurricanes for reasons I'm not sure anybody really
understands. The size of the eye can be 10km or 100km. It's a consequence of
what happened before the hurricane was starting, what the precursor events were
like."

Some aspects are more predictable. The tracking of hurricanes has become very
accurate in the past 20 years owing to a combination of in-flight field research
and advances in satellite technology. "Plotting the course is like a weather
forecasting task," says Merchant. "The same principles are applied, it's just a
bit more challenging in that you tend not to have very good observations of
what's going on at the time. Ships and aircraft tend to go away from the
hurricane. Satellite observations then come in, which can be quite useful to
track the position of the storm. Whatever observations you have are put into a
computer and analysed in the same way as other weather events. For the most
part, that turns out to be pretty good."

Julian Hemings has been relying on this method for the past week in his role as
tropical prediction scientist at the MET office. He uses a

global model to predict tropical cyclones and has been supplying data to the
national hurricane centre in Florida. "There have been great advances in
forecasting the track of hurricanes in recent years," he says. "There's a whole
cluster of different methods and computer models used."

However, hurricanes have a strong record for unpredictability. "Some will make a
last-minute change in direction that even the sophisticated models we have now
are unable to pick up on. There are subtle changes within the core of the
hurricane that are on such a small scale it's difficult to represent in a
computer model, at least the global scale models we use. Then the steering of
hurricanes is influenced by the other broader-scale weather systems, which can
be so finely balanced that if they're represented incorrectly by a small amount
in a computer model then that can make a big difference to how the hurricane
will actually track."

Yet tracking predictions are highly accurate compared with those for hurricane
intensity, which is graded one to five on the Saffir-Simpson scale. Category one
clocks a wind speed of 74-95 mph and causes minimal damage to vegetation; five
achieves winds of 155 mph and can cause catastrophic building failures.
Inaccurately predicting the strength of the hurricane can have serious
consequences for preparedness. This is something Landsea, as a Florida resident,
has first-hand experience of. He boarded Gulfstream research flights to collect
information about hurricanes Charley and Frances. Two days before it hit
Florida, Charley was forecast to be a category-two hurricane and it became a
four, which causes extreme structural damage. Two days before Frances hit, it
was forecast to be a catagory four but became a two, which causes moderate
damage to houses.

"The difference is about 50kph,'' says Landsea. "The intensity forecasting is
really quite rudimentary. From the data we gather from Ivan, we will try to
understand what

causes these changes and design computer models to account for what we see so
that next year we can make better predictions, but it's not going to be solved
overnight."

The patterns of wind direction appear to have an influence. The most destructive
hurricanes have a vertical eye, which Ivan was identified to have on its
approach to Jamaica. "If there's a horizontal wind then you get a down -draught
sort of superimposed on that, and that combination can be quite damaging," says
Merchant. Water temperature may also provide clues. Just as areas of warm water
energise a hurricane, areas of cooler water slow it down.

For Barnes, the key lies at the interface between the eye and the eye wall of
the hurricane. "What we need is a high-altitude aircraft that's capable of
flying through the eye and eye wall of the storm and collecting measurements
there," he says. "That's a crucial part of the storm that controls its
intensity. The core middle of the hurricane is very warm compared to its
surroundings. Most of that heat is in the upper part of the atmosphere.
Understanding that would be really a great thing."

The intensity and frequency of the recent cluster of hurricanes has led many to
question whether global warming is beginning to have an impact on our extreme
weather systems. Given the short history of hurricane research, the jury will be
out for years to come. However, hypotheses are being formed by those immersed in
the weather charts and hurricane models. "The current thinking is that, yes, it
could have some impact on tropical cyclone frequency or intensity, but it's
impossible to filter out that kind of long-term signal when you're talking about
one or two occurrences such as this," says Hemings. "Catagory-five hurricanes
have occurred throughout history so it would be dangerous ground to pin this
cluster of events on that. It's not the sort of thing we can pull out from one
or two cases."

Landsea is similarly cautious and sees the current cluster in the context of the
20-30-year cycle of quiet conditions followed by active conditions, as we're now
experiencing. "When there's a doubling of carbon dioxide in several decades and
we see a moderate increase in air temperatures in the tropics, we might have
about a 5% increase in how strong hurricanes get," he says. "Five per cent is
pretty tiny. With the natural cycles you get a doubling in the number of strong
hurricanes. Five per cent

really gets lost in the noise."

As with all hurricane-related predictions, however, these theories are subject
to change. The one certainty we have about hurricanes is that they are
unpredictable, or as Barnes puts it: "You scratch on the blackboard, look at the
model results, make your predictions and then you go out and get thoroughly
embarrassed by Mother Nature."

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2004

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: DEVASTATION: hurricane Frances blows its worst in Florida. Picture:
AP;Table of hurricanes not available on database, see hard copy

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                Copyright 2004 Scottish Media Newspapers Limited


                          FOCUS - 29 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                       June 1, 1987, Monday, City Edition

Hurricane season begins with warnings from the experts

BYLINE: William Fox

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1081 words



The 1987 hurricane season begins today, ushering in six months when    coastal
residents should keep a wary eye on the weather.

     Today also is the day the National Hurricane Center in Miami gets a    new
boss. Bob Sheets, a veteran hurricane forecaster and researcher,    takes over
as acting director, replacing Neil Frank, who is leaving to    become weather
director at a Houston TV station.

     Frank's trademark crew cut and rapid-fire delivery became familiar    to
millions after he was named director of the center in 1974. The    naming of his
permanent replacement is not expected for at least a    couple of months,
federal officials say.

     Sheets, who will turn 50 next Sunday, has been deputy director    since
1985 and is the leading contender for the top job.

     Frank, 55, leaves his post a worried man, worried that people think    the
center's job is getting easier, when it isn't.

     "There is a perception - a false perception - that we are    forecasting a
lot better than we really are," he says.

     "We're doing a great job of observing, and we're doing a great job    of
communicating those observations, but we're not forecasting a lot    better
today than we were 25 years ago."

     In the early '60s, before weather satellites and before    sophisticated
computer models, forecasts of where a hurricane would be    in 24 hours erred an
average of about 110 to 115 miles, Frank says.

 Today that error averages about 100 miles.

     A 100-mile error is the difference in the eye of the storm passing    over
St. Petersburg Beach or over Sanibel Island near Fort Myers.

     "We've improved our skills about 10 percent in the last 25    years," Frank
says.

     As a result, state and local officials must order evacuations    before the
forecasters can pinpoint where a hurricane will hit. Many    people will flee
their homes only to see the storm go elsewhere. Frank    tells coastal residents
that for every four times they evacuate, only    once will the hurricane strike
their area directly.

     Evacuation of vulnerable sections of the Tampa Bay area could take    up to
15 hours and must be completed before severe weather arrives,    officials say.

     "Hurricane-force winds will arrive hours before the center of the    storm
arrives," Sheets says. "All actions have to be completed some    six to 10 hours
before the center gets to the coast."

     Sheets says some people have gotten another misperception: When    they see
hurricane tracking maps on TV and in newspapers, they think    the thin line of
the track is the extent of the storm.

     "Of course, it's not," he says. "People don't realize how far    the
effects can extend."

     When a typical major hurricane strikes land, the swath of heavy    damage
will be 50 to 75 miles wide, he says. Some damage can be    expected across a
path 100 to 150 miles wide, and torrential rains with    winds of 35 to 40 mph
will extend another 100 miles on each side.

     The Tampa Bay area is particularly vulnerable to the hurricane    threat,
Sheets says. "There's a major portion of the population that    would be
inundated by the storm surge."

     The odds of a hurricane striking here are 1 in 28 each year, the
hurricane center says, but the last year one hit Tampa Bay was 1921.

     Elena came close on Labor Day weekend in 1985, but its full force
remained well out in the gulf. The highest sustained winds never    reached
hurricane strength of 74 mph. Tides were only 6 feet above    normal on the
beaches and 7 feet above in Tampa Bay. The 1921 storm,    not especially big as
hurricanes go, brought a 10-foot tidal surge.

     Storm surge is the hurricane's biggest threat.

     "Generally people associate hurricane danger with strong winds and    heavy
rains, but nine out of 10 hurricane victims drown," Frank says.    "The real
killer is the hurricane's storm surge."

     Storm surge is the dome of water that sweeps across the coast ahead    of
the eye of the hurricane. Huge waves atop this dome pound the    shoreline and
inundate low-lying escape routes. Hurricane Camille, one    of the most
destructive storms of the century, brought a 25-foot storm    surge to Pass
Christian, Miss., in 1969.

     "When we go out on our advisory and say there's going to be a    10-foot
storm surge, I think many people believe there's going to be    10-foot waves,"
Frank says. "I don't think it surprises them if you    say that the winds are
going to blow 125 mph. They're going to assume    that the ocean's going to be
rough.

     "No, no, no - that isn't what we mean. We mean the water's going    to rise
10 feet. Then you're going to have 10-foot waves on top of    that. So it's the
moving water that's devastating. ... It's the killer    element."

     No one knows what this year's hurricane season will bring to the    U.S.
coastline. Last year, with six named storms, was well below    average. Four
storms reached hurricane strength, but only two - Bonnie    and Charlie -
affected the United States. The storms killed nine    persons and caused $
17-million damage.

     In an average year, 10 named storms will form, with six becoming
hurricanes. Often the storms will remain far out at sea, being a threat    only
to shipping. A near-average 11 storms and seven hurricanes formed    in 1985,
but a record-tying six of those hurricanes struck the U.S.    coast. Thirty
persons died, and the damage totaled more than    $ 5-billion.

     William M. Gray, a hurricane researcher at Colorado State    University,
will issue his forecast today on how many tropical storms    and hurricanes are
likely this year. Since Gray began issuing his    forecast in 1984, he's been
amazingly accurate.

     He's the first to emphasize, though, that his prediction says    nothing
about where the storms might go. If just one hurricane forms    and devastates a
coastal community, it's a big season for that locale,    Gray says.

 - Information from UPI was used in this report.



LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, United Press International; Dr. Neil Frank,
right, leaves as chief of the National Hurricane Center with worries, while Bob
Sheets, left, takes over with warnings.

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 30 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   October 12, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Busy storm season a boon to forecasters

BYLINE: Jack Williams; Paul Hoversten

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1741 words


Roxanne, the 10th hurricane and the 17th tropical storm of the season, Wednesday
blasted across Mexico's Yucatan.

Already this is the busiest hurricane season since 1969, within three storms of
the all-time record year 1933. And the season doesn't officially end until Nov.
30.

It has been a scientific bonanza for researchers struggling to solve the secrets
of the greatest storms on the planet. "You need to have hurricanes to study
them," says Dean Churchill of the University of Miami's Rosenstiel School of
Marine and Atmospheric Science.

And they can study them more closely thanks to a new weather satellite, more
sophisticated radars lining the U.S. coasts and new computer models of storm
mechanics. But more dramatically, researchers flew three turboprops at once into
hurricanes Iris and Luis to take the most detailed measurements ever.

The object is to find better answers to the big three questions:

-- Where will the storm hit?

-- When will the storm hit?

-- How strong will the storm be when it hits?

More Americans living in the hurricane danger zone on and near the Atlantic and
Gulf Coasts - now 44 million, twice that of a quarter-century ago - are
pressuring researchers and forecasters to improve their predictions.

On the morning of Oct. 4, Hugh Willoughby, acting director of the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's hurricane research division, heard that
Hurricane Opal's atmospheric pressure was in the Category 5 range. Immediately,
"visions of (Hurricane) Camille II ran through my mind."

Would the storm crash into the U.S. Gulf Coast with 150 mph plus winds and 20 or
more feet of storm surge as Camille did in 1969? It was one of only two Category
5 storms to hit the USA this century.

Forecasts the night before had not foreseen such a monster. Would people in
danger have time to flee?

"I was wondering how I would explain this to the congressional inquiry we would
have when a thousand people died," says Willoughby. "The forecast was a
state-of-the-art forecast. But the state of the art doesn't handle these
situations very well."

The situation Willoughby worries about is a storm strengthening in the last few
hours before hitting land, as Hurricane Andrew did before hitting Dade County,
Fla., in 1992 and as Opal seemed about to do.

Willoughby was right in the middle of Opal in an NOAA Lockheed P-3 research
airplane when the storm did the opposite: It weakened.

As the storm's winds decreased, the area of hurricane force winds spread out,
expanding the length of coast washed by the dome of high water known as storm
surge.

The P-3 followed Opal's eye, and storm surge, across the beaches of western
Florida. "We looked down and saw buildings awash in surf," he says. "Almost all
of the damage you saw on television was from the storm surge, not from the
wind."

Hurricane track forecasts are improving, and forecasters expect another leap
forward in the 1996 hurricane season with flights of a new $ 38 million
Gulfstream G-4SP jet.

It will fly higher and farther than the NOAA P-3s and Air Force Reserve WC-130s
that now fly into storms collecting data.

"We're like the canaries in the mine shaft," says Ron Philippsborn, an NOAA
pilot and program manager. "You can't study the environment without going into
it."

Instead of flying into the eyes of hurricanes, the Gulfstream will measure
winds, temperatures and air pressures in the thousands of square miles around
storms. This data, fed into improving computer models, will give forecasters a
better handle on the winds that steer storms.

Researchers expect the improvement in forecast accuracy with the Gulfstream will
be the equivalent of all advances of the past 20 years.

"There's nothing we can do about a hurricane," says Phillippsborn. "If people
are expecting us to ward them off, we can't do that. But if you can improve the
forecasts in 24 to 48 hours before landfall, then you're going to see an
immediate impact."

But how strong will the storm be? "We have no skill at intensity forecasting,"
Willoughby says.

But he and others have come up with theories and tested them on computer models
of storms. The measurements needed to test these theories have to be taken at
the top of the storm, up around 40,000 feet.

Willoughby expects data from the Gulfstream to improve intensity forecasts
within 10 years.

"Nothing we can or don't do is going to affect hurricanes," says Churchill.
"They're part of the world's climate system."

El Nino, the complex global weather pattern that begins with unusually warm
water in the eastern tropical Pacific, is a key to the number of Atlantic
hurricanes.

One of the nation's foremost hurricane experts, William Gray of Colorado State
University, has found that El Nino years tend to have fewer storms. Warm eastern
Pacific water helps set up strong west to east, high-altitude winds over the
Atlantic that rip apart growing tropical storms.

Years when the eastern Pacific is colder than normal, so called "La Nina" years,
have more storms.

Other factors Gray uses for his hurricane predictions include:

-- Rainfall in parts of west Africa. Rainy years have more hurricanes.

-- Average air pressures around the Caribbean. Lower pressures usually mean more
hurricanes.

-- Direction of high altitude winds over the equator. More westerly winds mean
more hurricanes.

-- Direction of lower altitude winds over the Caribbean. Easterly winds
encourage hurricanes.

This year, says Gray, everything came together at the same time. Gray and other
hurricane experts say global warming is not involved.

Gray says if global warming were involved, "you wouldn't see the big jump this
year from last year."

Gray says his 11-year record of seasonal forecasts consists of two "busts," two
"marginal" predictions and seven "darned good" years.

For this year, he predicted 16 tropical storms and nine hurricanes - two storms
and a hurricane under the current count.

Gray won't make his 1996 season forecast until November, but doesn't hesitate to
say that "next year definitely won't be as active as this year" because
stratospheric winds won't be as favorable for hurricanes.

But "there are signs that it will be more active than 1991 to 1994."

More about hurricanes on USA TODAY's free online service.
http://www.usatoday.com/weather/ whur0.htm

Right ingredients fuel storms

Global weather patterns have come together in just the right ways to create a
busy season of hurricanes and tropical storms in the Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean
Sea and Gulf of Mexico. 1. Water cools off after 'El Nino,' the periodic warming
of the tropical Pacific from 1991 to 1994. 2. The end of 'El Nino' keeps strong,
high-altitude winds from disrupting storms. 3. Above average rain falls in
western Africa, including August to November of 1994 and this June and July. 4.
Disturbances, stronger than normal, move off of Africa and grow into storms. 5.
Water in the eastern Atlantic Ocean is warmer than last year. 6. Winds at all
levels of the atmosphere have the same speed and direction. 7. Air pressures in
the Caribbean Sea are lower than average.

Season ties third-busiest

The hurricane season, from June 1 to Nov. 30, has an average of 8.4 tropical
storms; 4.9 of the become hurricanes. There have been 17 tropical storms so far
this season, tying 1887 as the third-busiest year.
Name      Type            Date(1)   Location         Damage
Allison   Hurricane       June 4    Florida          Minor flooding
Barry     Tropical storm  July 7    Atlantic         70-mph winds
Chantal   Tropical storm  July 14   Near Puerto Rico Stayed clear of

land
Dean      Tropical storm  July 31   Texas            Downgraded to a

tropical depression
Erin      Hurricane       Aug. 1    Florida          11 killed, wind,

flood damage, power

outages
Felix     Hurricane       Aug. 10   Bermuda,         Nine killed, beach
                             east coast       erosion, 130-mph

winds
Gabrielle Tropical storm  Aug. 11   Mexico           Heavy rain, 70-mph

winds
Humberto  Hurricane       Aug. 23   Atlantic         75-mph winds,
Iris      Hurricane       Aug. 23   Caribbean        Three killed,

105-mph winds
Jerry     Tropical storm  Aug. 23   Florida          Heavy rain,

flooding
Karen     Tropical storm  Aug. 28   Africa           Absorbed by Iris
Luis      Hurricane       Aug. 31   Virgin Islands   140-mph winds

Puerto Rico
Marilyn   Hurricane       Sept. 14  Virgin Islands   80% of homes on

St. Thomas

destroyed, 110-

mph winds
Noel      Hurricane       Sept. 28  Atlantic         No land threatened
Opal      Hurricane       Oct. 2    Florida          One dead, roofs

ripped off homes,

widespread

power outages
Pablo     Tropical storm  Oct. 5    Atlantic Ocean   None
Roxanne   Hurricane       Oct 8     Yucatan, Mexico  Unknown

1 - Date storm became a hurricane or tropical storm

Annual number of tropical storms and hurricanes since 1950
    Tropical storms   Hurricanes
'50       13              11
'70       18              12
'95(1)    17              10

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, b/w, Gary Visgaitis and Genevieve Lynn, USA TODAY, Sources:
William Gray, Colorado State University, USA TODAY research (Map, chart); PHOTO,
color, Carlos Taboada, AP; PHOTO, b/w, The Coloradoan; PHOTO, b/w, Andrew Itkoff

TYPE: Cover Story

But ultimately, 'Nothing we can or don't do is going to affect hurricanes'; See
info box at end of text

                      Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 31 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                           September 12, 2017 Tuesday

With Jose on the Way, Here's the Good News About Hurricanes

BYLINE: John A. Tures

LENGTH: 1323 words


As the remnants of Hurricane Irma pass overhead, my family is glued to the
television, wondering where and when Hurricane Jose will strike. It's worth
asking whether this surge of dangerous storms is a game changer, somehow
connected to climate change, and whether it will get worse. Here is the good
news, and bad news, about hurricanes-as well as a few political solutions.

First, The Good News.

With all of these storms pounding the coastline, and the images of Hurricane
Katrina fresh in American minds, the most important question is whether or not
this recent spate of storms over the last two decades has become deadlier than
in the past.

While it's true that more people are living on or near coastlines, cases like
the deadly floods generated in New Orleans and Mississippi and Alabama by
Hurricane Katrina are thankfully rare.

Katrina was the third deadliest storm, with roughly 1,200 deaths in 2005. But
it's the only storm with such a high casualty rate in the top 15 deadliest
storms, according to Weather Underground. The worst of these storms was the
Great Galveston hurricane of 1900, which killed nearly 8,000 Texans, followed by
the Lake Okeechobee hurricane that hit Florida in 1928, causing nine foot surges
in flooding and thousands of deaths. The only other storm in the top 15 for
fatalities that occurred since 1935 was Hurricane Camille, which makes a cameo
in the movie "Forrest Gump." And that storm was number 15 for the deadliest
storms, with 256 lives lost.

This is a credit to FEMA, local law enforcement and regional rescue teams-but
especially the heroism of neighbors and volunteers from afar who rush in to save
so many. Sadly, even with these brave efforts, more than 60 still drowned with
Hurricane Harvey. We'll have to see what happens in the aftermath of Hurricane
Irma.

As for the number of storms, tropical storms, and hurricanes, it's not too much
different from years ago. Research I generated from the National Hurricane
Center shows that from 2010 to 2017, we've averaged 14.25 storms per year, with
6.625 tropical storms, 3.625 hurricanes (Category 1 and 2 storms), and 2.625
major hurricanes (Category 3, 4 or 5 storms) annually. That's not much different
from what America saw in the 1950s; from 1950 to 1959, the U.S. averaged 12.2
storms per year, 6.2 tropical storms, 3.7 Category 1 and 2 hurricanes, and 2.7
major hurricanes annually. And while the country saw six major hurricanes hit
the U.S. since 2010, we had nine from 1950-59. So there isn't a linear increase
in such storms from the past to the present.

Now, The Bad News.

As for the costliest storms, recent years have shown that the hurricanes today
will hit America hard in the pocketbook, and repeatedly so. Nine of the 15 most
damaging storms have occurred since 2000, according to Weather Underground. And
while one can try and explain it away with inflation or more modern expenses,
that doesn't explain why there are also two storms from the 1960s, one from the
1970s, and one from the 1980s still on the list.

Hurricane Katrina tops the charts...for now. Forecasters expect Hurricane
Harvey, a Category 4 storm which hit Houston with 130 mph winds and rain, to
displace Katrina as the costliest storm in U.S. history. As Jennifer Calfas with
Time Magazine notes, Hurricane Irma may take its place amongst the most
economically devastating storms. Her article explains why.

"We've entered a time in history where we have really put a lot of expensive
homes and expensive structures along our coastal areas, and that in itself is
the reason why the cost has gone up dramatically," said Dick Kottlowski, a
Senior Meteorologist with AccuWeather, in an interview with Calfas. "It's not
necessarily because the hurricanes are that much stronger, but because we have
put too many things in harm's way."

My own research supports Kottlowski's assertions. Before 2016, Hurricane Ike was
the third most damaging storm in U.S. history, and it was only a Category 2
storm from 2008. Hurricane Irene comes in as the seventh most devastating storm,
and it was a Category 1 type when it struck the East Coast. Tropical Storm
Allison (that's right, it wasn't even a hurricane) was number 12 on the list for
the trouble it caused in the Gulf of Mexico. Even if someone goes with the "most
recent = more costly" explanation, somebody's got to pay the cleanup costs.

And that data from the National Hurricane Center isn't all positive for
America's shores. While U.S. hurricane numbers are similar this decade to the
1950s, the U.S. is seeing a major shift from the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, when
hurricane numbers and power declined. In the 1980s, America saw only nine annual
storms on average (compared with more than 14 per year today), with more
tropical storms (6.625, compared to 3.9 in the 1980s), a few more Category 1 and
2 hurricanes (3.625 vs. 3.4 in the 1980s) with 2.625 major hurricanes on average
this decade, compared to 1.7 per year from 1980-1989.

Also, those more powerful storms are more likely to hit the United States than
they did in the 1980s. Only five hit the USA from 1980-1989, while six Category
3, 4 and 5 storms have hit the USA since 2010, with Hurricane Jose and two more
years to go. None of those 1950s storms make the list of most deadly or
damaging. In 2005 alone, the United States had 28 storms (more than twice the
1950s average) and almost as many major hurricanes striking the U.S.A. that year
than in the entire decade of the 1980s.

Is There A Political Solution?

The National Hurricane Center shows a dramatic increase in major storms hitting
the United States. Only one did in the 1860s, but as U.S. and European
industrialization ramped up into high gear, so did the number of major
hurricanes striking the USA (seven in the 1890s, five in the 1920s, and nine in
the 1950s). Those terrible storms of 1900 hitting Galveston, the 1928 Lake
Okeechobee disaster, the Key West storm of 1935 that killed so many, and the
1938 hurricane that devastated New England (as seen on the History Channel) were
the norm.

But as the United States shifted to a post-industrial economy, and the
Environmental Protection Agency, the Montreal Protocol, the Clean Air Act, were
passed and went into effect, the danger began to recede in the 1960s, 1970s and
1980s. Hurricane Camille was the exception, rather than the rule. Europe and
Japan took similar steps and pro-environment parties and factions fared well in
elections. Environmental actions worked, as politicians of both parties stepped
up.

Despite the efforts of the First World, the weather changed in the 1990s, 2000s
and this decade. Some of it reflected remaining vestiges of the fuel-based
economy and transportation grids in the First World, but much of it can be
attributed to the policies of the Third World and their rapid industrialization
and deforestation.

Just as the actions of Third World countries may be the reason for some of the
change, so too are they suffering from droughts, flooding and storms worse than
the First World is. Lacking an effective FEMA and local government capacity, the
cyclones and flooding that used to ravage America and take so many lives during
U.S. industrialization are doing the same to the people and economies of Latin
America, Africa and Asia.

The Trump Administration may have walked away from the Paris Agreement, but
that's not such a bad thing, as the deal did not hold the Third World countries
accountable for targets the way First World countries faced binding pollution
reduction targets. The U.S. needs a new international climate agreement that
forces all to make real changes, not just the wealthy countries. If they refuse
to reform, the rapid industrializers of the Third World will continue to drown
in the wake of weather changes from Climate Change.

John A. Tures is a professor of political science at LaGrange College in
LaGrange, Ga. He can be reached at jtures@lagrange.edu. His Twitter account is
JohnTures2.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 32 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           August 22, 2012 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

WAITING FOR THE STORM;
A Category 3 or greater hurricane hasn't hit the USA in nearly 7 years. Have we
become complacent?

BYLINE: Donna Leinwand Leger, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1748 words


Six years, nine months and 30  days have passed  since Hurricane Wilma came
ashore with 125-mph winds near Naples, Fla. -- the longest period the nation has
gone without a hit from a major hurricane since the government began keeping
records in 1851.

As the USA nears 2,500 days without a Category 3 or higher hurricane, weather
and disaster experts worry that Hurricanes Wilma, Katrina and Rita will become
hazy memories and Americans will go soft, letting their batteries die,
misplacing their flashlights and forgetting their emergency plans.

"Nobody thinks it's going to happen. Nobody prepares," says Scott Pinto, 48,
food and beverage manager for Historic Inns of Key West. Pinto knows firsthand
the damage a hurricane can do. The massive flooding in Key West from Wilma's
storm surge is documented in pictures on his iPad.

The storm killed five people and caused the largest disruption of electrical
service in Florida's hurricane-plagued history. More than 3.5 million homes and
businesses lost power -- some for more than two weeks.

Wilma wreaked $21 billion in damage, making it the fourth-costliest hurricane in
U.S. history, behind Katrina (2005), Ike (2008) and Andrew (1992), the National
Hurricane Service says.

Even so, Pinto admits that with only three cases of water, five candles and a
pack of batteries, he's far from  prepared for hurricane season, which extends
into November in the USA. He's certain  he's not the only one.

"We have so many transient people down here. The population changes yearly," he
says. "They don't realize what's going to happen."

Hours matter when a storm with 100-plus-mph winds is bearing down on population
centers. That being the case, hurricane-prone states along the Eastern Seaboard
and the Gulf of Mexico have aggressive campaigns to urge their residents to stay
alert and get prepared -- even if those hurricane supplies stay packed in
garages and closets for another year.

"Personally, I'd like to continue that streak, but eventually that luck is going
to run out," says Dennis Feltgen, a spokesman for the National Hurricane Center.
"It's not a matter of if, but when."

As if channeling Feltgen, Tropical Storm Isaac, with 40-mph winds, moved west
Tuesday toward the islands of the Caribbean. Forecasters predicted the storm
would move over the eastern Caribbean by Thursday and become Hurricane Isaac.
The forecast puts it on track to possibly hit Florida during the Republican
National Convention, which begins Monday in Tampa.

When a hurricane does strike, many people without evacuation plans end up in
shelters with insufficient supplies or no place for beloved pets.  Sometimes the
individual economic toll doesn't become apparent until well after the storm
passes: Many learn too late that their insurance doesn't cover flooding, which
often does more damage than the devastating winds.

Craig Fugate,  administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, says he
frequently encounters people who wished they had more insurance and supplies.
"Some folks are going to get ready," he says. "Some people will wait for the
absolute last minute."

FEMA is helping businesses -- including banks, groceries and hardware stores --
devise plans that would allow them to open more quickly after a storm as a way
of returning normalcy to a community hit by disaster.

"It's easy to become complacent, but we have to snap ourselves out of it," says
Rick Knabb, director of the National Hurricane Center. "I implore people to find
out today if they live in a hurricane storm surge evacuation zone. You need a
plan. You don't want to be figuring that out when the hurricane is on your
doorstep."

Last year's Hurricane Irene "was a reminder that we're vulnerable all the way to
New England," Knabb says. "You have to prepare all the way from Brownsville
(Texas) to Maine."

In Louisiana, where Hurricane Katrina killed 1,577 people and caused
catastrophic damage in 2005, hurricane preparedness is infused with new
intensity, says Kevin Davis, director of the Governor's Office of Homeland
Security and Emergency Preparedness, an agency that didn't exist before Katrina.
Davis' staff trains several times a week and meets with local officials to
ensure they have plans in place.

After Katrina, a Senate report criticized the state's preparations and faulted
then-governor Kathleen Blanco and New Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin for moving too
slowly to evacuate the city. More than 70,000 people stayed behind, and many
took refuge in an ill-prepared shelter at the Superdome.

Some city and state officials said residents willingly stayed behind because
they had weathered storms before. Gulf Coast residents played "hurricane
roulette," the Senate report said.

That complacency ended with Katrina, Davis says.

"We are constantly promoting, reminding people of the potential of a storm
hitting Louisiana. We do that every day of the week," Davis says. "Preparedness
is pretty much a way of life in Louisiana. It's completely changed since
Katrina."

Don't bank on outlooks

Since hurricane season began June 1, three hurricanes and six tropical storms
have formed in the Atlantic.

Two of the tropical storms, Beryl and Debby, came ashore in Florida. Debby
caused massive flooding in the Florida Panhandle and  killed seven people.

Forecasters at Colorado State's tropical storm prediction center expect a
slightly above-average hurricane season: 14 named storms, including six
hurricanes. In a revised forecast issued Aug. 3, the team predicted a
below-average chance that a major hurricane would strike the USA. The National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Climate Prediction Center revised its
forecast Aug. 9 to 12 to 17 named storms, including five to eight hurricanes of
which two or three could be major.

Once the wind of a tropical cyclone reaches 39 mph, it becomes a named tropical
storm. At 74 mph, it becomes a hurricane. A major hurricane -- Category 3 or
above -- has wind speeds of at least 111 mph.

Weather experts say the number of storms in a season does not predict the
likelihood of a catastrophic storm striking the USA. Hurricane Andrew, one of
the strongest and most devastating storms in history, struck Florida nearly 20
years ago on Aug. 24, 1992, during the least active hurricane season in nine
years.

"You can't use the seasonal outlook as a guide for preparation," Feltgen says.
"It only takes one."

Last year, the third-most-active season on record with 19 named storms, only
Hurricane Irene, a Category 1 storm, hit the USA. Before that, Hurricane Ike in
2008 fell just 1 mph short of Category 3 when it clobbered Galveston, Texas,
with 110-mph winds Sept. 13.

"It's not that we haven't had major hurricanes. It's just that they've either
stayed over water or hit our Caribbean neighbors," says Chris Vaccaro, spokesman
for the National Weather Service.

Knabb emphasizes that focusing only on wind speed can lull people in hurricane
zones into complacency. Tropical storms and Category 1 and 2 hurricanes can
cause massive damage with excessive rainfall and storm surge.

Hurricane Irene traveled across Puerto Rico as a Category 1 storm Aug. 22, then
came ashore Aug. 27 on North Carolina's Outer Banks. The storm moved out to sea
but made landfall again, this time as a tropical storm, in southeastern New
Jersey. By the time it dissipated Aug. 29, it had caused massive flooding in the
Northeast, killed 41 people and knocked out power to 7.4 million people. Damage
estimate: $15.8 billion.

"Water is the thing that tends to kill the most people," Knabb says.

'If you're wrong '

Disaster experts say now is the time, while the weather is good, to create a
hurricane plan, review  insurance policies and stock up on hurricane supplies.
The federal government posts a to-do list at READY.gov.

"It's very easy for human nature to think it's not going to hit me," Feltgen
says. "It's denial. They think, 'I've been here X number of years. I haven't had
one. I think my luck is going to continue.' If you're wrong, it could cost you
and your family."

In Florida, the most hurricane-prone state, the preparation and way of life that
come with these storms is new to thousands.  In 2010, more than 600,000 new
residents moved into the Sunshine State,  Census Bureau data show.

Beryl and Debby, the tropical storms that hit this season, jarred Floridians
back to their hurricane reality, says Bryan Koon, director of the Florida
Division of Emergency Management.

"You tend to forget how bad, how disruptive and how deadly they can be," Koon
says. "It was a good wake-up call for the state to realize that hurricane season
is here. Four storms and we've been hit by two of them."

FEMA's Fugate says federal disaster-relief teams that drill all year long and
respond to other types of disasters are prepared -- despite not having to deal
with a major hurricane. Hurricane Irene, he says, tested their skills, as did a
heavy tornado season in the Midwest and South.

"It was a challenge for us. Normally, we deal with a couple of states," he says.
"With Irene, we literally put teams into states from North Carolina to Vermont.
And trust me, a lot of people in Vermont thought they didn't have to deal with
tropical systems."

The Waffle House model

Fugate points to the Waffle House chain as a paragon of preparedness. He says he
noticed after a series of disasters that Waffle House "got open earlier than
everyone else." He began to gauge the severity of the disaster by the state of
the restaurant.

"If it's a limited menu, there are significant impacts," Fugate says. "If you go
to a community and the Waffle House was closed and couldn't open, it's a pretty
dire situation."

Waffle House has a hurricane team and prepares throughout the year for hurricane
season, says Pat Warner, vice president and director of culture for the chain.
Waffle Houses are open 24 hours.

"A big part of our culture is staying open," Warner says. "We want to be there
for our customers and for our associates after the storm. We see ourselves as
providing a service to the community.  A lot of times we're the first hot meal
people have."

The restaurant chain's hurricane planning includes staging generators near areas
likely to be struck and lining up vendors outside the area to supply
ingredients, he says. The company creates emergency menus for each stage of the
recovery. Restaurant operators get a checklist that tells them step-by-step what
to do once a named storm is forecast.

Warner says, "You can't wait for the storm to be barreling down on you before
you do it."

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Frank Pompa, USA TODAY (bar graph, map)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COVER STORY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 33 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              May 22, 2017 Monday
                                 FIRST EDITION

MEET THE COOLHEADED HURRICANE HUNTERS;
Their harrowing flights into the eye of the storm are all in a day's work

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, @usatodayweather, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 1032 words


"Buckle up -- bumpy skies ahead."

While that warning could be announced on your next flight, it's virtually an
ironclad guarantee for the crews aboard the fleet of "hurricane hunter"
airplanes and jets, whose sole mission is to fly directly into and around some
of the world's most powerful storms.

The 2017 Atlantic hurricane season officially begins  June 1, and the hurricane
hunters will again be on call this year to fly into these meteorological
monsters.

The U.S. Air Force and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
operate the aircraft that fly into the storms. The planes recently were on
display at Washington's Reagan National Airport as part of NOAA's spring
hurricane awareness tour, which visited several East Coast cities.

"We fly right through the eyewall into the heart of the storm at 5,000 to 10,000
feet above the Earth's surface," said Air Force Lt. Col. Brian Schroeder, who
has flown more than 100 missions, including 50 eyewall penetrations. The eyewall
is a doughnut-like ring of thunderstorms that surrounds the calm eye.

The Air Force Reserve flies 10 WC-130 turboprop planes based at Keesler Air
Force Base in Biloxi, Miss., known as the 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron.
They are the workhorses of the hurricane hunters.

An average weather reconnaissance mission lasts 11 hours and covers almost 3,500
miles, the Air Force said, and the flight typically carries  six to 15 people,
who make up the flight crew and the weather crew. In addition to full-fledged
hurricanes, the planes often fly into nascent storms, known as tropical waves or
tropical depressions.

The primary purpose of the missions, Schroeder said, is to locate the storm
center  and measure its maximum winds. That key information is then sent back to
the National Hurricane Center. Often, he said, whether a storm gets a name is
based directly on information from the hurricane hunters.

A tropical depression becomes a named tropical storm when its sustained winds
reach 39 mph.

"What makes flying through the eyewall exhilarating and at times somewhat scary
are the turbulent updrafts and downdrafts that one hits," NOAA research
scientist Chris Landsea said. "Those flying in the plane definitely feel these
wind currents" and can end up reaching for their airsickness bags,  he said.

The crews also evaluate the storm's size and structure and send that data  to
the hurricane center. Most of  the data, which are crucial to the hurricane's
threat, cannot be obtained from satellites, Schroeder said.

The weather data, including temperature, dew point, wind speed, barometric
pressure and relative humidity, are gathered by "dropsondes," small, disposable
cylindrical instruments that are dropped out of the planes and float by
parachute down to the surface.

"Those data go into the computer forecast models and help us make a more
accurate track forecast," said Rick Knabb,  former director of the National
Hurricane Center.

The data from the hurricane hunters can increase the accuracy of forecasts  up
to 30%, NOAA said, which is important in helping  narrow  the "cone of
uncertainty" in storm-tracking computer model forecasts.

No civilians -- other than journalists and scientists -- are permitted on the
flights.

Above the storm

NOAA operates two separate missions into hurricanes: the Gulfstream-IV jet,
which flies above and around hurricanes, and two WP-3D Orion turboprop aircraft,
which fly into hurricanes mainly for research.

The jet is used for  hurricane forecasts and for research,  hurricane center
spokesman Dennis Feltgen said. There is one Gulfstream jet and, this year, just
one Orion turboprop (the other Orion is being rewinged), he said. The NOAA
flights are out of MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa.

The Gulfstream jet is the nation's "only high-altitude hurricane reconnaissance
aircraft," pilot Lt. Dave Cowen said. He said it usually does not penetrate the
hurricane eye but instead flies above the storm at  41,000 to 45,000 feet,
deploying 20 to 40 dropsondes along the way.

The jet often flies over hundreds of miles of ocean around a storm, measuring
the winds that are steering it. The information helps forecasters better predict
where a storm is heading.

The Gulfstream also flies research missions into the very tops of hurricanes,
away from the worst turbulence and rain.

NOAA's Orion turboprops collect data from inside storms for research. On those
flights, onboard scientists direct the aircraft to those parts of the storm of
interest, which might not be near the eye of the hurricane. Experiments might be
planned to examine the outer rain bands or the hurricane's interaction with the
environment.

History of the hunters

Army Air Force Col. Joseph Duckworth piloted the first plane that intentionally
flew into a hurricane near Houston, on July 27, 1943. He made two flights that
day, calling them "experimental instrument flights," according to the book
Hurricane Watch.

With World War II raging, the military knew that tracking and flying into
Atlantic hurricanes and Pacific typhoons were vital, which "motivated leaders to
make airborne hurricane reconnaissance a standard weapon in the forecaster's
arsenal," the book says.

Hurricane fliers had their first success the next year with what came to be
called "The Great Atlantic Hurricane of 1944." (Storm names didn't begin until
1950.) Navy and Army planes tracked the storm from when it was north of Puerto
Rico until it slammed into the eastern end of Long Island and New England after
sideswiping North Carolina.

The hurricane killed 50 people in the USA, but newspapers and magazines as well
as officials credited the warnings the flights made possible with keeping the
death toll much below the 600 dead in a similar hurricane in 1938 that hit Long
Island and New England without warning.

Since the first flights into hurricanes and western Pacific typhoons (as
hurricanes are known there), three Air Force planes have gone down in typhoons
(in 1952, 1958 and 1974), and one Navy plane in an Atlantic hurricane (in 1952).
All 36 crew members and passengers aboard the four airplanes were lost.

The Navy stopped flying into hurricanes in the 1970s. Airplanes no longer fly
into western Pacific typhoons.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Jasper Colt, USA TODAY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2017 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 34 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                              June 25, 2006 Sunday

Hurricanes kick up travel savings

BYLINE: Suzanne Plank, LONELY PLANET

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. F4

LENGTH: 952 words


The backdrop picture on my iBook desktop is a Caribbean dreamscape: plush talcum
beach, deep azure sky, intense turquoise sea, shady palm arching into the frame
just so .... I snapped this shot from my hammock on the beach in Tulum, Mexico,
last year. It was midday in mid-October in the middle of the worst hurricane
season on record.

Between storms -- even in the worst years -- hurricane season in the tropics can
be strung with sparkling sun-studded days. Though most travelers will choose to
stay out of hurricane season's capricious -- and potentially dangerous -- way,
others might want to risk the threat of inclement weather for the benefit of the
affordable, crowd-free vacations that are available this time of year.

The North Atlantic hurricane season spans six months, from June 1 to Nov. 30.
(This year's hurricane season arrived on time and settled in quickly, already
unpacking Tropical Storm Alberto on the Gulf Coast.) Hurricane season occupies
both a convenient time -- the summer months, when many individuals and most
families are able to travel -- and a desirable place, the paradiselike Caribbean
tropics, where many of these people dream of vacationing.

Blame it on the water

The principal cause of the dramatic weather that defines hurricane season is
warm water. Warm sea-surface temperatures help create the necessary atmospheric
conditions that spawn tropical storms and hurricanes. Sea-surface temperatures
steadily increase over the summer months, reaching their peak from August to
October; it is at this time, therefore, that hurricane season is at its most
active and intense.

Last year, conditions -- including unusually warm water temperatures (linked,
many scientists suspect, to global warming) -- conspired to make hurricane
season 2005 the most prolific in recorded history, spawning 28 named storms in
all, seven of which became major hurricanes. The National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration predicts that 2006 will be slightly less extreme than
2005, with four to six major hurricanes on the horizon.

Skirting the storms

Travelers to the tropics should realize, though, that a prediction for an active
hurricane season is not a forecast for perpetually stormy skies -- as I learned
last October in Tulum.

You can heighten your chances for clear skies by traveling early (June, July) or
late (November) in the season. And you can travel to the southern Caribbean,
outside of the main hurricane corridor: The islands of Trinidad and Tobago, for
example, experience many fewer storms; the same is true for the ABC islands
(Aruba, Bonaire and Curacao), as well as the Venezuelan island of Margarita.

If you are willing to gamble on a trip to more volatile northern Caribbean
locations, the payoffs this time of year can be huge in terms of both privacy
gained and money saved. Even the most popular spots in the Bahamas, Jamaica, the
Virgin Islands and Mexico's Riviera Maya area are accessible and crowd-free
during hurricane season. Furthermore, as the risk of bad weather rises, the
price of travel lowers, so that travel now is dramatically less expensive than
in the other half of the year.

From lavish resorts to humble inns, rooms are 30 percent to 50 percent less
expensive during hurricane season, with September averaging the lowest rates of
the year. Airfares to tropical locales are lower now too; restaurant prices are
cheaper; and even street vendors sell their wares for less. Another alternative
is to take a cruise: Passage on liners is much less expensive during hurricane
season, with the added advantage that a ship can circumnavigate tropical storms.


Getting out in time

If you do decide to visit the Caribbean during hurricane season, remember that
generally speaking, there is at least a three-day warning period before a
hurricane makes landfall, which gives travelers time to evacuate a threatened
area. Also bear in mind that in the vast majority of cases, it is not the high
winds that kill during a hurricane but the storm surge, which causes flooding
and landslides, so it is imperative that you seek high ground as far from the
beach as possible. If for some reason you are unable to leave, or choose to stay
in a hurricane's path, local officials will -- forcibly, if need be -- direct
you to the nearest designated storm shelter.

Though chances are very slim that the dates and destination of your trip will
coincide with a hurricane's landfall, you'll enjoy yourself most if you're
prepared for the worst.

Consider getting travelers insurance before you leave. For about 7 percent of
your total trip cost you can find policies that will cover unexpected expenses
caused by emergencies. Make sure your policy includes specific hurricane
coverage.

Check airline policy. Many -- but not all -- airlines waive flight-change fees
for customers affected by a hurricane.

Check hotel policy. Only some hotels and resorts will reimburse fees or offer
alternate dates for stays missed due to a hurricane.

Bring just-in-case necessities: water-purification tablets, energy bars, a
flashlight, a first-aid kit and a can opener (during Hurricane Wilma, evacuees
were given cans of tuna -- but no opener!).

Check local weather reports daily, and/or go online for updated storm-watch
information. One excellent source is Weather Underground (www.wunderground.com).

While hurricane season sojourns in the Caribbean are not for everyone, you may
find yourself enjoying all the riches of the high season -- at low-season rates.

Suzanne Plank has contributed to Lonely Planet's Mexico, California and USA
guides. "Travels With Lonely Planet" is coordinated by Global Travel Editor Don
George. You can e-mail him at don.george@lonelyplanet.com.

TRAVELS WITH LONELY PLANET

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 Contra Costa Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 35 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            March 31, 2010 Wednesday

What use for forecasts if they only confound?

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: A; ARTICLE; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1129 words

DATELINE: ORLANDO


ORLANDO

Hurricane center is aiming to make its tools easier to understand

The nation's top hurricane expert says his own family "glazes over" when he
launches into forecasting jargon.

So imagine the challenge in getting the public to read his forecasts.
Nevertheless, that is the task confronting Bill Read, director of the National
Hurricane Center, and the 45 people who work for him, as they try to simplify
their forecasts in an age of increasing competition from the Internet and
television.

The hurricane center wants to be the public's go-to source for information
because the agency issues the official forecasts that trigger most emergency
evacuations.

The center considers the matter important enough to devote a full day during
this week's National Hurricane Conference to helping emergency managers and
public officials decode its forecast products.

Among the improvements: A new public advisory written in organized, plain
English, will tell people this year where a storm is, where it is expected to go
and what dangers it poses.

Past advisories flowed in free-form, Faulkner-for-forecasters phrases such as
the "coastal storm surge flooding of up to 20 ft above normal tide," issued for
Hurricane Ike in 2008.

The same message this year would read: "storm surge will raise water levels as
much as 10 to 15 ft above ground level."

Other user-friendly improvements this hurricane season will include new podcasts
and videos.

Still, a host of other products, which predict wind speed, storm surge and storm
track, remain as confusing as ever.

"Because so many of us are scientifically minded, we probably go down the wrong
paths on some of it," Read said.

Forecasts for most hurricane threats are all about probability. Think of it like
basketball, says senior hurricane forecaster Mike Brennan. The tournament may
begin off Cape Verde but by the time it reaches the Gulf of Mexico, it is down
to the Final Four.

Every hurricane is different and poses one or more threats: flooding rain, high
winds, tornadoes, rip currents and storm surge.

The hurricane center is trying to make the tools addressing those risks more
understandable to the public.

Storm surge

Winds cause storm surge by forcing water over land. The bigger the hurricane and
the stronger the wind, the greater the surge threat. A shallow coastline, such
as Southwest Florida's, increases the problem.

Because storm surge is the most deadly element of a hurricane as it makes
landfall, the hurricane center has emphasized improving surge forecasts.
Forecasts for surge will begin with this year's first hurricane watch, issued
when hurricane conditions are likely somewhere within a specified area.

As soon as forecasters issue the watch they will send weather data to super
computers in Washington, D.C. Thirty minutes later, they will have the entire
coast mapped. The default map will show where coastal areas could see the ocean
rise more than two feet above the average tide. Likelihood is given in
percentages and color-coded. The graphic can be manipulated to show areas where
greater surges are likely, up to 25 feet.

The prediction will be based on the storm track, the storm size and the contours
of the coastline. In addition to the predicted track, thousands of other
possible storm scenarios will run through the computers. If most of the possible
tracks show seas rising 12 feet in Tampa, for instance, the graphic will show a
high probability there for that amount of surge. As the storm gets closer to
land, the forecast becomes more certain.

The surge graphic was experimental last year. This year it will be used
full-time.

Wind speeds

Hurricanes bring damaging winds, but predicting exactly where those winds will
blow is impossible. That is why the NHC also uses probabilities to get the word
out about wind threats. The good news is that the improvements to track
forecasts are helping to improve wind speed forecasts.

A hurricane looks deceivingly tidy in a satellite image, but it is really quite
messy. Rain bands shoot off the edges, causing rain, high winds and sometimes
tornadoes far from the storm's center. The winds vary throughout the storm, even
close to the center.

As a hurricane moves, forecasters monitor where and when the highest winds are
likely, out to five days. Similar to storm surge, the information is presented
in a color-coded graphic that represents the likelihood that hurricane-force
winds will reach certain places on the map.

Twenty-five percent of all areas that were under a hurricane warning between
2000 and 2008 experienced hurricane-force winds.

That might not sound very accurate, says hurricane specialist Dan Brown, but
consider: If you had a one in four chance of getting run over by a bus while
crossing a street, would you avoid that street?

Cone of uncertainty

The biggest misconception about the cone of uncertainty is that it forecasts
where a hurricane will wreak havoc. Instead, the cone only predicts where the
center of a hurricane is going to be at a given time, starting at 12 hours and
forecasting out five days.

A circle is drawn around each point to represent error, based on the past five
years of forecasting. The further out in time, the greater the error, so the
circle gets bigger. Rather then showing several confusing circles, the hurricane
center smooths the forecast track into a cone shape.

Hurricanes can be tiny like Hurricane Charley in 2004 or gigantic like Hurricane
Ike in 2008. The cone does not account for a storm's size.

Tropical weather outlook

The graphic for the tropical weather outlook is one of the hurricane center's
easier tools. It shows a recent satellite image of the Atlantic Ocean. If there
is a hurricane, it will be labeled. Dragging a mouse over the hurricane will pop
up a box that describes the hurricane details. Clicking on the hurricane will
display the cone of uncertainty.

The outlook will highlight tropical disturbances that have the potential to form
into tropical storms or hurricanes. The chance of the storm developing will be
given in a percentage.

Former hurricanes will also get status in the new outlook. Any fizzled hurricane
that is still spinning and producing dangerous wind and rain will be called a
post-tropical cyclone.

Local statements

In addition to the public advisories and graphics published by the hurricane
center, the local offices of the National Weather Service, such as the one in
Ruskin, send out hurricane information specific to the regions they cover
starting 48 hours before a predicted landfall.

The local office uses Doppler radar, which gives meteorologists a sharp view of
where and when high winds and heavy rains will occur.

When an area is forecast to get damaging winds, the local office will broadcast
an extreme wind warning or a tornado warning, depending on the situation.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 36 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            November 22, 2010 Monday

A season of hits elsewhere and misses here

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: A; ARTICLE; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 705 words


Hurricane season is active, in other places

A season of hits elsewhere and misses here

In more than 130 years of record-keeping, the United States has not seen a
hurricane season like this year's. Never have so many storms formed without a
serious strike on the U.S. coastline.

In fact, since at least 1878, every year in which more than nine hurricanes
churned through the Atlantic, at least two have hit the United States.

But this season, 12 hurricanes -- five with fierce winds exceeding 110 mph --
erupted in the Atlantic, marking the third-busiest hurricane season on record.
Yet the U.S. and Florida came away unscathed.

Instead, hurricanes made 10 landfalls in other countries, severely damaging
Mexico, Newfoundland and St. Vincent in the Caribbean.

"There was a lot of hurricane activity and there were a lot of landfalls. We in
the U.S. were very fortunate," said Gerry Bell, lead seasonal hurricane
forecaster for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Climate
Prediction Center. "We just dodged a bullet."

The six-month hurricane season technically ends Nov. 30.

This year ranks second for the total number of hurricanes, eclipsed only by the
record 15 hurricanes that formed in 2005.

Statistically, during such a busy year it would have been normal to see three to
four hurricanes make a direct landfall in the U.S., meteorologists said.

In May, the Climate Prediction Center forecast 14 to 23 named storms, with 8 to
14 becoming hurricanes, and the season lived up to its billing, with 19 named
storms.

However, a combination of unusually persistent weather patterns pushed
hurricanes away from the U.S. and especially Florida.

Several storms also formed closer to Africa than normal, where they tended to
move more northwestward away from land.

The only storm that made U.S. landfall was Tropical Storm Bonnie, which brought
no more than a rainy day to South Florida. Tropical Storm Hermine made landfall
in Mexico, but caused severe flooding in Texas and Oklahoma.

NOAA does not make landfall predictions, but the Tropical Meteorology Project at
Colorado State University issues probabilities based on predicted activity. In
June, the project predicted an 89 percent probability that the U.S. would get at
least one hurricane strike.

The chance that the U.S. would avoid a strike was slim, said William Gray, who
assembles the project's seasonal forecast with Phil Klotzbach.

He said overall hurricane activity this year was 195 percent of normal -- or
nearly double the average activity since 1950.

"Yet we only had one weak tropical storm that hit the U.S.," said Jeff Masters,
founder and director of meteorology for Weather Underground. "We were fortunate
that the jet stream set up in such a location that it steered the storms out to
sea or to Mexico."

Throughout the hurricane season, continuous bursts of inclement weather moved
east across the nation, deflecting hurricanes that neared the eastern seaboard
like football players blocking field goals.

Meanwhile, a fair weather bubble over much of Florida and the northern Gulf of
Mexico acted as a shield against Caribbean storms, keeping them from traveling
much farther north than Mexico.

A similar pattern took hold in 1995. That year brought the same number of named
storms as this year, but fewer hurricanes. Still, that year saw four landfalling
U.S. storms, including Hurricane Opal, which struck the Florida Panhandle with
destructive 115 mph winds.

The season could have been deadly for the U.S. had the unusual patterns not been
in place. Five of the hurricanes were classified as major, Category 3 storms
with sustained winds of 111 mph or higher. Hurricane Igor, one of the storms
that curved away from the U.S. in the Atlantic, had winds topping out at 155
mph.

Even October, not a historically busy month, saw five tropical systems form in
the Atlantic. All became hurricanes -- far above the usual two storms and one
hurricane, according to the National Hurricane Center.

The weather patterns that steer hurricanes cannot be predicted months in
advance. It was impossible last spring for forecasters to see the pattern that
would routinely shunt storms off the Atlantic coast.

"It's just one of those random things we don't understand," Masters said.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 37 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             March 27, 2016 Sunday

Storm forecasts are still messy | A parade of advancements has helped, but it's
still an inexact science

BYLINE: Harold Bubil

SECTION: A; FL News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1519 words


HURRICANES

ORLANDO - Hurricane forecasting has come a long way in the past 60 years, since
a spate of cyclones hit the northeastern United States in 1954.

Meteorologists have satellite imagery, Hurricane Hunter aircraft and infrared
radar at their disposal. They have supercomputers that can crunch the data and
produce spaghetti-like graphics of where a storm might go.

Despite all that, along comes an unpredictable Tropical Storm Erika or Hurricane
Joaquin to prove that the

only thing certain about hurricane forecasting is uncertainty.

"And there's only a 50 percent chance of that," said James Franklin, chief of
forecast operations at the National Hurricane Center in Miami.

Erika, you may recall, put Florida into a state of emergency last year before
fizzling out near Cuba. Joaquin in October weirdly moved southwest into the
Bahamas as Category 4 storm before backtracking and heading out to sea, slapping
Bermuda on the way.

"Meteorology is a young science and we have a lot to learn, especially in terms
of intensity" of hurricanes, Franklin said.

The stakes are high. Forecasts that turn out to be wrong can erode public
confidence. Floridians who remember the Erika hype - the entire state except the
western Panhandle was in the cone of uncertainty at one time - might be
reluctant to heed hurricane advisories this summer. The result could be fatal.

Rather than err on the side of caution, "we want to make the most accurate
forecast we can," Franklin said. "Our credibility is at stake."

'Florida problem'

Forecast science took a big leap forward after the 1954 season, when three
hurricanes caused significant damage to the eastern seaboard and New England.

Before that, hurricanes were a "Florida problem," said research meteorologist
Neal Dorst at the National Hurricane Conference here.

Despite the hurricane that ravaged South Florida in 1926, killing at least 372,
and the one two years later that drowned 2,500 people on the southern shore of
Lake Okeechobee, and the Labor Day storm that killed 400 in 1935, Congress paid
little attention, Dorst said during a presentation on the history of hurricane
forecasting and research.

"Florida got hit by a dozen hurricanes from 1945 to 1953," Dorst added.
"Hurricanes became synonymous with Florida. Poor Florida."

It was a less-populated state - 2.8 million people in 1950 - with little
political clout, Dorst said.

Meanwhile, meteorology was still emerging as a study only of what could be
observed. Much was unobserved.

The first research into hurricanes, which were a problem for mariners and gave
little warning before coming ashore, was done in the 1840s. The radio telegraph
around 1900 permitted real-time tracking of storms encountered at sea. The first
aerial photograph of a hurricane was taken as the Labor Day 1935 hurricane -
among the three worst ever - passed over Cuba, and the first flight to penetrate
a tropical storm was flown by the U.S. military in 1943.

In 1951, researcher Bob Simpson, working on his own time, flew into Hurricane
Marge on a Hurricane Hunter plane and discovered a "stadium effect" in the
60,000-foot eye wall. He urged the full-time study of cyclones. "The response
was, 'We don't have the money,'" Dorst said.

But the 1954 storm season impressed on Congress that something had to be done.
That is the year that hurricanes Carol, Edna and Hazel did $750 million of
damage, in 1954 dollars. "All of a sudden, Congress is knocking on the weather
bureau's door and saying, 'We have to do something about the hurricane
problem,'" Dorst added.

Intense study

The National Hurricane Research Project was born, with Simpson in charge. In the
1970s, he co-develop the Saffir-Simpson scale, which rates hurricane intensity
from categories 1 to 5, based on sustained wind speed.

Funding was made available for hurricane research that steadily has raised the
state of the art, moving predictions beyond guesswork and into accurate
forecasts that protect lives and property.

Then based in West Palm Beach, the NHRP investigated weather disturbances to
determine how they form into hurricanes. Using former military bomber planes,
they were equipped with machines that recorded data on punch-cards. This was
revolutionary, until a stack of cards was dropped as it was carried off a plane.
Propeller wash scattered them, and it took years to get the cards back in order
to retrieve the data.

But there were many successes. A network of data reporting stations was
established in the Caribbean. Time-lapse cameras were installed at coastal radar
sites. Storm measurements were made from offshore oil rigs.

In 1958, the American Meteorological Society held the first hurricane conference
in Miami Beach. Experts requested an extension of the NHRP, and it became
permanent. The U.S. Department of Commerce bought aircraft for the program, and
the National Hurricane Center was formed in Miami to encompass several
hurricane-related organizations.

The development of GPS dropwindsondes in the 1990s provided a rush of new,
real-time data from within hurricanes. These 2-pound tubes are dropped out of a
Hurricane Hunter plane. A small parachute deploys, and they float down through
the hurricane's clouds, transmitting data to the aircraft during the 3- to
7-minute descent. At $650 a pop, with 15 of them deployed per mission, they
cannot be retrieved for reuse. But the data haul makes it "money well spent,"
said Dorst.

"It was a revolution in understanding measurements and conditions in eye wall
for first time," said Chris Landsea, science and operations officer at the
National Hurricane Center.

The planes also have Doppler radar and, in 1980, were outfitted with stepped
frequency microwave radiometers, which enabled meteorologists aboard the
Lockheed-Martin P-3 turboprop planes - named "Miss Piggy" and "Kermit" - to
determine the hurricane's wind speed at the ocean surface.

These are but a few of the many technologies that have been developed to assist
forecasters and researchers since the 1950s. The king of them all, said Landsea,
is satellite imaging. The first image was captured in the early 1960s from a
polar-orbiting satellite - NASA mailed the photos to the hurricane scientists -
but a major improvement was made in 1975.

"Geostationary satellites give us the ability to see the entire Atlantic basin
every 30 minutes. That is a capability you can't duplicate in any other way,"
Landsea said. "Aircraft are fabulous for telling us the details and the
structure and exactly where the storm is, but we couldn't do our jobs without
the geostationary satellites."

Seeing the future

Satellite images were ideal for the analysis of hurricanes, but for forecasting
where they were headed, computer modeling provided another big leap forward.

"In the past 20 years, the errors have been reduced by half because of better
observations going into the models, better physics in representing the hurricane
and, especially, more computer power so you can represent the atmosphere much
more completely," Landsea said. "On the forecasting side, that has been a huge
advance, both with the global models, as well as the specialized hurricane
models."

Five models get prime consideration by forecasters at the National Hurricane
Center, including the European and U.S. Weather Service models. "You are getting
the best representation of what could occur," Landsea said. "We don't know which
one is the most accurate before each storm. Of those five, the European and the
Global Forecast System from the Weather Service usually are 1-2. We do weight
them more than the others."

All of this is paid for by a fairly small outlay in the federal budget. But,
funding can ebb and flow with changing priorities in Congress.

After the disastrous 2004-05 onslaught of storms that included hurricanes
Charley, Frances, Ivan, Jeanne, Katrina and Wilma, the 10-year Hurricane
Forecast Improvement Project was funded at $13 million per year, starting in
2007.

"It was the most significant effort in my 30-year career to improve
forecasting," James Franklin said. "We have gotten good results. We are starting
to see our intensity forecast errors start to come down. We had always been
making progress with the (storm) track, but we hadn't been making progress with
intensity."

Last year, though, the HFIP budget was cut by two-thirds. Florida has gone a
decade without a hurricane hit, after all.

"As we get away from events, funding is cut," Franklin said. "Getting resources
for hurricane research has been difficult. There have been brief bursts of
funding. When you have a big event that does a lot of damage or causes a large
loss of life, those are the kinds of events that focus attention on a problem. A
lot of life is like that."

And technology can only do so much to protect life and property, said Max
Mayfield, the NHC's former director. The public is still slow to take action on
the message.

"We know a lot more, but from where I sit now, we still have a problem
motivating people to take the proper action," Mayfield said.

"We have to get real with people," said the current director of the NHC, Dr.
Rick Knabb, "instead of geeking out" on the science.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A fenced area in West Palm Beach marks the site where 674 black victims
of the Great Lake Okeechobee hurricane of 1928 are buried. The storm killed
thousands of people. The Associated Press ARCHIVE Fishing vessels out of New
Bedford, Massachusetts, are shown high and dry at Fairhaven, Massachusetts, on
Sept. 1, 1954, where they landed after Hurricane Carol swept them ashore. Three
hurricanes caused significant damage to the eastern seaboard and New England in
1954, prompting a much greater focus on forecast science. The Associated Press
ARCHIVE James Franklin, a hurricane specialist at the National Hurricane Center
in Miami, demonstrates how a Global Positioning System dropwindsonde works
during a news conference in August 2002 in Miami. The device, which is dropped
from an aircraft flying through a hurricane, measures the winds from the plane
to the surface. The Associated Press/Wilfredo Lee Maj. Richard Woodford checks
the weather satellite image of Hurricane Luis following pre-flight briefing
Friday, Sept. 8, 1995, in Homestead, Florida. Each hurricane season a group of
hurricane hunters doggedly pursues the monster storms. (AP Photo/Rick Bowmer)
Home Depot employees stack bottled water in August 2015 as Tropical Storm Erika
approached Florida. The storm ultimately dissipated after hammering the
Dominican Republic. STAR-BANNER ARCHIVE/2015/DOUG ENGLE People walk through
floodwaters in Ocean Isle Beach, North Carolina, last year, as Hurricane Joaquin
made its way through the Atlantic. STAR-NEWS ARCHIVE/KEN BLEVINS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 38 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       The Reporter (Tavernier, Florida)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              July 17, 2009 Friday

El Nino may be a blessing this hurricane season

BYLINE: David Hawkins, The Reporter, Tavernier, Fla.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 792 words


Jul. 17--El Nino conditions have started in the Pacific Ocean, and that could be
good news for hurricane season here.

El Nino, also called the Southern Oscillation by scientists, is a warming of
ocean surface waters off South America that affects weather patterns across the
hemisphere.

El Nino can help hold down hurricane activity in the Atlantic, according to
local weather forecasters and scientists with the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration.

By changing wind patterns, El Nino also can increase rainfall in the U.S.
southwest and make winters less wintry in the north. In Florida, the risk of
winter wildfires can be reduced by El Nino-driven rain.

NOAA scientists announced July 9 that ocean temperatures had reached the El Nino
range. They predict it will probably last through this winter.

Matt Strahan, meteorologist in charge of the National Weather Service forecast
office in Key West, said El Nino can decrease the total number of hurricanes and
their intensity in the Atlantic. But it's only part of the hurricane puzzle.

Strahan pointed out that the Atlantic is in an active phase for tropical
activity. While more-active and less-active phases last about 30 years, some
seasons can be more or less active within those phases. Also, Strahan said, "For
us, it takes a pretty strong El Nino to suppress hurricanes in Florida and the
Keys."

Nino appears

The Climate Prediction Center of the National Weather Service reports sea
surface temperatures in the El Nino area -- off the west coast of South America
around the equator -- have been 1 C above average since the end of June.

El Nino is defined by surface temperatures rising 0.5 C or more above average.
The last time there was an El Nino episode was 2006, NOAA spokesman Christopher
Vaccaro said.

Climate scientists say the developing El Nino is likely to be weak to moderate
in strength in the Northern Hemisphere until fall, when it may get stronger.

CPC scientists say El Nino suppresses hurricane activity by increasing vertical
wind shear -- air layers moving at different speeds or directions -- over the
Caribbean and tropical Atlantic Ocean. The wind pattern can keep hurricanes from
forming or from strengthening.

With El Nino, "It is mostly that upper-level winds blow stronger from west to
east, and hurricanes don't like that," Strahan explained.

El Nino doesn't guarantee a hurricane won't strike the United States. In fact,
the Keys and South Florida have had significant strikes in recent El Nino years.

At the start of 1992, a strong El Nino was underway, though it had diminished in
the June-to-August period. The first named storm of the season didn't form until
mid-August, but it became the catastrophic Category 5 Hurricane Andrew.

In 1998, a strong El Nino had been underway since the previous spring. By the
start of hurricane season, La Nina conditions were starting. That season,
Hurricane Georges slammed the Lower Keys, causing extensive storm-surge
flooding.

NOAA forecasters have said it's most likely that this hurricane season, which
runs to December 1, will see an average number of tropical systems. In the
Hurricane Season Outlook issued in May, forecasters said there is a 50-percent
chance of a "near normal" season.

Based on several climate factors, NOAA estimated a 70 percent chance of nine to
14 named storms, with four to seven hurricanes and one to three major
hurricanes.

Those ranges have occurred in about two-thirds of past seasons with similar
climate conditions to what's expected this year, the outlook authors said.

Hurricane seasons from 1995 to 2004 averaged 13.6 named storms, 7.8 hurricanes
and 3.8 major hurricanes. The 2005 season set new records for total storms, with
27, and hurricanes, with 15.

NOAA scientists base their predictions on three main factors:

-- The periods of increased or decreased activity that last for several decades.

-- The effects of El Nino and La Nina on wind patterns and storm formation.

-- Sea surface temperatures in the Atlantic basin, which includes the Caribbean
Sea and Gulf of Mexico.

Temperatures recently have been cooler than average in the eastern tropical
Atlantic, which hasn't happened since 1997. If the cooler temperatures last
through the height of the season, scientists expect reduced hurricane activity.

NOAA will issue an updated forecast for the remainder of the season on Aug. 6.

To see more of The Reporter or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.keysnet.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, The Reporter, Tavernier, Fla.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090717-UK-El-Nino-may-be-a-blessing-this-hurricane-season-0717

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UK


                          Copyright 2009 The Reporter


                          FOCUS - 39 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                             April 13, 2010 Tuesday

Above average hurricane year is predicted; Fifteen named storms forecast in the
Atlantic

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 436  words


Forecasters at Colorado State University are predicting an above- average
Atlantic hurricane season this year, featuring 15 named storms, eight of which
will become hurricanes.

To be designated a name, a disturbance has to reach tropical storm status, the
level immediately below that of a hurricane.

The forecasters say that El Niño conditions will dissipate by the summer and
that unusually warm tropical sea surface temperatures will persist, creating
favourable conditions for hurricanes to develop and intensify.

Chris Scott of Oakville, Ont., forecast operations manager for The Weather
Network, agreed that the departure of El Niño by the summer and the warmth of
the tropical water at this time are good indicators of a more active hurricane
season prevailing this year.

However, in terms of impact, he said the number of anticipated hurricanes and
even their intensity do not always affect how severely they would hit an area
like Atlantic Canada. "Even in a year of few named storms, it just takes one to
cause immense damage, said Scott.

He cited the example of Hurricane Andrew in 1992, which produced mass
destruction. Yet, there were only six hurricanes that year, said The Weather
Network spokesman.

Of the eight expected hurricanes, the Colorado State forecasters predict that
four will strengthen to major storms, meaning they would be Category 3 or higher
hurricanes. There are five categories of hurricanes with Category 5 being the
severest.

Last year was an unusually light one in terms of tropical storm activity. There
were only eight named storms in 2009 in the Atlantic, just two of which
developed into hurricanes -- Hurricane Bill and Hurricane Fred.

Scott said the presence of El Niño or La Niña definitely plays a key role in
gauging whether it will be an active or inactive year for tropical storms. But
there are various other factors, as well, that come into play, he said.

One important indicator would be dry air in the atmosphere over the Atlantic,
said The Weather Network spokesman.

"If you have a lot of dry air coming in from Africa, for instance, you might not
have a lot of moisture for thunderstorms to form," he said. And this would
translate into less tropical depressions, tropical storms and hurricanes, said
Scott.

Also, he said the jet stream pattern might be positioned to allow for stronger
winds to "tear apart" developing storms.

And the actual water temperature in not just the Tropical Atlantic, but also the
Gulf of Mexico, is a determining factor in assessing what kind of hurricane
season the Atlantic can expect this year, said Scott.

* Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 40 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             August 30, 2004 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hotbed Of Hurricanes

BYLINE: KURT LOFT, kloft@tampatrib.com

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


The fury of storms is obvious. It's their breeding ground and march across the
Atlantic that have scientists searching for clues to their beginnings.

By KURT LOFT

kloft@tampatrib.com

TAMPA -- Long before Hurricane Charley unleashed its power on Florida, it
simmered thousands of miles to the east as an infant swirl of wind and water.

Then, it revved up along Hurricane Alley, gaining strength just north of the
equator on its march to the Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico. As a hurricane,
Charley surprised everyone with its quick turn and change of intensity, aspects
of the storm scientists will continue to study.

But much less documented than a hurricane's wrath at landfall is its beginnings,
and the long-range, ecological benefits of its passing.

Researchers at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Hurricane
Research Division in Miami say they have much to learn about the birth, or
genesis, of Atlantic hurricanes and the confluence of events that give them so
much bite. That will be a focus of NOAA's 2004 Hurricane Field Program Plan.

"Genesis is one of the areas we know least about because it's so hard to
observe," says Robert Rogers, an NOAA research meteorologist. "There are a lot
of factors that have to come into play to form a hurricane."

Average Atlantic hurricanes take six to 10 days to spin through the alley and
its warm, equatorial waters, which fuel its life. The final fury of Charley,
Rogers says, only "highlights the importance of having a better understanding of
the intensity and origin of hurricanes."

Like most Atlantic hurricanes, Charley started out as what meteorologists call a
Cape Verde storm, named after the islands where favorable weather systems give
birth to more than 70 events each year. August and September are ideal spawning
months for Cape Verde storms.

"This is the peak of the season," Rogers says. "Right now, the genesis of
hurricanes is off the coast of Africa."

Typically, Cape Verde waters are too cold at the beginning and end of hurricane
season, which runs from June 1 through Nov. 30. In contrast, storms that
originate in the western Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico tend to be idle at
midseason but active in the early and late periods.

Right now, Cape Verde is ground zero for storms. The clash of hot air over the
Sahara Desert and cooler air over the Gulf of Guinea provide the energy and spin
required for hurricanes to develop, scientists say. Once on their way up
Hurricane Alley, storms can be unstoppable as they feed on waters above 80
degrees, upper-level winds that limit disruptive shear and a convergence of air
masses called a tropical wave.

While scientists continue to learn about the origins of hurricanes, others are
studying the end result: their benefit to ecosystems. One study suggests that
storms replenish estuaries and fisheries and can have a positive effect on water
quality.

Researchers found a natural laboratory with the Neuse River and Estuary and
Pamlico Sound in North Carolina, which took the brunt of hurricanes in 1996 and
1999. These ecosystems were nearly destroyed as the storm surge depleted oxygen
in the water and brought in high concentrations of contaminating nitrogen,
phosphorus and fecal bacteria, according to a team of scientists at North
Carolina State University.

Not only did the systems quickly recover, but also some harmful organisms that
took hold before the storms decreased in number. This suggests a helpful
flushing effect, the team wrote in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

"The overall story we see is resilience to these major storms," says JoAnne
Burkholder, director of the Center for Applied Aquatic Ecology in North
Carolina. "The predictions about long-term devastation, made right after the
storms, were not borne out."

Reporter Kurt Loft can be reached at (813) 259-7570.

Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: SCIENCE

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 2
South Florida Sun-Sentinel Hurricane Charley, which devastated mobile homes in
south Punta Gorda, started out as a Cape Verde storm off the coast of Africa.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration This map of sea-surface
temperatures, made from NASA's Aqua satellite data, shows the storm "fuel" zone
known as Hurricane Alley. Scientists hope a better understanding of a storm's
origin will help unravel its cycle.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 41 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              May 21, 2006 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

BEFORE THE STORM

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 475 words


CENTER TRIES TO STAY AHEAD OF APPROACHING HURRICANES

When a hurricane is approaching land, the National Hurricane Center will begin
issuing watches and warnings.

oA HURRICANE WATCH means hurricane-force winds of more than 73 mph are possible
within 36 hours.

oA HURRICANE WARNING is issued when those winds are possible within 24 hours.

oWatches and warnings also are issued for TROPICAL STORM-STRENGTH WINDS of 39 to
73 mph.

Because of uncertainty in forecasting a storm's path and strength, watches and
warnings cover large areas of coastline.

Those alerts mean anyone in a watch or warning area could be hit by a storm.

oA TROPICAL STORM generates winds from 39 to 73 mph.

oA tropical storm becomes a HURRICANE when winds hit 74 mph.

oSTORM SURGE is an abnormal rise in sea level accompanying a hurricane or other
intense storm. This dome of water (often 50 to 100 miles wide) sweeps the
coastline near where the hurricane's eye makes landfall.

(CHART) MEASURING A HURRICANE

Emergency officials decide which areas to evacuate using the Saffir-Simpson
scale, which ranks hurricanes from Category 1 (minimal) to Category 5
(catastrophic), according to wind speed.

CATEGORY 1

Wind: 74 to 95 mph

Storm surge: 4 to 5 feet

Damage: Minimal

Example: Hurricane Gaston in 2004

CATEGORY 2

Wind: 96 to 110 mph

Storm surge: 6 to 8 feet

Damage: Moderate

Example: Hurricane Frances in 2004

CATEGORY 3

Wind: 111 to 130 mph

Storm surge: 9 to 12 feet

Damage: Extensive

Example: Hurricanes Jeanne and Ivan in 2004

CATEGORY 4

Wind: 131 to 155 mph

Storm surge: 13 to 18 feet

Damage: Extreme

Example: Hurricane Charley in 2004

CATEGORY 5

Wind: 156 mph plus

Storm surge: Higher than 18 feet

Damage: Catastrophic

Example: Hurricane Andrew in 1992

Tribune graphic; Source: National Weather Service

(CHART) BAY AREA GOVERNMENT CONTACTS

Emergency management Web sites and phone numbers:

oHILLSBOROUGH COUNTY: www.hillsboroughcounty.org; (813) 276-2385

oPINELLAS COUNTY: www.pinellascounty.org; (727) 464-3800

oPASCO COUNTY: www.pascountyfl.net; (727) 847-8137

oPOLK COUNTY: www.polk-county.net; (863) 534-5600

oHERNANDO COUNTY: www.co.hernando.fl.us/em; (352) 754-4083

oMANATEE COUNTY: www.co.manatee.fl.us; (941) 748-4501

(CHART) 2006 STORM NAMES

These are the storm names for the 2006 hurricane season, which runs from June 1
to Nov. 30. The National Hurricane Center assigns a name when a storm's winds
top 39 mph and it becomes a tropical storm.

Alberto

Beryl

Chris

Debby

Ernesto

Florence

Gordon

Helene

Isaac

Joyce

Kirk

Leslie

Michael

Nadine

Oscar

Patty

Rafael

Sandy

Tony

Valerie

William

Photo credit: Tribune photo by JAY NOLAN

Photo: Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami,
monitors Hurricane Wilma. The center is responsible for watches and warnings
when tropical weather threatens the United States.

Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: HURRICANE GUIDE 2006

GRAPHIC: PHOTO CHART 3
.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 42 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           September 11, 2016 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Storm season 'average'; will 2nd half surprise?

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 756 words


The 2016 hurricane season peaked Saturday, a notable event in that,
historically, a tropical storm or hurricane was most often charging through the
summer-warm waters of the Atlantic on Sept. 10.

Whether Mother Nature would follow her own climatological calendar this year was
debatable Saturday as three systems with varying ambitions to gain tropical
storm status were being watched by the National Hurricane Center.

If Ian -- the next name on the 2016 storm list -- wasn't christened by day's
end, it would be a schedule departure that has happened only 12 times in the
past five decades.

As of Friday, only one cluster of thunderstorms was given a high chance of
development over five days, and leading hurricane researcher Phil Klotzbach
predicted atmospheric tranquility at least through midweek.

"I don't see a lot of transition toward a better environment for storms in the
short term," said Klotzbach, lead author of the University of Colorado's annual
hurricane season forecast. "Overall, the atmosphere is not giving me the warm
and fuzzies."

So what can be said about the 2016 Atlantic hurricane season on its peak date?

It's a record-breaker, and, yet, mostly average.

When Category 1 Hurricane Hermine swept ashore near St. Marks on Sept. 2, it
marked the first time in nearly 11 years that a hurricane touched Florida soil,
breaking an unprecedented drought that began in 2005 with Hurricane Wilma.

As many as 70,000 city of Tallahassee utility customers were left without
electricity because of the storm, which hit with 80-mph winds and sent more than
six feet of storm surge into Cedar Key. Friday morning, more than 400 customers
were still in the dark a week after landfall.

But besides two preseason storms -- Hurricane Alex, which formed in January, and
May's Tropical Storm Bonnie -- the number, fortitude and rank of storm prowess
has remained near normal for this time of year.

Hurricane-force winds have occurred on 8.25 days. An average year would have 9.3
days of hurricane winds at this point. There has been one major hurricane --
mostly-ignored Hurricane Gaston reached 120 mph winds last month as it spun
harmlessly in the Atlantic.

The climatological average is 1.1 major hurricanes of Category 3 or higher at
this point in the season.

There have been four hurricanes this year, when the normal is 2.6. But the total
of four includes oddball Alex, which some meteorologists said really belongs to
the 2015 hurricane season.

"It's basically, basin-wide, dead-on average," Klotzbach said about the 2016
season. "But for Florida, obviously, it's not over."

Florida, more than any other state, gets hit most frequently by hurricanes in
October, Klotzbach said.

And some forecasters are predicting that active part of the season may linger
longer into November than normal because of the neutral state of the Pacific
Ocean, which has shed its El Niño characteristics.

Hurricane season runs June 1 through the end of November, but storm generation
typically shuts down by early November. El Niño works against hurricanes by
sending out storm-killing wind shear, while La Niña is more accommodating to
tropical cyclones.

The Atlantic Ocean is very warm and we will probably have less wind shear
through October and into November," said Dan Kottlowski, a hurricane expert with
Pennsylvania-based AccuWeather. "Usually, the tropical season begins to fall off
in the second half of October, but we could have tropical features all the way
into November."

Bob Henson, a meteorologist and blogger for Weather Underground, said it's
possible the season could have more activity in its second half.

"Shear is one variable out of several, and if you just look at that, there is a
chance the season could be back-loaded," he said. "And certainly having the warm
water helps."

The one atmospheric player that could prolong the season is turning out to be a
no-show.

In the spring, the Climate Prediction Center gave La Niña a 75 percent chance of
rearing up by fall. Now, it's down to between 55 percent and 60 percent and
Earth has been taken off "La Niña watch."

"If we do get a La Niña, it's going to be weak," said Weather Channel
meteorologist and hurricane expert Michael Lowry. "It sure hasn't shown itself
yet."

If you haven't yet, join Kim on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter.
kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

Get the app

Check local conditions, see live radar and keep up with Kimberly Miller's
weather updates. The free Palm Beach Post Weather app is available on iTunes and
at GooglePlay. Search for Palm Beach Post WeatherPlus.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2016 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 43 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           November 29, 2016 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Memorable 2016 hurricane season has historic finish

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1138 words


The tropics awoke early and furious in 2016, brewing up January's Hurricane
Alex, sending Hermine to shatter Florida's unprecedented hurricane drought, and
terrorizing coastal communities from Palm Beach County to the Carolinas with
Category 4 Matthew.

And in the end, Otto reminded everyone why hurricane season lasts through Nov.
30.

The rare November hurricane grew in the only area left this late in the year for
tropical development -- the deeply warm waters of the southwest Caribbean Sea.
Otto gained hurricane status Nov. 22, making it the latest hurricane on record
to form in the Caribbean.

"I think this could go down in the record books as one of the longest hurricane
seasons," said Bryan Norcross, a hurricane expert with The Weather Channel, who
is also known for walking South Florida through 1992's Hurricane Andrew. "It is
extremely unusual to have Alex so early in the year and have Otto so late in the
year."

Not since 2012 has the Atlantic produced an O-named storm, but seasonal
forecasters predicted 2016 would be the year.

With the exception of Category 4 Hurricane Joaquin, 2015 was a mostly
forgettable season that was marked by a cyclone-suppressing El Nino of record
strength. The atmospheric phenomenon of warming equatorial Pacific waters is
typically followed by a cooling La Nina phase that can be more accommodating to
tropical cyclones.

But La Nina was waffling as the 2016 hurricane season neared and climate
scientists tried to weigh that uncertainty.

"I remember thinking there could be lingering wind shear from El Nino, but in
the back of our minds we thought the water temperatures were so warm along the
southeast coast and in the Gulf of Mexico that those could be the determining
factor," said Dan Kottlowski, a hurricane expert with the Pennsylvania-based
AccuWeather. "The season kind of unfolded like we expected."

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted 12 to 17 named
storms, five to eight hurricanes and two to four major hurricanes. Colorado
State University and The Weather Channel were a bit more precise, both calling
for 15 named storms. But while CSU predicted six hurricanes and two major
hurricanes, The Weather Channel forecast nine hurricanes and four major
hurricanes.

All of the predictions were very near the final tally of 15 named storms, seven
hurricanes and three major hurricanes of Category 3 strength or higher. A
Category 3 hurricane has winds between 111 and 129 mph. The average hurricane
season for years 1981 to 2010 has 12 named storms, six hurricanes and three
major hurricanes.

As of Tuesday, the Accumulated Cyclone Energy, or ACE, for 2016 was 129.5,
according to the Tropical Cyclone Project at Colorado State University. The
average amount of seasonal ACE, which is a measure of storm strength and
duration, is 103.1.

For Kottlowski, the biggest surprises of the season were the early arrivals of
Tropical Storms Bonnie and Colin. Kottlowski discounts January's Hurricane Alex
as a holdover from the 2015 season, but Bonnie showed up in late May, with Colin
following a week later -- just four days into the June 1 start of hurricane
season.

By June 20, Tropical Storm Danielle formed as the earliest D-named storm on
record.

"Bonnie and Colin were so interesting because they were early and we were coming
out of such a strong El Nino year," Kottlowski said.

For Floridians, who had enjoyed nearly 11 years without a land-falling hurricane
since 2005's Wilma, Hermine was a hurricane drought-breaker if not a
record-strong storm. The Category 1 cyclone with 80 mph winds hit in the Big
Bend area in the early-morning hours of Sept. 2.

Hermine, which exhausted forecasters with a track that began developing Aug. 18,
triggered mandatory evacuations of coastal areas in five counties as officials
feared a storm surge of up to 9 feet.

Hermine was the debut of groundbreaking storm surge inundation maps issued by
the National Hurricane Center.

"We want people to be aware of the various hazards and storm surge has never had
its own watches and warnings before," said James Franklin, chief of the National
Hurricane Center's hurricane specialists unit. "There is still a lot of focus on
the wind and we have to keep hammering away at other aspects."

Between 1963 and 2012, 49 percent of tropical cyclone deaths were storm surge
related. Another 27 percent were attributed to rain accumulation. Just 8 percent
of deaths were from wind.

The maps were used again in what Franklin said was the most memorable storm this
year for him, Hurricane Matthew. The storm, which whipped up from a Category 1
to a Category 5 monster in 24 hours, had residents from Palm Beach County
through the Carolinas pulling out hurricane shutters and clearing out store
shelves.

Matthew mowed down Haiti and strafed the Bahamas before turning its sights as a
Category 4 storm on Florida. The official track was a terrifying sight to
forecasters, paralleling the densely populated east coast.

"A paralleling storm is a nightmare. It's the worse-case scenario," said Erik
Salna, a meteorologist and associate director of the Extreme Events Institute at
Florida International University. "It's an extremely difficult case for the
hurricane center and for every single emergency manager along the entire
coastline."

In Palm Beach County, 49,000 people in mobile or manufactured homes, and 90,000
who live on barrier islands or along some areas of the Intracoastal were asked
to evacuate. About 7,560 people sought cover in the county's 13 general
population shelters, 184 stayed in a special needs shelter and 245 people were
in the pet-friendly shelter at West Boynton Recreation Center.

A lucky hop east spared Palm Beach County the worst of Matthew.

"Some people called it an exercise, but it's not an exercise I would like to
have very often," said Bill Johnson, Palm Beach County's director of emergency
management. "We had a Category 4 storm 50 miles offshore and it didn't hit us.
That's when I tell everyone that prayer works."

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

get the app

Check local conditions, see live radar and keep up with reporter Kimberly
Miller's weather updates. The free PBPost Weather app is available on iTunes and
at Google Play. Search for Palm Beach Post WeatherPlus.

2016 tropical cyclones

Hurricane Alex, Jan. 13-Jan. 25

Tropical Storm Bonnie, May 27-June 4

Tropical Storm Colin, June 5-June 7

Tropical Storm Danielle, June 19-June 21

Hurricane Earl, Aug. 2-Aug. 6

Tropical Storm Fiona, Aug. 16-Aug. 23

Hurricane Gaston, Aug. 22-Sept. 3

Hurricane Hermine, Aug. 28-Sept. 6

Tropical Storm Ian, Sept. 12-Sept. 16

Tropical Storm Julia, Sept. 13-Sept. 19

Tropical Storm Karl, Sept. 14-Sept. 25

Tropical Storm Lisa, Sept. 19-Sept. 25

Hurricane Matthew, Sept. 28-Oct. 9

Hurricane Nicole, Oct. 4-Oct. 18

Hurricane Otto, Nov. 21 - (as of deadline, Otto was still a storm)

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2016 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 44 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            November 26, 2017 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Deadly hurricane season set to end;
Hundreds die in fierce cycle 'where everything went supersonic.'

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller     Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1443 words


In August, the waters of the equatorial Pacific cooled, quieting powerful
western gales that act as a balm to the tropical Atlantic during hurricane
season.

The atmosphere took advantage of the lull, whipping quickly into a violent
lather that crashed three Category 4 storms into the U.S., created the longest
lived 185 mph hurricane in recorded history and drowned Houston in a tropical
broth 5-feet deep.

The devastating 2017 hurricane season ends Thursday. Its formidable ré sumé also
includes the most named storms since 2012, more than double the normal number of
major hurricanes, and an intensity and longevity cyclone score twice as fierce
as the 30-year historical mean.

Hundreds of people in the U.S. and Caribbean died in storm-related incidents,
although a final tally may not be known until the National Hurricane Center
completes its storm reviews. Texas officials said in September that about 80
people were killed by Hurricane Harvey. In Florida, 72 people died from
Hurricane Irma-related accidents, including five in Palm Beach County, according
to the state's Division of Emergency Management.

"It's just one of those seasons where everything went supersonic," said Chris
Dolce, a digital meteorologist with Weather.com. "Everything that was out there,
just wanted to develop. Every fledgling system decided to become a storm."

It wasn't just a La Niña-influenced atmosphere that created the hyperactive
season, which began with Tropical Storm Arlene in April and wound down with
Tropical Storm Rina on Nov. 7.

Abnormally warm sea-surface temperatures and a westward-sitting Bermuda High
increased the fuel for the 17 named storms that formed, and pushed them closer
to the U.S. as they rode the high's underbelly as if on a conveyor belt.

Four hurricanes -- Harvey, Irma, Maria and Nate -- made landfall in the
continental U.S. or Puerto Rico. Harvey, Irma and Maria were Category 4 giants
at landfall.

Dan Brown, acting chief of the National Hurricane Center's hurricane specialist
unit, said the number of storms threatening land increased the pressure on
forecasters this season.

"With a storm out over the open ocean, there may be ships in the way, but when
storms are headed toward any highly populated area, we want to make sure people
are getting the message and taking the actions they need to take to save their
lives," Brown said.

The first big challenge came with Hurricane Harvey. Born in the deep eastern
Caribbean on Aug. 17, Harvey mustered only tropical storm strength before
dissipating to a tropical depression and then reforming in the Gulf of Mexico.

The storm became a major Category 3 hurricane on Aug. 24 and rapidly intensified
to a Category 4 before making landfall near Port O'Connor, Texas, on Aug. 26.
From there, it meandered, dropping more than 60 inches of rain and causing
unprecedented flooding in the Houston area.

The National Weather Service tweeted; "This event is unprecedented and all
impacts are unknown and beyond anything experienced."

Still, Brown said Harvey was a well-forecast storm with meteorologists
predicting the track, rapid intensification and deluge of rain.

"Our track forecasts this year have set records for accuracy at each of the
forecast time periods out five days," Brown said. "The three most damaging
hurricanes -- Harvey, Irma and Maria -- the track errors were 25 percent lower
than the long-term mean."

Intensity was still a struggle, especially rapid intensification, which is
considered an increase in wind speeds of 34 mph or more over a 24-hour period.

Brown said there were an estimated 40 cases of rapid intensification this
season. Just six of them were accurately forecast.

Hurricane Maria's 15-hour rapid intensification from a Category 1 storm to a Cat
5 was compared to 2005's legendary Hurricane Wilma, which took just 12 hours to
reach Cat 5 status.

Maria landed in Puerto Rico on Sept. 20, strafing the island with 155 mph winds.
It wiped out Puerto Rico's electrical grid, cut water lines and turned green
hillsides brown from wind burn. As of Nov. 20 -- two months after Maria made
landfall -- just 46 percent of the island had electricity.

"We had 10 hurricanes in a row and they were all sandwiched between early August
and mid-October," Dolce said. "It's one of those years where you are just really
taken aback."

In between Harvey and Maria, was Irma, which formed Aug. 30 and quickly
intensified to a Category 5 hurricane. It held that lofty status for an
astonishing three days.

About 6.5 million Floridians evacuated for the storm -- the most in the state's
history.

"This was a big, nasty Category 5 hurricane and it got people's attention," said
Jason Senkbeil, a University of Alabama associate professor who interviewed
evacuees at a service plaza on Sept. 7 and 8. "Some people thought all of
Florida was going to experience Cat 4 or 5 winds."

Irma's fury was reduced somewhat by a rub against Cuba's northern coast. It made
landfall as a Category 4 storm near Florida's Cudjoe Key on Sept. 10 at 9:10
a.m.

"This season definitely put things in perspective," said Jonathan Rizzo, the
warning coordination meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Key West.
"The fact that Irma remained a Cat 5 for so long, even among intense hurricanes,
it's not something you normally see."

Rizzo, who lives in Key West, said the weight of Irma's potential impact hit him
on Sept. 4 -- Labor Day. The five-day forecast cone was inching closer and
almost every possible path had some sort of impact on the Keys.

He sent his family to Orlando two days later.

Rizzo was stationed at the Marathon emergency operations center, which had to
relocate to Ocean Reef when there were concerns it wouldn't hold up to Irma's
blow. During the storm he was so focused on forecasting, he didn't have time to
worry about his home.

"The reason we stay is to make sure that our emergency managers and the public
gets the critical information they need," said Rizzo, whose home weathered the
storm. "I know I sound nonchalant, but after 2005 and seeing Wilma's impacts,
you start to realize that you can survive this. We're not victims, we are
survivors."

Statewide, 90 percent of Florida Power & Light customers lost electricity with
the average outage lasting 2.3 days. That's compared with 75 percent of
customers who lost electricity during Wilma when the average outage was 5.4
days.

In Palm Beach County, more than 290,000 people were urged to evacuate coastal
areas and from around Lake Okeechobee. About 17,000 stayed in shelters.

But while Irma knocked over trees with gusts that reached 91 mph at Palm Beach
International Airport, homes were largely spared.

"We got lucky. We got very lucky, again," said Bill Johnson, head of Palm Beach
County's emergency management division. "But some day our luck is going to run
out."

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

GET THE APP

Check local conditions, see live radar and keep up with reporter Kimberly
Miller's weather updates. The free Palm Beach Post Weather app is available on
iTunes and at GooglePlay. Search for Palm Beach Post WeatherPlus.

By the numbers

2017 hurricane season stats:

*17 named storms, including 10 hurricanes and six major hurricanes.

*Major hurricanes spun for 19.25 days -- the most since 2005.

*Harvey was the first major hurricane to make landfall in continental U.S. since
2005's Wilma.

*Harvey produced more than 60 inches of rain, breaking previous rainfall record
of 52 inches.

*Irma's maximum wind speed of 185 mph was strongest on record in Atlantic,
outside Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean.

*Irma maintained 185 mph winds for 37 hours -- the longest any tropical cyclone
around the globe has maintained that intensity.

*Irma was the first Category 4 hurricane to make landfall in Florida since
2004's Charley.

*Irma and Harvey marked the first time two Category 4 hurricanes made landfall
in the continental U.S. in same year.

*Irma spent three days as a Category 5 hurricane -- the longest for an Atlantic
hurricane in the satellite era (since 1966).

Source: Colorado State University Department of Atmospheric Science

About the storms

2017 tropical cyclones and maximum sustained winds:

Storm Speed

Tropical Storm Arlene, 50 mph

Tropical Storm Bret 45 mph

Tropical Storm Cindy 60 mph

Tropical Storm Don 50 mph

Tropical Storm Emily 45 mph

Hurricane Franklin 85 mph

Hurricane Gert 105 mph

Major Hurricane Harvey 130 mph

Major Hurricane Irma 185 mph

Major Hurricane Jose 155 mph

Hurricane Katia 105 mph

Major Hurricane Lee 115 mph

Major Hurricane Maria 175 mph

Hurricane Nate 90 mph

Major Hurricane Ophelia 115 mph

Tropical Storm Philippe 60 mph

Tropical Storm Rina 60 mph

Major hurricane is a Category 3 or higher

Source: National Hurricane Center

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Winds from Hurricane Irma push water from the Intracoastal Waterway
over the sea wall along Flagler Drive in West Palm Beach on Sept.   10. Lannis
Waters / The Palm Beach Post

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2017 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 45 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                            November 15, 2004 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

Is this the new 'normal'?;
This past summer was the worst hurricane season on record for Florida. Was it a
fluke or an omen?

BYLINE: By MARK ZALOUDEK mark.zaloudek@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: FLORIDA WEST; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1306 words


For those who don't know much about the science of hurricanes -- and let's face
it, that's most of us -- this year's barrage of punishing blows to the
Southeastern United States, especially Florida, raises some troubling questions:

* Can Floridians expect to see more hurricane seasons like this?

* Should I leave the Sunshine State because of what happened this year?

* Can coastal residents along the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico expect to
see more frequent and more intense hurricanes than they've seen prior to this
year?

Hurricane expert Bill Gray cautions people not to jump to wrong conclusions
based on 2004, one of the worst hurricane seasons on record. This year saw four
significant evacuations in Florida. Insurance claims topped $20 billion, and
there was an additional $20 billion in uninsured losses.

"Floridians should view this year's onslaught of hurricane activity as a rare
anomaly," Gray and his research team at Colorado State University conclude in an
interim report on the 2004 hurricane season.

"We would not recommend that anyone move out of Florida or decide not to move to
Florida solely because of the threat of hurricanes. Florida hurricanes must be
accepted as one small negative of an otherwise pleasant climate."

Gray, an atmospheric science professor, has earned respect in meteorological and
emergency management circles nationwide for his dogged research into the complex
global weather patterns that produce hurricanes and for his scientifically
daring annual forecasts for the past 21 years.

Although Florida bore the brunt of four hurricanes and a tropical storm in a
48-day period, "(which) is unprecedented in ... historical records going back
130 years," Gray cautions that coastal residents from Maine to Texas may start
to see more of the violent storms make landfall than they've seen in recent
decades.

A dangerous new era

Gray says he believes the Atlantic Basin, which includes the Caribbean Sea and
the Gulf of Mexico, goes through alternating cycles of frequent and infrequent
hurricane activity that can last 25 to 35 years. He says there has been a lull
in the fierce storms since the mid-1960s, when millions of Americans began to
live along the coastline.

That 30-year lull appears to have shifted in the mid-1990s to an era of more
frequent and more intense hurricanes that could last for two more decades, he
says.

Gray cautions Floridians and residents of other coastal states to beware, even
though a repeat of the 2004 season is unlikely.

"Overall, Florida has been extremely fortunate in recent years. Between 1966 and
2003, the Florida peninsula has experienced the landfall of only one major
hurricane: Andrew in 1992. ... Old-timers who lived in Florida in the 1930s
through the 1950s well remember that Florida used to be hit by many intense
storms. Between 1928 and 1965, the Florida peninsula experienced 14 major
hurricane landfalls, (or) one every three years," he says.

Government scientist Stan Goldenberg agrees with Gray that a decades-long shift
favoring hurricane development began in 1995.

"We think it could last for as long as another 10 or even 20 or 30 years," says
Goldenberg, a research meteorologist with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's Hurricane Research Division in Miami.

Goldenberg says the recent upswing hasn't gone unnoticed by islanders in the
Caribbean.

"I think they've had close to three dozen killer hurricanes in the Caribbean
since 1995. Islands have been devastated, just one after another," he says.

Scientists also have noticed a dramatic increase in major hurricanes occurring
in October since 1995.

"It used to be that a major hurricane in October occurred about once every 10
years, and now we're seeing them on the average of about one a year. That has
caught a lot of people by surprise," Goldenberg says.

Gray takes into account several global weather patterns, including ocean
temperatures in the Atlantic, when making his predictions for the severity of
each hurricane season and the shifting decades-long cycles. He says cooler water
in the North Atlantic produces more upper-level wind shear, which makes it more
difficult for hurricanes to develop or intensify.

Gray attributes Florida's misfortunes this year to several favorable conditions
in the Atlantic for hurricane development and an unusually strong Bermuda high
off the East Coast. The high-pressure ridge blocked the storms from curving
northward away from the United States and sent them, instead, on sweeping,
westward tracks into Florida.

It could have been much worse, he adds.

Big cities spared

"Florida's four destructive hurricanes fortunately came ashore along coastlines
that were not very densely populated," he says.

"Pensacola was the largest Florida community feeling the direct brunt of one of
these damaging hurricanes (Ivan). The coastal and inland areas around Punta
Gorda/Port Charlotte (where Charley came ashore) and Stuart (where Frances and
Jeanne came ashore) do not have large coastal populations."

He points out that the state's three largest concentrations of population --
from Tarpon Springs to Sarasota, from West Palm Beach to South Miami, and from
Daytona Beach to Melbourne (and inland to Orlando) -- were all largely spared.

As a Miami-area resident, NOAA's Goldenberg worries that Florida's unusually bad
luck in 2004 may not be over yet.

Weather patterns that steer hurricanes can last as much as a decade, he says.

"In the 1940s, most of the major hurricane landfalls were in the Florida
peninsula. I think there were seven major hurricane landfalls within 10 years.
Then in the '50s, it was mainly the East Coast of the United States. And then in
the '60s, it was primarily the Gulf coast," he says.

"There needs to be more research on establishing this as a predictive tool, but
it's a distinct possibility that the steering that favored Florida this year
could be around with us for at least several years."

Gray and Goldenberg also agree that the upturn in hurricane activity can't be
blamed on global warming.

Six other areas of the globe that spawn hurricanes and typhoons have not had a
dramatic increase in hurricane development or intensity, Gray says. Some of
these tropical storm basins have even seen a slight decrease during the past
decade.

"If global warming, natural or man-made, were the cause of the increased
Atlantic Basin activity, we should have seen an increase in the other storm
basins as well. This has not occurred," he says. "We do not attribute Florida's
four land-falling hurricanes (this year) ... to be related in any way to human
influences."

Looking ahead, Gray cautions people living along the coast to be prepared to
deal with more hurricanes and tropical storms than before.

"There can be no question that from 1995 onward, we have been in a new era for
major hurricane activity."

A historical perspective

Although the Atlantic hurricane season dealt Florida its most punishing blows in
2004, it hasn't always been the case. Many communities along the Atlantic and
Gulf coasts have been battered by hurricanes and tropical storms since 1900.
Some have had to clean up more frequently than others.

Many coastal residents may be unaware of the risk they face because of a lull in
hurricane activity from the 1960s to the 1990s, when much of the U.S. coastline
experienced a population explosion. Some experts believe we're returning to an
era of more frequently and more intense hurricane development, but scientists
are unsure how many will make landfall.

Do hurricanes come in cycles?

From 1966 to 2003, only one major hurricane slammed Florida, while the previous
33 years (1933-1965) saw 11 Category 3 or stronger hurricanes pound the state.
Back then, Florida suffered a devastating blow once every three years on
average. Many scientists believe we've entered a similar cycle that could last
10 or 20 years.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, MAP 3
 AP ARCHIVE PHOTO / NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE Hurricane Charley, about to strike
Charlotte County Aug. 13, was the first of four hurricanes to cause severe
damage in Florida this year. MAPS Landfall locations, 1900-2004 Hurricane scale
Major hurricanes (Maps available on microfilm)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2004 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.


                          FOCUS - 46 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                            October 21, 2007 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Scientists may soon knock wind out of hurricanes' sails; Storms can be weakened,
diverted off course in simulations

BYLINE: Tim Shipman, Daily Telegraph

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 547  words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON - Scientists have made a breakthrough in man's desire to control the
forces of nature -- unveiling plans to weaken hurricanes and steer them off
course -- possibly preventing future tragedies.

The damage done to New Orleans in 2005 by hurricane Katrina has spurred two
rival teams of climate experts, in America and Israel, to redouble efforts to
enable people to play God with the weather.

Under one scheme, aircraft would drop soot into the near-freezing cloud at the
top of a hurricane, causing it to warm up and so reduce wind speeds. Computer
simulations of the forces at work in the most violent storms have shown that
even small changes can affect their paths -- enabling them to be diverted from
major cities.

But the hurricane modifiers are fighting more than the weather. Lawyers warn
that diverting a hurricane from one city to save life and property could result
in multi-billion dollar lawsuits from towns that bear the brunt instead.

Hurricane Katrina caused about $41 billion in damage to New Orleans.

Hurricanes form when air warmed over the ocean rises to meet the cool upper
atmosphere. The heat turns to kinetic energy, producing a spiral of wind and
rain. The greater the temperature differences between top and bottom, and the
narrower the eye of the hurricane, the faster it blows.

Moshe Alamaro, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, told the Telegraph
of his plans to "paint" the tops of hurricanes black by scattering carbon
particles -- either soot or black particles from the manufacture of tires --
from aircraft flying above the storms. The particles would absorb heat from the
sun, leading to changes in the airflows within the storm. Satellites could also
heat the cloud tops by beaming microwaves from space, possibly affectiong the
strength of the hurricane.

The theory has so far been tested only in computer simulation by Alamaro's
colleague, Ross Hoffman. "With small changes to this side or that side of the
hurricane we can nudge it and change its track. We're starting with computer
simulations, then will hopefully experiment on a small weather system," Alamaro
said.

Last month, scientists at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem announced that they
had simulated the effect of sowing clouds with microscopic dust to cool the
hurricane's base, thus weakening it. The dust would attract water but would form
droplets too small to fall as rain. They would rise and evaporate, cooling hot
air at the hurricane base.

In findings presented at a conference in Trieste, Italy, the team led by Daniel
Rosenfeld demonstrated that dust dropped into the lower part of hurricane
Katrina would have reduced wind speeds and diverted its course.

The MIT team has now hired a professor of risk management to advise on steps
necessary to protect themselves from legal action by communities affected if a
hurricane is diverted.

It is pressing for changes to U.S. law and for an international treaty to settle
possible disputes between neighbouring countries.

Alamaro said: "The social and legal issues are daunting. If a hurricane were
coming towards Miami with the potential to cause damage and kill people, and we
diverted it, another town or village hit by it would sue us. They'll say the
hurricane is no longer an act of God, but that we caused it."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Reuters; A one-time resident of the apartment that stood here
checks out the aftermath of hurricane Katrina. If it were possible to control
the direction of the mighty winds, such scenes might not need to take place. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2007 Edmonton Journal, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 47 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Victoria Advocate (Texas)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             August 28, 2016 Sunday

Be prepared with supplies, insurance if hurricane threatens

BYLINE: Kathryn Cargo, Victoria Advocate, Texas

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 483 words


Aug. 28--The peak of hurricane season is upon the Crossroads and residents
should plan ahead.

Most hurricanes usually occur in September and August.

The last major hurricane to hit the mid-coast in Texas was Hurricane Carla in
1961, and the last hurricane to hit the mid-coast was Hurricane Claudette in
2003.

"A major hurricane strikes the mid-coast every 30 to 40 years," said John Metz,
National Weather Service warning coordination meteorologist. "We're overdue --
I'd say so."

The time to plan for a hurricane is now, Metz said.

"It could happen anytime in the next several weeks as we are going through this
season," Metz said.

People need to talk to their families about an emergency plan and know where
their evacuation routes are, said Alina Nieves, National Weather Service
meteorologist.

"It's not a matter if we're going to get a hurricane; it's a matter of when,"
she said.

People should have at least three days of nonperishable food and enough water
for one gallon of water per person a day ready if they need to evacuate, said
Mark Hanna, Insurance Council of Texas pubic relations manager.

Upon evacuation, they should bring important documents, including insurance
polices, prescription medications, coolers for ice and food, blankets, pillows,
sleeping bags and phone chargers.

If a city issues a mandatory evacuation, residents should heed it, Metz said.

If someone decides to ride out a hurricane, they may be without power for weeks,
and essentials such as water, gas and food may be hard to locate, Hanna said.

People staying through a hurricane should stay on the lowest floor of their home
or business in an interior room with a sturdy floor, Metz said. People should
board up their windows and doors before the storm to prevent as much breakage as
possible, Metz said.

"If something does happen, there's usually not going to be anyone to come and
help in the height of the storm," he said.

During hurricane season, people should check weather.gov/victoria daily to see
if a hurricane could be headed their direction, Metz said. A hurricane watch is
issued 48 hours before weather impacts of the storm start moving into the area.

If a watch is issued, people should check the website every six hours to see the
progress of the storm.

Waiting until a watch is issued to plan for a hurricane is too late, Metz said.

If someone lives near the Texas coast, they should prepare with three different
kinds of home insurance, including flood, wind storm and a basic home insurance
policy, Hanna said. People can't buy insurance to protect their home from a
hurricane at the last minute, he said. A flood insurance policy takes 30 days to
take effect, and if a hurricane watch is issued, insurance companies will not
sell windstorm insurance.

___ (c)2016 Victoria Advocate (Victoria, Texas) Visit Victoria Advocate
(Victoria, Texas) at www.victoriaadvocate.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20160828-VI-Be-prepared-with-supplies-insurance-if-hurricane-threatens-0828-2016
0828

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VI


                        Copyright 2016 Victoria Advocate


                          FOCUS - 48 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Brunswick News (Georgia)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                              June 9, 2017 Friday

NOAA predicts a busy hurricane season ahead in 2017

BYLINE: Larry Hobbs, The Brunswick News, Ga.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 775 words


June 09--This time last year, few in Glynn County even gave Hermine, Julia or
Matthew a passing glance.

But after two tropical storms and a hurricane bearing those names hit the Golden
Isles in 2016, maybe folks are more willing to pay attention this hurricane
season to the possibility of a visit from Harvey, Jose or Maria. Those three are
among the lineup for the 2017 Atlantic Hurricane Season's roster of named
storms.

And if the National Atmospheric and Oceanic Administration's predictions for the
coming months are any indication, this year's storm season could see people
along the Atlantic Coast tuned in to weather updates all the way to Rena -- the
17th storm name for 2017.

In short, NOAA's Climate Prediction Center anticipates another above average
activity Atlantic Hurricane season. The hurricane season started June 1 and will
continue through Nov. 30.

The National Weather Service's Climate Prediction Center predicts a high
likelihood of between 11 and 17 named storms forming in the Atlantic this year.
Forecasters say between four and five of those named storms could become
hurricanes, with anywhere from two to four developing into major hurricanes.

NOAA, which also includes the National Weather Service, released its annual
predictions on June 1.

"Regardless of how many storms develop this year, it only takes one to disrupt
our lives," said Robert J. Fenton Jr., Acting Administrator for the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.

Or three. Mother nature broke long-standing local tradition last hurricane
season, delivering tropical storms Hermine and Julia back to back in September,
followed in October by Hurricane Matthew. Prior to that, the Golden Isles was
last subject to a mandatory evacuation in 1999 for the approach of Hurricane
Floyd, which turned out to be a dud locally. The last named storm of consequence
to make a direct hit on Glynn County had been Hurricane Dora in 1964. Beyond
that, a deadly hurricane last struck home in 1898, before forecasters started
naming storms for tracking purposes.

A myth developed that the Golden Isles served as a good place to ride out
hurricane season, situated as it is in a deep bight along the coast that aligns
longitudinally with Cleveland, Ohio. That myth was shattered last year.

Jay Wiggins hopes the unfortunate experience got folks' attention locally.

"I don't care how many storms they predict," said Wiggins, Director of Glynn
County Emergency Management Agency. "I don't care if it's 10 or 100 storms. I
worry about the one coming to Glynn County. Last year they predicted a high
volume hurricane season. Well, it certainly was for us, wasn't it?"

As it turned out, 2016 produced 15 named storms and seven hurricanes, four of
which grew in strength to major hurricane status. Named tropical storms begin at
sustained winds of 39 mph. Hurricanes begin with sustained winds of 75 mph.
Major hurricanes are classified as those with sustained winds of 111 mph and
higher.

Climate Prediction Center forecasters estimate there is a 45 percent chance for
an above-average hurricane season. This cautionary outlook includes a 70 percent
chance that between 11 and 17 names storms will develop this year; between five
and nine of those could become hurricanes, with up to four churning into major
hurricanes.

The predictions are based in large part on the weak state of El Nino, a tropical
weather pattern that originates in the central Pacific and has far-reaching
climatological consequences. A weak El Nino in the Pacific typically translates
into weak vertical wind shears in the Atlantic. It also means warmer ocean
temperatures on the surface. Together, these conditions indicate a strong
likelihood of increased hurricane activity.

"The outlook reflects our expectation of a weak or nonexistent El Nino," said
Gerry Bell, the Climate Prediction Center's lead hurricane forecaster.

If NOAA's prediction for higher hurricane activity in the months ahead prompts
local residents to get ready for it now, Wiggins is all for it. That means
having an evacuation plan in place, and putting together a hurricane kit that
includes nonperishable food, water, flashlights, radios, batteries, needed
medications and other necessities to get through the aftermath of a named storm,
Wiggins said.

"If they will take the sunny days to prepare for the rainy days, they will be so
much more relaxed when and if it finally comes," Wiggins said. "I think the way
to interpret hurricane season predictions is based on how it affects you."

___ (c)2017 The Brunswick News (Brunswick, Ga.) Visit The Brunswick News
(Brunswick, Ga.) at www.thebrunswicknews.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20170609-GE-NOAA-predicts-a-busy-hurricane-season-ahead-in-2017-0609-20170609

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GE


                       Copyright 2017 The Brunswick News


                          FOCUS - 49 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                           November 29, 2012 Thursday

Busy hurricane season ends Friday

BYLINE: Dinah Voyles Pulver, Dinah Voyles Pulver ENVIRONMENT WRITER

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1064  words


As the official Atlantic hurricane season expires Friday, coastal- dwelling
residents can heave a sigh of relief that it's finally over, after a season that
delivered 19 named storms.

The season proved a long, and at times challenging, one for National Hurricane
Center forecasters. It also added to the fears of local emergency management
officials that local residents might be complacent or unprepared for a major
hurricane.

The "season" really started before the official June 1 date, with tropical
storms Alberto and Beryl appearing in late May. And it just kept on. It was the
second time in three years the Atlantic produced storms all the way up to the
letter T, about seven storms more than average.

The procession of storms spared Volusia and Flagler counties from some of the
worst winds and rains, even though four different storms caused impacts.

The rough surf, rainfall and winds from the storms serve as a reminder that "you
don't need a major hurricane to have problems," said Bart Hagemeyer,
meteorologist-in-charge of the National Weather Service in Melbourne.

Chief among them was the death of an Orlando teenager, who drowned in Tropical
Storm Beryl's rough seas.

"Even passing hurricanes can still have an impact," Hagemeyer said.

But, while Irene and Sandy caused major impacts elsewhere in terms of property
damage, the east Central Florida region "got through the hurricane season in
pretty good shape considering how active it was," Hagemeyer said. "We were
fortunate that we were never really under the gun."

The rain produced by the tropical storms was especially beneficial, given the
area's recent drought conditions, said both Hagemeyer and Charlie Craig,
emergency management director for Volusia County.

The season wasn't without its scary scenarios, Craig said. It was "a little
frightening" to have storms walk right up the coast, just 200 miles offshore, he
said. "We were very lucky."

For Troy Harper, emergency services chief for Flagler County, the primary
message of the last two seasons is that "anyone along the Eastern Seaboard could
have an impact during any year."

One of his ongoing fears is the number of people who have moved here and haven't
experienced a major storm. "There are people who continue to trickle into our
counties from other areas that may not understand the hazards of even a small
tropical system," Harper said.

"Add to that the complacency of long-term residents," he said, including those
who think they survived a hurricane because they were here during the storms of
2004.

"Folks that went through the '04 season with Charley, Frances and Jeanne think
they've survived a hurricane, when they've really not seen the brute force that
can be exhibited," he said. "We haven't had a catastrophic weather disaster in
Northeast Florida in the history of record-keeping."

This year's big storms, such as Sandy, illustrated that people - individuals,
families and businesses - need to develop a "culture of preparedness that would
enable them to survive and exist for three to five days on their own," Craig
said.

And just because hurricane season is over, doesn't mean the job of the emergency
officials is done.

"We continue to preach and teach all year long," Harper said. "Honestly, I worry
just as much about severe thunderstorms and our tornadoes that we've witnessed
as I do about hurricanes. The threat never goes away. Thunderstorm season is 365
days of the year."

Emergency officials really do need to preach preparedness "all year round, all
hazards," said Craig.

Looming next on the calendar are spring tornado season and wildfire season.

2012 Hurricane Season in Review:

Alberto, tropical storm, May 19-22

Beryl, tropical storm, May 25-30

Chris, hurricane, June 19-22

Debby, tropical storm, June 23-27

Ernesto, hurricane, Aug. 1 - 10

Florence, tropical storm, Aug. 3 - 6

Gordon, hurricane, Aug. 15 - 20

Helene, tropical storm, Aug. 9 - 19

Isaac, hurricane, Aug. 21 - 30

Joyce, tropical storm, Aug. 22 - 24

Kirk, hurricane, Aug. 28 - Sept. 2

Leslie, hurricane, Aug. 30 - Sept. 11

Michael, hurricane, Sept. 3 - 11

Nadine, hurricane, Sept. 11 - Oct. 4

Oscar, tropical storm, Oct. 3 - 5

Patty, tropical storm, Oct. 11 - 13

Rafael, hurricane, Oct. 12 - 17

Sandy, hurricane, Oct. 22 - 29

Tony, tropical storm, Oct. 22 - 25

Reviewing the predictions

How did the season compare to the pre-season and mid-season outlooks?

- Actual: 19 named storms, 10 hurricanes

- Colorado State spring outlook: 10 named storms, 4 hurricanes

- Colorado State summer outlook: 14 named storms, 6 hurricanes

- NOAA spring outlook: 9 - 15 named storms, 4-8 hurricanes

- NOAA summer outlook: 12-17 named storms, 5-8 hurricanes

Volusia-Flagler impacts

Four storms affected Volusia and Flagler counties: Beryl, Debby, Isaac and
Sandy.

Tropical Storm Beryl brought rainfall and rough surf along local beaches.
Ritchey Dauphin, 18, of Orlando, drowned in the storm- tossed surf. While Beryl
dumped up to 15 inches of rain in Suwannee County, it dropped anywhere from 4 to
5.6 inches across Palm Coast, 3 inches in Ponce Inlet and 1.5 to 2 inches of
rain elsewhere in Volusia.

Tropical Storm Debby also dumped heavy rainfall across the area. A weather
monitoring station in Pierson recorded 8.82 inches of rain, while a station in
DeLand reported 5.48 inches. But Debby's heaviest rain - 28.78 inches - fell on
Curtis Mill in Wakulla County. The highest sustained winds at Daytona Beach
International Airport were 21 mph with 32 mph gusts, while gusts of up to 30 mph
were reported in Bunnell.

Isaac swept east Central Florida with wind and rain as it passed through the
Florida Straits as a tropical storm. While Isaac dropped 16.5 inches of rain in
Vero Beach, it left only 1.27 inches in Daytona Beach. Peak gusts up to 40 mph
were reported in Flagler County, while the peak gusts in Daytona Beach were 30
mph. Gusts up to 19 mph were reported in DeLand.

Hurricane Sandy forced tropical storm warnings along the coast, gusty winds and
pushed in large breaking waves that created beach erosion from Volusia County
south, with more severe erosion from Brevard to Martin counties. Sandy left 4.3
inches of rain in Daytona Beach and 2.43 inches of rain in Edgewater. Gusts up
to 43 mph were reported in Palm Coast and a few crossbeams and pilings were lost
from the Flagler Beach pier.

Source: National Hurricane Center, National Weather Service, Flagler County
Emergency Management and Volusia County

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2012 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2012 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 50 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                    September 16, 1999, Thursday, Edition 1

AIRSTREAM'S BIG CHILL CAN FLATTEN FLOYD

BYLINE: Peter Calamai

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 587 words




OTTAWA - Canada's weather service has eight hurricane meteorologists in
Dartmouth, N.S., analyzing every bump and grind of Hurricane Floyd as it whirls
northward up the eastern seaboard.

Canada did not have its own hurricane expertise in 1985 when the U.S. National
Hurricane Centre dubbed Hurricane Gloria ''the storm of the century'' and
predicted Gloria would swirl devastation through the Maritimes.

It didn't.

Instead, the Maritimes received then what Floyd is likely to deliver tomorrow -
strong winds and lots of rain.

''We're one of the leading countries in the world for knowledge of storms that
undergo the transformation from tropical to a regular mid-latitude storm, ''
says Ken Kirkwood, a meteorologist with the Canadian Hurricane Centre.

Because hurricanes change dramatically in character as they move north, the
Canadians and Americans pool meteorological expertise.

The U.S. centre in Miami watches for the birth of hurricanes, forecasts their
initial intensity and path and tracks them up the U.S. coast.

The Canadians specialize in figuring out when and where a hurricane will start
changing into a cold, non-tropical storm. They also may come up with slightly
different projections for the storm's path inside Canada.

''Quite often when the storm is no longer a threat to the U.S., the Americans
tend to ask us about its path,'' Kirkwood said. Temperatures in the core are the
crucial difference between the two types of storm, rather than mere wind
speeds[semi] winter storms in Canada can have winds greater than the 119 km/h of
a Category 1 hurricane

Hurricanes are hot, feeding off warm tropical seas and the ''latent heat'' set
free when moist air condenses into water droplets. That internal heat pump
creates the hurricane's central eye and keeps the towering column swirling.

Canadian meteorologists try to forecast when the hurricane's heat pump will
falter. One key factor is the airstream 3,000 metres and higher - the
''westerlies'' - that can shear off the top of a hurricane, causing the core to
cool so the storm collapses.

Hurricanes tend to lose their oomph quickly over land where friction from
hitting the ground causes winds to fill in the centre, destroying the sharp
pressure difference that drives heat-fed storms.

Westerlies can shear off

the top of a hurricane Details about upper-atmosphere wind patterns are gathered
from
 sounding balloons sent aloft twice a day around the world and,
 increasingly, from satellites providing coverage over the oceans.

 Fed into the weather service's supercomputers at Dorval, this information
generates a forecast of where the storm will be steered by prevailing winds and
how soon it will run down.

''You'd be foolish to try to forecast what will happen to a hurricane further
out than three days,'' says Kirkwood. ''Short-term effects that aren't captured
by our measurements could change the track of the storm.''

Hurricane researchers in the United States say 24-hour forecasts of a
hurricane's path have an error of 125 to 160 kilometres in any direction, while
48-hour forecasts have a 300-kilometre error.

Canada's professional hurricane-watchers don't get much chance to fine-tune
their forecasting ability when the hurricane season ends.

The eight meteorologists with specialized hurricane training are part of the
regular staff at the Maritime Weather Centre in Dartmouth.

Any time soon, they'll be dealing with those all-too-predictable blizzards.


LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1999

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                          FOCUS - 51 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 10, 2017 Wednesday

FEDERAL REGISTER: National Hurricane Preparedness Week, 2017 Pages 21901 - 21902
[FR DOC # 2017-09632]

LENGTH: 690  words




Washington: Office of the Federal Register has issued the following notice:
The President
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Proclamation 9606--National Hurricane Preparedness Week, 2017 Proclamation
9607--Public Service Recognition Week, 2017 Notice of May 8, 2017--Continuation
of the National Emergency With Respect to Yemen Presidential Documents Federal
Register / Vol. 82 , No. 89 / Wednesday, May 10, 2017 / Presidential Documents
___________________________________________________________________ Title 3--
The President [[Page 21901]] Proclamation 9606 of May 5, 2017 National Hurricane
Preparedness Week, 2017 By the President of the United States of America A
Proclamation National Hurricane Preparedness Week reminds those of us living in
hurricane-prone areas of the need to ready our homes, communities, and families
for extreme weather events before hurricane season arrives. Preparing for
weather-related disasters can dramatically reduce their impact on you, your
family, and your community. The 2017 hurricane season, which begins June 1 and
lasts through November 30, marks the 25th anniversaries of Hurricanes Andrew and
Iniki.

In August 1992, Hurricane Andrew tore through South Florida before making
landfall, again, in Louisiana. It claimed 65 lives, destroyed 25,000 homes, and
caused approximately $26 billion in overall damage. A few weeks later, Hurricane
Iniki struck the Hawaiian Island of Kauai, killing six, demolishing 1,400 homes,
and causing about $1.8 billion in overall damage. The tragic losses caused by
those terrible storms remind us of the need to prepare for the destruction
hurricanes can bring. As Hurricane Andrew demonstrated, inland areas are not
immune from the destruction hurricanes can bring with them through flooding
rains and other related weather events. A National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration study of Hurricane Andrew revealed that most of the damage it
caused was inland from the primary storm surge areas. Just last year, heavy
rains from Hurricane Matthew caused destructive flooding and loss of life in the
Carolinas, even though the hurricane's eye remained mostly offshore. This week,
through several initiatives, I am encouraging Americans to take the time to
prepare for the upcoming hurricane season. After a major disaster, you may not
have immediate access to the services you are accustomed to, such as clean
water, grocery stores, and emergency services. Hurricane preparedness
information provided by the National Weather Service (NWS) and the Ready
campaign conducted by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), both
available online, outline important steps you can take right now to safeguard
your family, pets, and property. These resources will help you create evacuation
and communications plans and assemble a disaster kit of necessary supplies.
Developing and implementing these plans will save lives and avoid excess damage.
NOW, THEREFORE, I, DONALD J. TRUMP, President of the United States of America,
by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the
United States, do hereby proclaim May 7 through May 13, 2017, as National
Hurricane Preparedness Week. I call upon Americans living in hurricane-prone
areas to observe this week by making use of the online resources provided by the
NWS and FEMA and by taking actions to safeguard their families, homes, and
businesses from the dangers of hurricanes. I also call upon Federal, State,
local, tribal, and territorial emergency management officials to help inform our
communities about hurricane preparedness and response, in order to help prevent
storm damage and save lives. [[Page 21902]] IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto
set my hand this fifth day of May, in the year of our Lord two thousand
seventeen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the two
hundred and forty-first.

                     (Presidential Sig.)
[FR Doc. 2017-09632
 Filed 5-9-17; 11:15 am]
 Billing code 3295-F7-P
In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 52 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Star-News (Wilmington, NC)

                             May 28, 2016 Saturday
                             NC Wilmington Edition

Outlook for hurricane season

BYLINE: NC Vance Merton; The Associated Press

SECTION: 1,A; GateHouse Media GM9; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1043 words


MIAMI   U.S. government forecasters expect a near-normal Atlantic hurricane
season, after three relatively slow years. But they also say climate conditions
that influence storm development are making it difficult to predict how many
hurricanes and tropical storms will arise over the next six months.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration s outlook Friday called for
a near-normal season with 10 to 16 named storms, with four to eight hurricanes
and one to four  major  ones with winds reaching 111 mph and up.

The long-term season averages are 12 named storms, with six hurricanes and three
major ones.

The Atlantic hurricane season officially starts June 1, but tropical weather got
a head-start this year: Hurricane Alex made an unseasonable debut in January
over the far eastern Atlantic.

On Friday, the National Hurricane Center said an area of low pressure between
Bermuda and the Bahamas became a tropical depression. A tropical storm warning
was issued for the South Carolina coast.

Hurricane hunter aircraft were investigating the disturbance, and communities
along the coasts of Georgia and the Carolinas should monitor its development,
said NOAA Administrator Kathryn Sullivan.

Forecast challenges

While they can t predict whether any storm will strike the U.S., and more
tropical storms are expected than in the last three years, NOAA officials said
significant variables are at play.

It s unclear whether a decades-long high-activity era for Atlantic hurricanes
has ended, said Gerry Bell, lead seasonal hurricane forecaster with NOAA s
Climate Prediction Center. Meanwhile, El Nino is dissipating while La Nina looms
for the season s peak from August through October.

El Nino is the natural warming of parts of the Pacific Ocean that changes
weather worldwide. That tends to reduce hurricane activity in the Atlantic,
while La Nina tends to increase it.

The active storm era associated with warm Atlantic temperatures and stronger
West African monsoons began in 1995, but recent hurricane seasons showed shifts
toward a cooler phase marked by colder waters and a weaker monsoon, Bell said.

Each era can last 25 to 40 years, and it might take years to determine whether
the transition has happened, Bell said.

The last transition to a less active hurricane era happened in the 1970s,
without the data and computer models that forecasters have now.  We re watching
it for the first time with very new eyes,  Sullivan said.

2015 tally

The 2015 season was slightly below average with 11 named storms, including two
tropical storms that made landfall and caused flooding in South Carolina and
Texas. Hurricane Joaquin, one of two storms to reach major hurricane strength,
killed all 33 mariners aboard a cargo ship that sank off the Bahamas in October.

During U.S. Coast Guard investigative hearings this month into the sinking of
the El Faro, one federal investigator characterized the disaster as  a colossal
failure  of management.

Initial forecasts for Joaquin also were wildly inaccurate. Sullivan said NOAA is
on track to meet storm track and intensity forecast improvement goals, and a new
weather satellite launching this fall will produce much sharper images of
hurricanes and other severe weather.

Coastal risks

The last major hurricane to strike the U.S. mainland was Hurricane Wilma, which
cut across Florida in 2005. Wind speeds, not damage estimates, determine whether
a hurricane is classified as  major    that s Category 3 and up on the hurricane
wind scale .

Since 2005, the population in the 185 coastline counties most threatened by
hurricanes has grown 8.7 percent to 59.2 million people, according to U.S.
Census estimates. Overall, 143.6 million people   44.7 percent of the U.S.
population   from Maine to Texas could be living in harm s way.

Other Census figures hint at the potential financial risks throughout those
states: 60.1 million housing units and 3.3 million business establishments with
52.3 million paid workers.

Ferocious storm winds aren t the deadliest threat. According to the National
Hurricane Center in Miami, storm surge and rainfall flooding combine for
three-quarters of all U.S. deaths from hurricanes, tropical storms or tropical
depressions.

Major damage

In the Bahamas, Joaquin caused over $60 million in damage, according to the
hurricane center. The islands reported widespread flooding that contaminated
drinking water, cut off an airport and swamped a local fishing fleet.

Even  minor  storms can leave misery behind. After Tropical Storm Erika swept
through the Caribbean last year, damage estimates on the island of Dominica
ranged up to $500 million for homes, roads, bridges and infrastructure, and
Puerto Rico reported $17.4 million in agricultural losses for plantains, bananas
and coffee.

The Northeast was wracked by catastrophic flooding, first from Hurricane Irene
in 2011 and again from Superstorm Sandy in 2012. Damage estimates tallied in the
tens of billions of dollars.

Due to the financial hardships left in Sandy s wake, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency said Monday that it s overhauling its appeals process for
flood insurance claims with more transparency and oversight. Homeowners will be
able to take disputes directly to FEMA instead of first going through the
insurance companies they re fighting.

Climate change

Rising sea levels are expected to increase the vulnerability of coastal
communities to flooding from tropical systems. Recent research indicates climate
change is likely to make hurricanes more intense in the future.

Improved computer models show that warming atmospheric conditions may hinder
tropical cyclone development worldwide, says David Nolan, a University of Miami
professor of atmospheric sciences.

But the hurricanes that do form could grow more intense because ocean
temperatures will be higher, Nolan says. Warm ocean waters feed hurricanes like
fuel in an engine.

The ones that do occur could be a little bit stronger,  Nolan says,  but the
changes over the next 10, 20, 30 years would be very small, almost undetectable.



Dillon Christ, front, and Kyle Barnell paddle their canoe down a flooded street
in Charleston, S.C. on Oct. 3 after a low-pressure system interacted with
Hurricane Joaquin off the coast to bring heavy rain. ASSOCIATED PRESS FILE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2016 Star-News, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 53 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                              July 12, 2009 Sunday
                                HandleX Edition

NORMAL, BELOW-NORMAL HURRICANE SEASON FORECAST WEATHER;

BYLINE: Michelle Boss

SECTION: I; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 386 words


Hurricane season officially started  June 1, and it has been pretty quiet so far
both in the Atlantic and Eastern Pacific. For the month of June, there were no
tropical storms in the Atlantic. In the Eastern Pacific, hurricane Andres, with
maximum winds of 75 mph, affected the southwestern coast of Mexico during the
last week of June. One fatality was associated with that storm.

For the same reason I enjoy reading my horoscope every once in a while, I also
find it interesting to check out the latest seasonal hurricane forecasts. I say
"forecasts" in the plural since there are often multiple forecasts put out by
different people or agencies. While I have the utmost respect for my fellow
meteorologists who specialize in tropical weather and associated storms, I
really wonder about the usefulness of seasonal hurricane forecasts. What good is
it to try to predict how many hurricanes will form in one season, when it's more
important to know whether or not they will make landfall and where? Gerry Bell,
Ph.D, and lead seasonal hurricane forecaster for the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration's  Climate Prediction Center did make a good point:
"Prepare for each and every season regardless of the seasonal outlook. Even a
near- or below-normal season can produce land-falling hurricanes, and it only
takes one land-falling storm to make it a bad season."

The latest forecast from NOAA calls for a "near-normal" Atlantic hurricane
season, with a 70 percent chance of having 9 to 14 named storms, of which 4 to 7
could become hurricanes, including 1 to 3 major hurricanes. Another forecast,
put out by noted hurricane experts Philip J. Kotzbach, William M. Gray, and
their associates at Colorado State University, calls for slightly "below
average" activity with 11 named storms, five hurricanes, and two hurricanes of
category 3 or higher. Joe Bastardi, meteorologist and founder of the large
private weather forecasting company Accuweather, also predicts fewer hurricanes
this year (as compared to last year), but warns that the East Coast could still
be at risk for a major storm, while in contrast, folks on the Caribbean Islands
would get a break from the storms this year.

The 2008 hurricane season saw 16 named tropical storms including eight
hurricanes, of which five were considered major.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Michelle can be reached at weatherboss@comcast.net

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column: Weather

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2009 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                          FOCUS - 54 of 881 DOCUMENTS




                           September 12, 2004 Sunday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

YEARS OF KILLER STORMS LIKELY

BYLINE: BY DEREK ROSE DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 516 words


SO LONG, Sunshine State. Hello, Hurricane Alley.

Killer storms like Charley, Frances and now Ivan are not a temporary exception
to the weather patterns affecting Florida but the continuation of a historic
pattern, scientists say.

And it suggests more major hurricanes will be trolling the North Atlantic for
years to come.

"We better be ready for an active hurricane season for the next few decades,"
said John Gaynor, program manager for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's U.S. Weather Research Program. "It could last for another 30
years."

Last month saw a record-setting eight named storms, as well as an unprecedented
173 tornadoes in the U.S., mostly spawned by Tropical Storm Bonnie and Hurricane
Charley.

And in a hurricane season when experts predicted two to four major storms of
Category 3 and up, Hurricane Ivan is already the fourth. The season doesn't end
until December, and its peak stretches from September through October.

If Ivan slams Florida it will be the third 'cane to hit the peninsula this
season, matching the record set in 1964. Frances swamped the state last weekend
and Charley ripped a swath of destruction Aug. 13.

Hurricane expert William Gray of Colorado State University wrote recently that
the "real surprise" is not that Florida is getting slammed in rapid succession -
it's that the peninsula has experienced so few hurricanes since 1965.

Scientists say the reason is a long-term shift in ocean temperatures dubbed the
"Atlantic multidecadal oscillation."

Before 1995, ocean currents were in a 24-year "cool" period. Now they're in
their "warm" phase. Those warmer waters spawn lighter winds - and light winds
and warm waters breed hurricanes.

The nine years since 1995 have seen the highest number of hurricanes, major
hurricanes - Category 3 or higher - and tropical storms, scientists say.

Temperatures in the Pacific Ocean also play a role. The Pacific is in a weak El
Niño phase - meaning currents are warmer than normal - but the system is not
strong enough to create hurricane-destroying winds.

There's no way the gradual effects of global warming could be creating this
dramatic increase in hurricanes, according to Gray. It's simply a natural
phenomenon.

The Atlantic warming changes other weather patterns, too, scientists say, with a
silver lining for New Yorkers: less summer rain. Maybe that'll make New York the
new Sunshine State.

drose@edit.nydailynews.com

Graphic: AN INTENSE HURRICANE SEASON

A cyclical temperature change of the waters in the Atlantic Ocean has played a
major role in the number of storms reaching Florida and the Caribbean.

1 Deep ocean water periodically rises off the coast of Africa. This causes a
drop in water temperature in the eastern Atlantic and a rise in water
temperature in the western Atlantic.

2 The change in water temperature helps eliminate eastward winds that normally
stunt the development of hurricanes.

3 Without the winds, storms are free to grow and streak westward across the
Atlantic.

4 Fueled by warm water in the Caribbean, hurricanes have lashed the Florida
coast this year.

JR DAILY NEWS DIAGRAM

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAM;GRAPHIC;INFOGRAPHIC, NOAA Hurricane Ivan as it roared by
Jamaica. JR DAILY NEWS DIAGRAM

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2004 Daily News, L.P.


                          FOCUS - 55 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     August 29, 2003, Friday, FINAL EDITION

Travel during hurricane season need not be a wash

BYLINE: Laura Bly

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 1134 words

It's a classic bargain hunter's dilemma, played out each autumn: Book a seaside
getaway at the lowest prices of the year and risk your vacation being washed out
by a tropical storm or hurricane.

The quandary is particularly nettlesome this hurricane season, which runs June 1
through Nov. 30 and peaks in September for the Atlantic, Caribbean and Gulf of
Mexico. Experts are bracing for above-average activity, with the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecasting 12 to 15 named storms and
Colorado State University predicting a 64% chance of at least one major
hurricane making landfall on the East Coast.

The picture is somewhat brighter in the Eastern Pacific, where forecasters
expect fewer storm systems than normal -- but where Ignacio, the region's first
hurricane of 2003, petered out near La Paz, Mexico, this week after cutting off
roads and stranding travelers.


To be sure, notes meteorologist Chris Landsea on the NOAA Hurricane Research
Division Web site, "a direct hit by a major hurricane is an extremely rare event
and if I had a chance -- for example -- to go on a cruise in the Caribbean
during hurricane season, I would go without hesitation."

But catastrophic storms aside, even a series of heavy downpours can put a damper
on a fun-in-the-sun getaway. Some strategies for minimizing the risks:

 * Play the odds. A 25-year analysis of the Atlantic basin by the National
Hurricane Center shows that among U.S. locations, Miami and Cape Hatteras, N.C.,
have the highest probability -- 48% -- of experiencing a strike by a named
tropical storm or hurricane sometime during the June to November season. They're
followed by San Juan, Puerto Rico, at 42% and New Orleans at 40%.

Elsewhere in the region, Bermuda has about a 60% chance of being hit by a
tropical storm or hurricane, while the northern end of the Lesser Antilles --
including the U.S. and British Virgin Islands -- comes in at 42%. By contrast,
the "ABC islands" of Aruba, Bonaire, and Curacao, just off the coast of
Venezuela, have a strike probability of less than 10%.

Storms in the Eastern Pacific are twice as prevalent as those in the Atlantic,
and the region's hurricane season begins two weeks earlier, on May 15. But they
tend to track away from land, "occasionally slicing" into Baja California or
Mexico's West Coast, adds the National Hurricane Center's Frank Lepore.

 * Opt for a "mobile resort." With their sophisticated technology and fast
speeds, cruise ships can usually evade major weather systems. But as the
hurricane advice on CruiseCritic.com notes, "This is not the time to make a
visit to one particular (scheduled) port a crucial element of the holiday
because itineraries can be disrupted by even the mere threat of a storm. Be
flexible, knowing you may have trouble getting to an airport in South Florida or
in San Juan (where many Caribbean-bound cruises depart). Aim to arrive in port a
couple of days early."

 * Get a hurricane guarantee. To reassure vacationers, many hotels and resorts
-- Hyatt, Marriott, Sandals, SuperClubs, Sheraton, Westin and Wyndham, among
them -- offer weather guarantees with refunds or replacement stays if a
hurricane hits.

All 80 members of the Bahamas Hotel Association, for example, pledge to give
disrupted travelers a choice of refunds or applying payments to a future stay,
and say those stranded by a hurricane will be "offered all possible courtesies
and be charged the lowest possible rates in light of the situation."

But cashing in on hurricane guarantees can be problematical: Some hotels promise
refunds if guests cancel 24 hours ahead of a threatened landfall, while some
will offer credits toward a future stay but limit refunds to direct hits by
hurricane-force winds as defined by the National Weather Service (74 mph or
higher, vs. a tropical storm, which has wind speeds of 39-73 mph). Others
require replacement trips be taken within a year, subject to blackout dates.

 * Consider travel insurance. Trip-cancellation/interruption insurance covers
losses (including deposits and non-refundable payments) when you can't travel or
your trip is cut short. Not all policies cover weather-related problems,
however. And one that does, TravelGuard's, specifies that severe weather must
force evacuation of the traveler's hotel or resort, and notes that insurance
must be purchased before the hurricane is forecasted or predicted.

In other words, downpours don't always translate to an insurable loss: "There's
a big difference between a life-threatening storm and the fact that it's too
rainy to take the kids to the beach," says Lee Hughes of CSA Travel Protection.

 * Be proactive. Despite the fact that the National Hurricane Center now issues
forecasts five days ahead instead of three, "hurricane forecasters have no way
of saying a week or two ahead of time that a hurricane is likely to form, much
less where it's likely to hit," says USA TODAY's weather expert, Jack Williams.
Still, it's a good idea to monitor news and forecasts for your destination,
check updates at local Web sites such as Caribbean Hurricane Network
(stormcarib.com) and contact your travel agent, airline, hotel or cruise line if
a major storm is brewing.

"If you're the kind of person whose 'entire life will be ruined' if you don't
have room service every day, a hurricane that doesn't do much damage would be a
disaster . . .  employees might not make it to work and the resort's electricity
might be out," Williams adds. "If you'd see the whole thing as an adventure, and
might offer to help the locals clean up, a hurricane could make your vacation
the trip of a lifetime."

---

 * Get hurricane news, forecasts and background information at
hurricanes.usatoday.com

Name that storm

Here are the names for the 2003 storms in the Atlantic and Eastern Pacific
hurricane basins. Once a name is used, the storm is classified as a tropical
storm (TS) or hurricane (H).

Atlantic

Dates

Top winds

TS Ana April 20-23 50 mph

TS BillJune 29-July 1 60 mph

H ClaudetteJuly 8-1780 mph

H DannyJuly 16-2075 mph

TS ErikaAug. 14-1670 mph

TS FabianAug. 28-?40 mph

Grace

Larry

Rose

Henri

Mindy

Sam

Isabel

Nicholas

Teresa

Juan

Odette

Victor

Kate

Peter

Wanda

Eastern Pacific

Dates

Top winds

TS AndresMay 19-2545 mph

TS BlancaJune 16-2265 mph

TS CarlosJune 26-2760 mph

TS DoloresJuly 6-740 mph

TS EnriqueJuly 10-1365 mph

TS FeliciaJuly 17-2350 mph

TS GuillermoAug. 7-1260 mph

TS HildaAug. 10-1340 mph

H IgnacioAug. 22-27105 mph

TS JimenaAug. 28-?40 mph

Kevin

Patricia

Waldo

Linda

Rick

Xina

Marty

Sandra

York

Nora

Terry

Zelda

Olaf

Vivian

Source: USATODAY.com

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Adrienne Lewis, USA TODAY, Source: Hurricane Watch:
Forecasting the Deadliest Storms on Earth by Dr. Bob Sheets and Jack Williams,
Vintage Books, 2001 (BAR GRAPH); PHOTO, B/W, Gregory Bull, AP; Deluge: Hurricane
Kenna hit Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, in October.

                      Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 56 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   September 26, 2005, Monday, FINAL EDITION

In the eye of the storms

BYLINE: Dan Vergano

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1383 words

The power of Mother Nature -- the devastation wrought by hurricanes Katrina and
Rita -- has many people asking one simple question:

Why is this happening?

There's more than one answer, says Adm. James Watkins, chairman of the U.S.
Commission on Ocean Policy, created by Congress to craft a plan to protect the
oceans and coasts:

*Overdevelopment has deposited more homes and jobs on the coasts, leaving people
sitting ducks when big storms strike.

*Hurricane frequency goes through natural cycles, and the cycle in the Atlantic
Ocean is on the upswing.

*The planet is getting warmer. Research indicates that climate change that
raises sea levels and increases ocean temperatures also might intensify
hurricanes.


"People have to understand the ocean needs more attention, not only when there's
a crisis, but in everyday life," Watkins says. Last year, his commission
forecast potential ocean-related disasters, including the danger of a major
hurricane hitting New Orleans, and made recommendations to reduce such risks.

The recipe for a hurricane is simple. Conditions are ripe whenever large
thunderstorms occur over tropical seawater heated to at least 80 degrees.
Essentially, hurricanes are circling weather machines, sucking the heat out of
the ocean and turning that energy into high waves and heavy rains.

Steered west by the Earth's spin, Atlantic hurricanes head for the East and Gulf
Coasts as a matter of course. A typical hurricane produces about 5.5 trillion
gallons of rain a day, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.

Not every hurricane hits the U.S. mainland -- just under 18 storms each decade
on average, according to NOAA. But when they do, the factors mentioned above can
lead to disaster.

People flocked to the shore during a lull in hurricanes in the 1970s. The
National Flood Insurance Program provided incentives to build homes and
businesses in flood-prone areas, Watkins says. Now about half the nation's gross
domestic product, involving 60 million jobs, comes from coastal regions, his
commission found.

"By living so close to the coasts, we have hampered nature," says climate
scientist Brenda Ekwurzel of the Union of Concerned Scientists, an advocacy
group. Uninhabited barrier islands that once shielded coastal towns are now
dotted with homes and communities, she says. In and around New Orleans,
development destroyed marshes that absorbed some of each storm's punch in
earlier years.

In fact, a ubiquitous technology facilitated this migration. During the last
peak period of hurricane activity in the 1940s and 1950s, there simply weren't
that many people living in Florida and along the Gulf Coast. It was too hot and
humid.

But just as hurricane activity began to slow, home air conditioning became
affordable, setting the stage for the tremendous population growth in the South
and Gulf regions over the past 30 years.

So the damage that hurricanes can do is magnified, says Roger Pielke, a
professor of environmental studies at the University of Colorado.

Drawing a Miami comparison

If the hurricane that struck Miami on Sept. 12, 1926, were to hit today, Pielke
estimates it would cause $110 billion in damage. "In 1926, Miami was a small
town of several hundred thousand people," he says. "We're just a much wealthier
society. So the average person who lives in a coastal location today has more to
lose than a person who lived there in the '20s."

The solution? Government and citizens must manage coastal regions in an
integrated fashion instead of lumping development and storm responses into
separate categories, Watkins says. Otherwise, history will repeat itself.

Hurricanes have been on the rise in the past decade. William Gray, a Colorado
State University professor considered the dean of hurricane scientists,
attributes the rise in the number and intensity of hurricanes to a shift since
1995 in seawater circulation in the North Atlantic.

Such shifts, he says, can last up to two or three decades, as happened in the
1930s and 1960s.

That means hurricane activity is cyclical, drawing people to the shore in
slow-going decades and punishing them in busy ones.

"This isn't rocket science. If you look at the record of hurricane activity in
the Atlantic going back 100 years, you see that there are periods of high
activity and periods of low activity," says Kerry Emanuel of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, author of Divine Wind: Hurricanes in History and
Science.

Robert Sheets, director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami from 1987 to
1995, criss-crossed the country trying to warn towns that a decade or more of
hard weather was coming, but few paid attention.

Says the center's Frank Lepore: "This current episode started in 1995, when we
had 11 hurricanes. Normal is six. This year we expect nine to 11."

Says Christopher Landsea, a NOAA meteorologist, "We've seen very busy times
before, but the big difference is there's so many people living in Hurricane
Alley."

Even with Hurricane Rita over, there is no time to relax; Gray's Tropical
Meteorology Project predicts at least one more major hurricane this month and
next. "We expect that by the time the 2005 hurricane season is over, we will
witness seasonal tropical cyclone activity at near-record levels," the latest
forecast states.

The role of global warming in hurricanes Rita and Katrina is a hot topic, even
leading to sparring at a congressional hearing last week between Sen. Dianne
Feinstein, D-Calif., who suggested a link, and Sen. Pete Domenici, R-N.M., who
called the suggestion "nuts."

But the connection is not clear, even to scientists. "First we have to make it
clear that none of these hurricanes appear to be directly connected to climate
change," says atmospheric scientist Donald Wuebbles of the University of
Illinois in Urbana. "However, in the long run, based on a number of studies
looking at increasing intensities of hurricanes, there may be a relationship
there."

A United Nations climate panel estimates that average temperatures will rise
from 2 to 10 degrees worldwide by 2100, driven in part by industrial emissions
of "greenhouse" gases.

In addition to indications that the world's oceans are squirreling away more
heat, the engine behind hurricanes, Ekwurzel of the scientists union points to
studies published in the journals Science and Nature that suggest storms last
longer at a higher intensity than they did 30 years ago.

Atlantic storms tough to call

But it's "absurd" to jump from those findings to directly pinning the blame on
global warming for Katrina and Rita, says MIT's Emanuel, who wrote the Nature
paper. Atlantic storms in particular are tough to call, he says, especially
since scientists don't have centuries of hurricane records on which to base
forecasts and analyses.

In the Science report, researchers at Georgia Tech and the National Center for
Atmospheric Research found that the number of category 4 and 5 hurricanes, with
sustained winds of 131 mph and above, almost doubled worldwide in the past 35
years.

Gray, whose Tropical Meteorology Project forecasts how active hurricane seasons
will be, disagrees that human-caused global warming is to blame. If it were,
there would have been more hurricanes in other tropical storm basins, including
the Pacific and Indian oceans, he says.

"The rest of the globe that has 88% of the tropical storms hasn't changed," Gray
says. "If I'm proven wrong, I will jump off the highest peak in Colorado."

Other scientists are more cautious about dismissing the link. "Unfortunately,
the science of climate looks at what happens to the weather over the long term,
and we have got to have a lot of statistics before we can say anything
authoritative," says Wuebbles of the University of Illinois. "But the warning is
there, and we ought to be thinking about the climate because the cost of
inaction is potentially much higher than the cost of taking action now."

The challenge is to continue paying attention to how we live and work along the
nation's coasts, even after the storms are gone, Watkins says. "We can't let
crisis drive us instead of leadership."
---
Contributing: Pat O'Driscoll and Elizabeth Weise





LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Marcy E. Mullins, USA TODAY, Source: National Weather
Service, National Hurricae Center; PHOTO, Color, NASA; PHOTO, B/w, Tony
Giberson, Pensacola News Journal, via AP

TYPE: COVER STORY

                      Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 57 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                             June 7, 2007 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Warming not driving hurricanes; Natural weather patterns to blame, study says

BYLINE: Lewis Smith, Times of London

SECTION: NEWS; Next: Trends - Discoveries - What's New; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 460  words


Hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean are increasing because of natural weather
patterns rather than global warming, a study has concluded.

Growing numbers of hurricanes battering the United States and the Caribbean have
made their presence felt in the past decade and are forecast to worsen. Global
warming has been cited as a possible cause, but researchers looking at sediment
and coral deposits have now identified natural variations in their frequency.

Hurricane Katrina, which devastated New Orleans in 2005, was "unexceptional"
when historic patterns of such stormy weather are analyzed, they suggested.

Global warming may even have been responsible for unusually low levels of
hurricanes in the 25 years before 1995 when the number began rising, according
to the scientists, led by the Geological Survey of Sweden.

Using deposits trapped in sediment to indicate when hurricanes had taken place,
the researchers built up a record detailing the number and frequency going back
270 years.

They found that the decline in hurricanes during the 1970s and 1980s was matched
by similar declines in the past, indicating natural variations in the weather
patterns. "The record indicates that the average frequency of major hurricanes
decreased gradually from the 1760s until the early 1960s, reaching anomalously
low values during the 1970s and 1980s," they reported in the journal Nature.

"Furthermore, the phase of enhanced hurricane activity since 1995 is not unusual
compared to other periods of high hurricane activity and appears to represent a
recovery to normal hurricane activity."

The findings are at variance with the conclusions in February of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the United Nations organization
addressing climate change. The UN panel stopped short of blaming increased
frequency of hurricanes on man-made temperature rises, but said it was "more
likely than not" that man's greenhouse gas emissions had contributed to the
greater intensity of cyclonic storms.

The Swedish-led research team suggested that hurricane levels were normal,
though they accepted "a future possibility" of higher sea temperatures
contributing to more intense hurricanes.

The researchers were unable to identify any direct link between increased
hurricanes and rising sea level temperatures, beyond the requirement for a
minimum temperature of 27 C (81 F) to be reached before a hurricane would
develop.

The researchers from Sweden, the U.S. and Puerto Rico said that being able to
calculate vertical wind shear, the differences in wind speeds at different
heights, was crucial in determining the frequency of hurricanes. Higher wind
shear levels disrupt developing hurricanes; low wind shear levels fail to batter
the storms sufficiently to prevent them developing.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Herald Archive, Bloomberg; Hurricane Wilma hits the Yucatan in
October, 2005. A new study claims global warming may not be responsible for
monster-sized storms. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2007 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 58 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                             June 1, 2006 Thursday

Is the BIG ONE striking this year?

BYLINE: By JACK MINCH , Sun Staff

SECTION: TODAY'S HEADLINES

LENGTH: 840 words


It's been almost 15 years since Hurricane Bob and the remnants of Hurricane
Grace fueled the infamous Perfect Storm on Halloween in 1991.

Some state officials are worried the region is due for another strike.

"With another very active hurricane season predicted, the odds continually
increase that New England may be due for its next major hurricane,"
Massachusetts Emergency Management Director Cristine McCombs said in a statement
yesterday.

Hurricane season starts today and continues through November.

Matt Noyes, a meteorologist for New England Cable News, isn't about to predict a
hurricane will make landfall in New England, but he recognizes the weather
patterns are lining up.

"New England is certainly overdue for a major hurricane strike," he said.

Forecasters at Colorado State University are predicting that 17 storms will form
in the Atlantic basin and grow large enough to merit names this season. Of those
storms, nine are expected to become hurricanes. Another five are expected to
develop into Category 3, 4 or 5 hurricanes, with sustained winds of 110 mph or
more.

The probability of a Category 3, 4 or 5 hurricane striking New England is 12
percent this year. The average during the past 100 years is 4 percent, said Phil
Klotzbach, the lead writer for the Colorado State report.

"It's very high in average, but it's still a 1-in-8 chance," he said.

The odds are higher because more storms are expected, and because weather
conditions could lead the storms to the East Coast, Klotzbach said.

The National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration's National Weather Service has a
similar forecast. It's predicting 13 to 16 named storms, including eight to 10
hurricanes. Of the hurricanes, four to six could be Category 3 or higher, said
Scott Kiser, the Weather Service's hurricane program manager in Silver Spring,
Md.

This year's daunting forecast numbers are nevertheless down from last year, when
27 named storms formed, including 15 hurricanes.

An average season will see 9.6 named storms and 5.9 hurricanes, including 2.3
intense hurricanes.

Major New England hurricanes often cited include the storm of 1938, dubbed the
Long Island Express, the hurricane of September 1944 and the 1954 storms Carol
and Edna. Bob and Grace were not considered major storms in 1991.

Hurricane seasons are cyclical, Klotzbach said.

"The Atlantic tends to go through periods of 25 to 30 years of active seasons,"
he said.

The Atlantic was quiet from 1970 through 1994. Storms have been more frequent
since, and we are now in the middle of the cycle.

Klotzbach grew up in Plymouth and visited UMass Lowell for tennis matches while
attending Bridgewater State College.

He studied hurricane forecasting under William Gray, the pioneer of such
reports, who assisted on this year's prediction.

Hurricanes start as clusters of thunderstorms over warm water, usually off the
coast of Senegal, Kiser said. Low-pressure systems lift the warm air, then more
air rushes into to fill the void and is warmed to repeat the cycle. In
low-pressure systems, the air swirls counter-clockwise, he said.

"The more warm water, the more potential energy you have," Kiser said.

A trough in the jetstream hanging over the Northeast this year will draw storms,
Noyes said.

"The concern is if we continue that trough ... we'll draw the storms up as
well," he said.

Hurricanes are usually weakening by the time they reach New England, but their
forward motion increases, so winds on the right side can be incredibly strong.

When the hurricane of 1938 hit, it had winds as high as 186 mph because it was
moving about 60 mph, according to reports.

Damage from a New England hurricane would depend on where it strikes land, said
UMass Lowell meteorology professor Frank Colby.

"A lot of times ... the storms that come ashore, the rains get wrapped on the
left side of the storm and the wind on the right side," he said.

Fast-moving storms kick up higher tidal surges, so those along the coastline
would have to worry about flooding, Kiser said.

It's important to be prepared for a storm, Kiser and Noyes said. No one expected
Florida to get four hurricanes in 2004 or two cataclysmic storms to hit the
country last year, Kiser noted.

Households should keep storm kits for hurricanes and Nor'easters, he said.

Kits should include food that doesn't need to be heated, water, flashlights,
portable radio, batteries, first-aid kits, an evacuation plan, and a plan on
where to keep pets.

"These types of things are good when we have a Nor'easter and you're marooned in
your house," Kiser said.

Lowell has plans in place to deal with hurricanes, focusing on its response to
flooding and wind damage, said Fire Chief William Desrosiers, the city's
emergency-management director.

Klotzbach said he does not believe the increase in storms is related to global
warming. While storms in the Atlantic basin have increased, hurricanes in the
eastern Pacific basin have decreased.

"If you add those two basins together, there's very little trend," Klotzbach
said.

Jack Minch's e-mail address is jminch@lowellsun.com .

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The ocean lashes the coastline at Woods Hole on Cape Cod during the
hurricane of 1938. The storm took 600 lives and caused more than $300 million in
damage.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 59 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            October 30, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

FROM ITS FIRST STIRRINGS, WILMA MEANT TROUBLE

BYLINE: By ROBERT P. KING Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1854 words


Lixion Avila had trouble believing what he was hearing.

It was early on the morning of Wednesday, Oct. 19, and an Air Force Reserve crew
was piloting a C-130 transport plane into the turbulent air south of the Cayman
Islands, plunging into a hurricane called Wilma.

A day earlier, Wilma was a humble tropical storm. By Tuesday night, it had
exploded into a 155-mile-wide spiral of fierce winds, icy cloud tops and what
forecasters called "the dreaded pinhole eye" - a narrow core indicating an
emerging monster.

The hurricane hunters found sustained winds raging at 175 mph, placing Wilma
well above the threshold for the elite rank of Category 5 storms. But that
wasn't the most shocking news.

This was: Wilma's central air pressure had plunged to 882 millibars.

882 millibars.

To most people, this is a meaningless number. To a trained weather watcher such
as Avila, receiving the dispatches at the National Hurricane Center near Miami,
it was history in the making.

The pressure is a measure of a hurricane's intensity, the vacuum formed as the
winds roar toward the eye and corkscrew up toward the stratosphere. The lower
the number, the fiercer the storm.

Never had anyone seen the pressure so low inside an Atlantic hurricane - lower
even than the record Hurricane Gilbert had set as it sliced toward Mexico in
1988. Translation: Wilma was now the most powerful Atlantic storm of all time.

"First of all, I could not believe it," said Avila, a veteran hurricane
specialist, who suspected at first that the readings might be mistaken. "Nobody
in their right mind would have expected this drop in pressure."

Even worse for Floridians, the hurricane center already had predicted a
boomerang-shaped path for Wilma. It was coming our way.

Aside from Wilma's record-breaking plunge, little about the hurricane should
have taken people by surprise.

Hurricane center meteorologists had been watching for its possible birth as far
back as Oct. 5, eyeing a mass of thunderstorms and disturbed air that lingered
in the southwestern Caribbean after Hurricane Stan swept into Mexico.

By Oct. 14, even amateur weather-watchers were speculating about the threat to
Florida from the festering cloud swirl southwest of Jamaica. A day later, Avila
issued the first official advisory for Tropical Depression 24.

On Oct. 18, the center predicted that the depression - by now, Tropical Storm
Wilma - would become a hurricane slicing across southwest Florida to Palm Beach
County.

Six days later, on Monday, Wilma did just that.

By then, Wilma's pinhole eye had widened to a 75-mile-wide maw that subjected
most of South Florida to its vicious eye wall.

When it was over, an estimated 14 people were dead in Florida, plus at least 20
in Mexico, Haiti and Jamaica. The Mexican tourist havens of Cozumel and Cancun
were in tatters. Across South Florida, 6 million households and businesses were
without power, some until perhaps Thanksgiving. Shortages of fuel and even water
broke out.

"We always thought it could be a dangerous hurricane," Avila said, adding that
Wilma's eventual curve toward the northeast "is the typical track for October."

Wilma probably will rank among the 10 most economically devastating U.S.
hurricanes, said Stephen Leatherman, director of the International Hurricane
Research Center at Florida International University in Miami.

"I think we'll remember it as the power outage hurricane," he said. "We're not
quite back to the Stone Age, but we're pretty close."

Wilma followed the grim tradition of October storms, spawning in the
southwestern Caribbean before menacing Mexico, Central America and South
Florida.

Hurricane Isbell followed a similar path in 1964, striking southwest Florida and
exiting the state near Juno Beach. Hurricane Mitch killed 9,000 people in
Central America in late October 1998 before pummeling Palm Beach County and the
Treasure Coast as a tropical storm in November. In October 1999, Hurricane Irene
brought South Florida another drenching.

Wilma, Mitch and 1961's Hurricane Hattie were the Atlantic basin's only three
October storms to reach Category 5 strength since at least 1851, according to
federal records. Hattie destroyed much of Belize City, forcing that nation's
government to move to a new capital.

In Wilma's case, "it was in the right place for October," Avila said.

'This was a giant'

Among the ingredients for Wilma: The southwestern Caribbean still had lots of
the bath-warm water that supplies hurricanes with high-octane fuel. Air currents
that could shear hurricanes apart were weak. Eastward-blowing winds were
creeping south into the Gulf of Mexico, ready to turn any approaching storm into
a threat to Florida.

The only missing ingredient was the hurricane itself. The disturbed air in
Stan's wake filled that gap.

"We were monitoring that system for days and days and days," Avila said. He
added that early in his career, meteorology old-timers - veterans of the busy
1940s and '50s - had warned him to watch out for such lingering, late-season
disturbances.

"They kept telling me you have to have patience," Avila said. "Systems in the
Caribbean in October take a long time to develop."

By Oct. 12, photos from weather satellites were showing an increasingly
organized cloud mass south of Jamaica. Two days later, weather enthusiasts were
buzzing about it on Web sites such as Storm2K.org, saying the system looked like
a potential threat to Florida.

"What are the chances of a Hurricane Irene-type track?" asked Storm2K weather
-watcher Christy, who identified herself as a pharmacy technician in Homestead.

At 5 p.m. Saturday, Oct. 15, Avila issued the official word that Tropical
Depression 24 was born. "All indications are that there could be a dangerous
hurricane in the northwestern Caribbean Sea in the next 3 to 5 days," he wrote.

Within two days the depression was Tropical Storm Wilma, the 21st of the
Atlantic hurricane season, tying a record set in 1933. Soon came the forecast
placing Palm Beach County in the bull's-eye, and Wilma's surge into the record
books.

Wilma didn't stay at Category 5 for long - few hurricanes can. But its power was
bad news.

"Oh, my," said FIU's Leatherman, recalling his reaction. "This was a giant that
couldn't be killed."

The hurricane center stuck close to its path prediction for Wilma, even as its
computer forecasting models wobbled between the Keys and Tampa Bay. Still,
predicting when a hurricane will curve is tricky, and federal meteorologists
admit they have little skill in forecasting a hurricane's strength.

The big X-factor was the Yucatan Peninsula. Would Wilma slip past it, as the
early forecasts predicted, retaining monster strength as it hit Florida? Or
would it expend its fury over the Yucatan, emerging as a weakling in the Gulf of
Mexico?

Both Florida and the Yucatan lost.

Wilma pounded Cozumel and the Yucatan's mainland for two days, forcing tourists
to flee, shoving 70,000 people into shelters and leaving 300,000 homeless,
according to U.S. government estimates. The storm submerged beaches, tore open
downtown banks, left cars up to their roofs in water and flattened
wood-and-tar-paper houses.

"Cars are floating by!" one blogger wrote from the scene.

Wilma's outer bands also whipped western Cuba and flooded roads and
neighborhoods in Havana, according to BBC News.

Some fail to heed warnings

Then it was Florida's turn. Wilma left the Yucatan as a weaker but dangerous
Category 2 storm and prepared to cross the Gulf of Mexico's Loop Current, the
same ribbon of warm water that fueled Katrina to catastrophic strength in
August.

Hurricane center forecasters predicted Wilma would strengthen over the current,
then weaken amid hostile winds closer to Florida. If that happened, Florida's
east coast might face no more than a Category 1 hurricane.

Still, hurricane center Director Max Mayfield urged Floridians to prepare for "a
very significant hurricane," and emergency managers echoed the advice. As it
turned out, Wilma arrived in Florida as a major Category 3 storm.

Some people heeded the warnings. But many Keys residents refused to evacuate,
and a fair number of South Florida home and business owners did not board up.
Two days before landfall, piano music still played on the veranda of The
Breakers in Palm Beach. In West Palm Beach, one Winn-Dixie supermarket had
plenty of water on the shelves and few shoppers Sunday morning.

Then came Wilma's blustery pre-dawn arrival, the explosive winds in the morning,
the overcast calm of the eye and the final, sucker-punch blast of the
hurricane's back end. Wilma roared off into the Atlantic and into history.

History is something forecasters remember, but they can't always take much
pleasure in it.

"Let's put it this way," Avila said. "I wish it could have happened in the
middle of the ocean."

bob_king@pbpost.com

Hurricane Wilma: From minor winds to record-setting storm

Oct. 12

EARLY SIGNS

A mass of disturbed air - left behind by Hurricane Stan - shows signs of
coalescing southwest of Jamaica.

Oct. 15: TROPICAL DEPRESSION 24

Tropical Depression 24 is named at 5 p.m. National Hurricane Center warns it
could become `a very intense hurricane.'

Oct. 18: TARGET: FLORIDA

The hurricane center's five-day forecast track predicts Wilma will strike Palm
Beach County on Oct. 23.

At this point, Wilma is still a stationary tropical storm southwest of Jamaica.

Oct. 19

STRONGEST HURRICANE ON RECORD

Approaching the Yucatan, Wilma becomes the strongest hurricane ever seen in the
Atlantic basin, with an all-time-low pressure of 882 millibars. It's a Category
5 storm with 175 mph winds.

Oct. 21-22: WILMA POUNDS YUCATAN

Wilma rips the island of Cozumel and the resort-lined Yucatan Peninsula,
including Cancun.

The hurricane kills at least seven people in Mexico, plus a total of 13 in Haiti
and Jamaica.

Monday

FLORIDA LANDFALL

After weakening over the Yucatan, Wilma regains strength over the Gulf of
Mexico's warm Loop Current.

It's a Category 3 hurricane with winds near 125 mph when it lands about 6:30
a.m. near Cape Romano in southwest Florida.

It hits southeast Florida as a Category 2 storm with 105 mph winds.

The eye exits the east coast near Hobe Sound around 11 a.m.

What made Wilma different

Fast forward speed: When Wilma hit Florida, it was moving at nearly 23 mph.

A back end with as much power as the front end:

Palm Beach International Airport recorded 100 mph gusts more than 2 hours apart
- an almost unheard-of gap between maximum winds.

Large eye: As wide as 75 miles over Florida. All of Palm Beach County felt the
eye.

The 21st named storm: Ties the record set for most storms in an Atlantic
hurricane season set in 1933. (Tropical Storm Alpha broke the record Oct. 22.)

October hurricanes 1944-2005

The southwestern Caribbean has a history of spawning October hurricanes that
threatened South Florida from the west.

They include:

Isbell, which crossed from the western Everglades to Jupiter and Juno Beach in
1964.

Mitch, which formed in October 1998, weakened to a tropical storm before hitting
Florida.

Irene, which drenched the region in 1999.

Michelle, which missed Florida as it crossed Cuba in 2001.

Text by BOB KING/Staff Writer

Sources: NOAA; NASA; file graphics; staff research

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  MAKING HISTORY Ran all editions. Info box at end of text.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC (B&W)
    CHRISTOPHER SMITH/Staff Artist Hurricane Wilma

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2005 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 60 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 irishmirror.ie

                      August 17, 2017 Thursday 7:20 AM GMT

Everything you need to know about Hurricane Gert and when it will hit Ireland;
Hurricane Gert is brewing up something fierce ahead of her arrival on Irish
shores at the weekend

BYLINE: By Anita McSorley

SECTION: NEWS,IRISH NEWS; Version:2

LENGTH: 341 words


The Irish summer has been a bit of a wash out - and things are set to get even
worse as a HURRICANE is about to sweep across the country.

Hurricane Gert is brewing up something fierce ahead of her arrival on Irish
shores at the weekend.

But the Met Office says hurricanes aren't actually all that unusual towards the
end of summer,Get Surrey reported.

Irish weather: Hurricane Gert to bring thundershowers and misery to Ireland
after threatening lives in America

In fact, last year, the UK was lashed by Hurricane Gaston, while in 2015 it was
Hurricane Kate. And let's not forget Hurricane Bertha a year before that.

Gert will be in Ireland over Saturday and Sunday (August 19-20) so here's
everything you need to know about the next significant Irish weather event on
the way.

Met Office meteorologist Clare Nasir said: "This time of year, mid summer to
autumn time, occasionally we see the odd hurricane modified by the cool waters
of the north Atlantic that slowly move up."

She added the hurricane will become a "typical depression" by the time the cool
water has moved across to western Europe.

Hurricane Gert is currently a category one storm and is the north Atlantic's
second hurricane this year.

At the moment, Gert is travelling eastwards, parallel to the USA coast.

However, by today (August 17), she will be touring the east side of Canada,
where she is upgraded to an "ex hurricane".

Ms Nasir continued: "By the time it gets to the mid-Atlantic, it becomes a
typical mid-Atlantic depression, so a deep area of low pressure."

Gert will cross the waters to the Irish coast on Friday (August 18) and will
arrive fully by "the latter part of the weekend and into next week".

In short, this means a lot of wet and windy weather is on the way.

"Currently we are expecting some wet and windy weather, some heavy rain from
time to time, particularly in the northern half of the UK," it is added.

While there is a small chance of some "fine and warm weather", unsurprisingly,
it is more likely to be "heavy rain and perhaps strong winds".

Today's top stories

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBMGNIRIS


                      Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 61 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              May 10, 1999, Monday

Hurricane safety taught at expo

BYLINE: JORGE SANCHEZ

SECTION: CITRUS TIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 420 words



Weather experts tell residents not to hesitate and to heed the warnings and to
be prepared to evacuate early.

With another active hurricane season predicted, area residents were told at a
hurricane and disaster expo to make plans early to deal with Florida's seasonal
catastrophic weather.

At Saturday's expo held at the Crystal River Mall, residents got a chance to
view what is available this year in terms of shutters, marine products and home
and property insurance.

They also heard from two weather experts: the director of the fleet of hurricane
hunter airplanes that fly directly into a hurricane and a local television
meteorologist.

Capt. Don Winter, director of aircraft operations for the National Oceanographic
and Atmospheric Administration at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, spoke to the
audience about his experience with hurricanes. Last season, he toured Puerto
Rico and  Honduras after Hurricane Mitch struck. Winter said as many as 11,000
people drowned from fresh water storm surge. Winter said many of the victims
were children playing near fast-moving water who were toppled and then swept
underneath. He said a foot of fast-moving water is enough to knock a person down
and 16 inches of water will make a car float away.

Winter gave the typical hurricane preparation information: Be aware of any
storms by monitoring the weather reports, make preparations to evacuate early
and be prepared - without hesitation - to take action.

Winter also said the hurricane forecasting techniques had improved greatly over
the past two years, with the addition of new airplanes and equipment to the NOAA
fleet.

"In the past two years, we've improved track forecasting by 22 to 25 percent,"
Winter said.

The crowd also heard from Dick Fletcher, meteorologist at WTSP-Ch.10 in  St.
Petersburg. He reiterated that most people are good at making storm plans but
tend to hesitate when it comes time for action.

"Nothing works unless you listen and do what local emergency managers tell you
to do," Fletcher said. "If they tell you to evacuate, then that's what you have
to do."

Hurricane season runs from June 1 through Nov. 30, and hurricane forecaster
William Gray at Colorado State University, who makes the annual predictions for
the National Hurricane Center, predicts 14 named storms. He also predicts nine
will develop into hurricanes with four of them becoming major to severe
hurricanes. The forecast is similar to last season, with 14 storms developing
into 10 named hurricanes.


LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITRUS TIMES

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, JORGE SANCHEZ; Journeyman lineman Jim Fowler of the
Withlacoochee River Electric Cooperative demonstrates the power of a 7,000-volt
power line Saturday at the hurricane and disaster expo at Crystal River Mall.
The simulation of a downed power line shows the arc that reaches a temperature
of 10,000 degrees.

                    Copyright 1999 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 62 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Victoria Advocate (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 26, 2010 Wednesday

Texas has long hurricane history

BYLINE: David Tewes, Victoria Advocate, Texas

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 384 words


May 26--The Texas Coast has been hit by 63 hurricanes since the National Weather
Service began keeping records in 1851.

That's an average of one every three years and a map showing where they made
landfall shows no real pattern. Every part of the Texas coast is equally
vulnerable.

The Weather Research Center in Houston notes that some records of hurricane
strikes go as far back as 1527. Explorer Alvez Nunez reported being cast ashore
in November of that year on an island called Malhado.

It's possible that island is what is now called Galveston.

The last hurricane to strike the Crossroads was Hurricane Claudette, a strong
Category 2 hurricane with sustained winds of 95 mph. There was one death and it
was in Victoria County.

Before that it was Category 4 Hurricane Carla, which slammed ashore at Port
O'Connor with sustained winds of 150 mph.

Hurricane Beulah, which moved ashore along the lower Texas Coast, spawned a
record 115 tornadoes.

The National Weather Service began naming hurricanes after women in the 1950s
and it added men's names in the 1970s.

Notable storms that struck the Texas coast include:

The Category 4 1875 storm that struck Indianola, killing 176 people. The Weather
Research Center reports that three-fourths of the town was swept away by the
storm surge.

Indianola was destroyed in an 1886 hurricane estimated to be a Category 4 or
Category 5 hurricane. Not a house remained undamaged and many were washed or
scattered inland over the plains.

In 1945, a Category 3 hurricane hit the Middle Texas Coast. Tides reached 15
feet at Port Lavaca and a large amount of salt water came over a 19-foot bluff.

An unnamed hurricane moved inland at Galveston in 1900, producing a 14.5-foot
tide. At least 6,000 of the 38,000 people living on Galveston were killed.

A 1919 hurricane moved inland near Corpus Christi, where the tide reach 16 feet.
The storm killed 300-600 people

To see more of Victoria Advocate, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.thevictoriaadvocate.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Victoria Advocate, Texas
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100526-VI-Texas-has-long-hurricane-history-0526

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VI


                        Copyright 2010 Victoria Advocate


                          FOCUS - 63 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           The Orange Leader (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           January 28, 2010 Thursday

Hurricane Ike claims total $12 billion in Texas

BYLINE: The Orange Leader, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 706 words


Jan. 28--Hurricane Ike's devastating storm surge and 110 mile per hour winds
made it by far the costliest weather catastrophe in Texas history. Total
windstorm claims in Texas according to ISO totaled $9.8 billion. The National
Flood Insurance Program said Texans filed nearly 44,000 flood claims from
Hurricane Ike costing $2.175 billion, placing the storm's total insured losses
just under the $12 billion mark.

"Hurricane Ike took the same path as Galveston's 1900 storm that claimed more
than 6,000 lives," said Mark Hanna, a spokesman for the Insurance Council of
Texas. "Thankfully, coastal residents had been adequately warned for Hurricane
Ike, but few were prepared for Ike's destructive storm surge. Many residents who
lost everything did not have flood insurance."

Hurricane Ike struck Galveston on September 13, 2008. The hurricane's 16 foot
storm surge destroyed homes and businesses on Bolivar Peninsula as well as
communities surrounding Galveston Bay and all along the shoreline and inland
from Orange down to Freeport. More than half of Galveston Island was submerged
from the rising water. Fortunately, most of the area's coastal residents heeded
evacuation orders after the National Weather Service (NWS) issued a warning
saying people living in one or two story homes along the coast would face
certain death. The NWS said Hurricane Ike was directly attributable to 20
deaths, most of them from drowning.

The Texas Department of Insurance reported Texans filed more than 800,000
windstorm claims from Hurricane Ike, including claims from Texas Windstorm
Insurance Association (TWIA) policy holders. Sixteen months after the storm,
TWIA is still receiving damage claims from the hurricane. TWIA is eventually
expected to pay out $1.8 billion in Ike claims.

Texas wasn't the only state heavily damaged by Hurricane Ike. After blowing
through Texas, the remnants of Ike reignited over the Midwest. Louisiana
reported $318 million in flood losses, while ten other states reported flood
losses amounting to $137 million. Hurricane-force winds in Ohio created insured
losses in excess of $1 billion making it the costliest weather catastrophe in
that state.

Prior to Hurricane Ike, Tropical Storm Allison had been the Texas' costliest
weather catastrophe. Allison caused $3.5 billion in insured losses, when it
dumped more than two feet of rain on the city of Houston on June 8, 2001.
Hurricane Rita, which made landfall about 60 miles up the coastline on September
24, 2005, caused $2.8 billion in insured losses in Texas and a similar dollar
loss in Louisiana.

The volume of claims that poured in from Hurricane Ike was compounded by
Hurricane Dolly that struck South Padre Island six weeks earlier causing wind
and flood losses of $500 million. Only one insurance company was unable to meet
the financial demands from the 2008 hurricane claims and its insolvency was not
totally attributable to the storms.

TWIA remained solvent by using all of its $470 million Catastrophe Reserve Trust
Fund, $1.5 billion in reinsurance and assessing insurance companies $530 million
to pay all of the hurricane claims.

"These two storms within seven weeks of each other cost TWIA all of the written
premiums ($1.825 billion) it had received from coastal policyholders dating back
to its inception in 1971," said Hanna. "We can only hope that the next hurricane
to make landfall in Texas is many years from now."

Out of 800,000 Hurricane Ike claims, Texans filed 2,683 justified complaints
with the Texas Department of Insurance giving insurers a complaint ratio of .33
percent.

The Insurance Council of Texas is the largest state insurance trade association
in the country consisting of more than 500 property and casualty insurers
writing business in Texas. For more information turn to ICT's Web site at
www.insurancecouncil.org.

To see more of The Orange Leader or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.orangeleader.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Orange Leader, Texas
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100128-XY-Hurricane-Ike-claims-total-12-billion-in-Texas-0128

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: XY


                                 Copyright 2010


                          FOCUS - 64 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                      October 6, 2015 Tuesday 12:10 PM GMT

London weather: Strongest hurricane in five years is due to hit Britain

BYLINE: HANNAH AL-OTHMAN

SECTION: LONDON

LENGTH: 428 words


The strongest hurricane in five years is due to hit Britain next week,
asHurricane Joaquin crosses the Atlantic Ocean.

The Met Office has saidthe 800-mile wide hurricane- the strongest Atlantic
hurricane since Hurricane Igor in 2010 - is "increasingly" likely to impact
Britain around Friday, with"severe gales" and heavy rain forecast for the north
and north west, and the south of England also at risk.

A Met Office spokespersonsaid: "There is an increasing risk later in the week of
gales or possibly severe gales across the West and North.

"Joaquin is the strongest Atlantic hurricane in terms of central pressure since
Hurricane Igor in 2010."

The Weather Network: Hurricane Joaquin remnants heading towards the UK?

The first storms are due to hit tonight, and willbringgales of 50mph in the
south-west and heavy rain on Monday across the UK.

Met Office forecaster Laura Young said: "Low pressure arrives on Sunday evening
in the South-West with potential gale-force winds, and another system arrives on
Tuesday. It will feel autumnal, with wet and windy weather."

Government forecasters have warned of potential disruption on the roads, as well
as possible falling tree branches andferry cancellations.

Read more

Hurricane Gonzalo: Tail end of tropical storm 'to hit Britain on

British couple missing off Mexican coast after deadly Hurricane Odile

London weather: heavy showers to continue as ex-hurricane Bertha

Forecasters: More downpours on the way, and there could be thunder too

Met Office warns of thunder, lightning and torrential rain

Hurricane Joaquin is due to career across the Atlantic and be within 400 miles
of Ireland's coast - on course for Britain - by Thursday night, the US
Government's National Hurricane Center hassaid.

Today President Obamadeclared a state of emergency in South Carolina over heavy
flooding, triggered by heavy rainfall following Hurricane Joaquin.

The hurricane has alsoleft 33 sailors missing at sea off the US coast.

Met Office forecaster Marco Petagna added: "The Joaquin system looks like
tracking towards the northwest of the UK, although there is uncertainty.

"Winds speeds in the northwest are shown as picking up on Thursday, with the
strongest winds in the north and west but a windy spell certainly possible
further south.

"Gales could be enough to bring branches down and potentially impact roads near
exposed coasts and shipping."

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2015 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 65 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                           October 6, 2004 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Forecasters: Not over til its over

BYLINE: DINAH VOYLES PULVER - ENVIRONMENT WRITER

SECTION: SECTION A; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 774  words


For 38 crazy days, tropical weather alerts were issued at a frantic pace in
Florida. No sweeter words could appear to weary Floridians than the phrase on
the National Hurricane Centers Web site: There are no tropical cyclones at this
time. Residents of the newly dubbed plywood state could finally take a deep,
hopeful breath. Now weather experts are deluged with just one question: Will
there be any more hurricanes this fall? Probably, but whether theyll hit Florida
is anybodys guess.

Even though were weary of hurricanes, theyre still possible, said Frank C.
Lepore, spokesman for the National Hurricane Center. October is the third
busiest month in the six-month season that runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, Lepore
said. Hurricane Opal, for example, pounded the Panhandle on Oct. 4, 1995. But
the chances are certainly less. September is the busiest month and August is
second. Last year, two tropical storms formed in early December, Lepore said,
the week after hurricane season ended. The potential for more storms is
certainly out there, said David Zierden, assistant state climatologist at
Florida State University. Professional opinion is mixed on whether an El Nino
cycle of warm currents is really forming in the Pacific and whether it could
influence Floridas weather, he said. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration announced that a very weak El Nino had formed last month. But
Zierden said Monday that his boss at the state climate center, James OBrien,
doesnt consider the weather pattern in the Pacific strong enough to be a real El
Nino. Conventional theory holds that a developing El Nino greatly curtails the
formation of hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean, he said. But, the eight named
storms in August set a record for the month. If there is a weak El Nino out
there or developing, it certainly hasnt had any impact on the hurricanes and its
certainly not going to cut the hurricanes off for the rest of the year either,
Zierden said. While the El Nino, if it forms, might limit hurricane activity, it
also would usher in a wet winter for the Southeast, he said. That would not be
good news for us. The Farmers Almanac, which predicted five storms would hit
Florida in August and September, is predicting a warm, wet winter. The Almanac
was right on the number of hurricanes but wrong on the intensity, calling for
two hurricanes and three tropical disturbances, managing editor Sandi Duncan
said. The old-timers standby did not predict any hurricanes or tropical storms
for Florida in October. Noted hurricane forecaster Dr. William Gray, a professor
of atmospheric science at Colorado State University, updated his seasonal
outlook this week and forecast three named storms in October, with two
hurricanes but not major ones. Experts believe the Atlantic is in a cycle of
hurricane hyperactivity that started in the mid-1990s. Thats when conditions
became favorable for hurricanes to maintain their intensity longer and to track
toward Florida more often, said James Elsner, professor of geography at Florida
State University. In October, the area where hurricanes typically form shifts
west to between Florida and Bermuda and to the northwestern Caribbean, said
Chris Landsea, a research scientist with the Atlantic Oceanographic and
Meteorological Laboratory of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.

We can have strong hurricanes in October and if they form in the northwest
Caribbean, Florida is often at risk, Landsea said. Who knows if well have one
this year but thats a distinct possibility.

We know when you have an active two-thirds of the season, the last third isnt
going toright away, he said. I would be very surprised if we didnt have any more
hurricanes, somewhere out there. The experts admit forecasting is far from an
exact science.

Its almost just throw a dart at a dart board, said Chuck Watson, director of
research and development for Kinetic Analysis Corporation in Savannah, Ga. On
Monday, Watson computed the statistical chances of a hurricane striking a
certain area this fall. Daytona Beach has a 2.83 percent chance of a storm,
while Melbourne has a 1.17 percent chance, Tampa, 1.80 and Miami, 3.41.

The problem is we dont know exactly what the conditions are in the Atlantic,
Watson said. There are so many unknowns.Deadly October StormsA look at some of
the major hurricanes of October, listed by the numbers of deaths associated with
each storm:275 DEATHS: Hurricane Hattie, Belize, 1961180 DEATHS: Hurricane
Isabel, Puerto Rico, 198559 DEATHS: Hurricane Opal, Pensacola Beach, 19958
DEATHS: Hurricane Lili, Bahamas and Central America, 1996SOURCE: National
Hurricane Center

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Caption: Forecasting and predicting hurricanes, despite the
technological advances, is still an inexact science. Richard Theokas, flight
director at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach, gives a
briefing in front of a live satellite feed of Hurricane Frances on Sept. 1. The
briefing for staff and students took place at ERAUs new weather
center.News-Journal/ JIM TILLER

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2004 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2004 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 66 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           December 24, 2005 Saturday
                                 SOONER EDITION

CONGRESS FUNDS BETTER HURRICANE MONITORING EQUIPMENT

BYLINE: Debbie Cenziper, The Miami Herald

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A-12

LENGTH: 860 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


When deadly storms threaten, forecasters at the National Hurricane Center will
get the chance to fly their most sophisticated hurricane hunter planes on
missions rarely flown before.

They'll get essential information from new buoys installed in waters that have
long gone unmonitored, and from upgraded ground sensors that for years have died
in strong winds.

The equipment was promised by Congress late Thursday, which approved a White
House proposal of more than $25 million in emergency spending to improve the
nation's storm-warning system.

The money for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which
oversees the Hurricane Center in West Miami-Dade, comes as hurricanes are
striking at a deadly pace -- with nine of the past 11 years posting above-normal
hurricane seasons.

NOAA officials were unable to say when the equipment would be installed, but
said it was a top priority.

"I'm glad the Senate heard our call for new equipment for NOAA," said Sen. Bill
Nelson, D-Fla. "In Florida and elsewhere, the agency literally is a lifesaver."

Mr. Nelson and other members of Congress vowed to push for the improvements
after a Miami Herald series in October revealed chronic lapses in weather
-observing equipment and research that for years have compromised hurricane
forecasts.

The stories detailed how buoys, weather balloons, radars, ground sensors,
dropwindsondes and planes -- crucial tools to forecasters -- have been
unavailable or broken during nearly half of the 45 hurricanes that struck land
since Hurricane Andrew in 1992.

Issues raised in the series, Blind Eye, immediately sparked discussions in the
Senate Appropriations Committee and the House Science Committee. In late
October, the White House proposed improvements that addressed many of the gaps,
including:

* An earmark of $9 million for a third WP-3D Orion, the nation's most advanced
hurricane hunter plane.

With three radars and breakthrough equipment to measure hurricane wind speeds,
the planes are better equipped than those flown by the Air Force Reserve for
hurricane reconnaissance.

But NOAA has diverted the planes in at least three prior hurricane seasons for
unrelated research missions, including an air quality study in New Hampshire as
Hurricane Charley bore down on Florida in 2004.

The extra plane also will offer forecasters more options, including sending one
plane into the predicted path of a hurricane while the other is in the storm.

That way, forecasters will know what's coming -- namely, the heat content of the
water below -- so they can make better predictions. Heat fuels hurricanes; the
data will be fed into the computer models to help improve intensity forecasts.

* A redesign of the dropwindsonde, crucial data-gathering sensors released from
hurricane hunter planes. Researchers and engineers have urged NOAA for years to
fix the devices, which have failed as much as half the time in strong winds
before reaching a hurricane's surface.

* Eight new buoys in the Atlantic to collect data about wave height and wind
speed.

* Backup power on ground-based weather sensors that measure wind speed and
rainfall and help forecasters plot the path of hurricanes on land. The sensors
have often shut down in high winds, creating blind spots as scientists try to
assess the strength of storms.

The sensors, mostly located at airports, died more than 60 times in Florida
alone during the 2004 hurricanes, the Herald found. During Hurricane Wilma in
October -- one of the most destructive storms to hit South Florida in years --
11 of about 17 sensors in the region malfunctioned, leaving some areas with
little or no information about the strength of Wilma's winds.

Now, 200 sensors in hurricane-prone communities, including all of the sensors in
Florida, will get backup power to keep the devices running in storms.

* New equipment for hurricane hunter planes.

* More than $1 million to advance the "next generation hurricane prediction"
system -- a state-of-the-art computer model that's expected to bring widespread
improvements to forecasting.

The upgrades were part of a $30 billion spending package, approved by Congress,
for hurricane relief in the Gulf Coast. The package was tacked onto the 2006
defense spending bill, which President Bush is expected to sign next week.

Most of the hurricane money will pay for assistance and rebuilding, including
$55 million for NOAA, of which close to half will pay for the new or upgraded
forecasting equipment.

It's unclear how much of the equipment will be in place for the 2006 season;
buoys, for example, can take about a year to deliver.

Despite the new money, several critical gaps remain.

Still unfunded: a second Gulfstream jet, which flies in the environment around a
storm to track steering currents, improving hurricane track predictions by as
much as 25 percent. Forecasters say a second jet is needed for back-to-back
missions.

Also excluded from the proposals is emergency money for Miami's Hurricane
Research Division, where scientists say they face a projected $800,000 shortfall
for 2006. The scientists partner with the Hurricane Center during storms and
have pioneered breakthroughs to advance hurricane forecasting.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jacqueline Larma/Associated Press: Brennan Waguespack, left, and
Remy Roper build a small bonfire pyre on the Mississippi River in Lutcher, La.,
Wednesday. The tradition of burning dozens of massive bonfires, believed by
local children to illuminate the river so Papa Noel, the south Louisiana Santa
Claus, can find their homes, will take place Christmas Eve despite Hurricane
Katrina's impact in the area.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.


                          FOCUS - 67 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                          September 12, 2013 Thursday

Hurricanes bypass;
Experts cite luck, geography for storms skirting region since 1921

BYLINE: RAY REYES; Tribune staff

SECTION: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1326 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



HIGHLIGHT: Sept. 10 is the statistical peak of tropical cyclone formation during
this year's hurricane season. And we're right in the middle of peak hurricane
season. Yet it does not look like Tampa is in any danger of getting hit by a
major hurricane. We take a look at the reasons why a major storm has not struck
the city since 1921.


Bay area for 92 years

- The statistical peak of hurricane season came and went this week and, just
like it's done for the past 92 years, Tampa dodged a direct hit from a major
storm.

Some scientists attribute the remarkably low frequency of hurricane strikes to
blind luck. Others credit Tampa's location on the Central Gulf Coast as the main
factor why devastating storms seem to skirt by.

Whatever the reason, maps from the National Hurricane Center showing where
hurricanes have made land

fall in the past 60 years reveal a striking pattern: while long stretches of
South Florida and the Gulf Coast are dotted with stricken areas, the Tampa area
remains virtually unblemished.

Looking back on the frequency of hurricanes in the last 150 years, Tampa has
been extremely lucky, said William H. Gray, the former director of the National
Hurricane Center in Miami and the founder of the Tropical Meteorology Project at
Colorado State University.

A major hurricane has not hit Tampa since 1921, decades before the National
Weather Service started naming storms. In 1944, Brandon and eastern Hillsborough
County caught a glancing blow from a no-name, Category 1 hurricane. Two years
later, another weak, no-name hurricane trekked across Pinellas County.

And in 2004, one of the busiest storms seasons for Florida in recent memory,
Hurricane Jeanne, a slow-moving Category 1 hurricane, passed through Pasco
County and doused the entire state with inches of rain over a period of several
days.

A colleague of Gray's said geography plays a big role in the streak.

Some of the reasons why Tampa Bay tends to avoid major hurricane landfalls is
due to its geographic location, said Phil Klotzbach, a meteorology professor at
CSU. Storms have to hit Tampa Bay from the south and west to cause significant
damage. Tracks of tropical cyclones have to be somewhat unusual to hit the area.

Gray said a storm that formed in the Atlantic Ocean has to enter the Caribbean
Sea, then take a sharp turn north around the Florida Straits to make a beeline
toward Tampa.

Those kinds of tracks are not very frequent, Gray said.

Dennis Feltgen, spokesman for the National Hurricane Center, said the Tampa area
is statistically overdue for a Category 3 or stronger storm. Predicting how
often an area will get struck or when a city overdue for a major storm will get
hit is total guesswork, though, he said.

That kind of long-range science doesn't exist, Feltgen said. Hurricanes are
influenced by the weather patterns at the time.

Predictions of the number of named storms in a given season sometimes aren't all
that accurate, either. Before this year's storm season began June 1, the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecast above normal activity
with 13 to 20 named storms, seven to 11 hurricanes and three to six major
hurricanes of category 3 or higher.

Sept. 10 is the statistical peak of hurricane season each year, but only seven
named storms have formed so far this year. The first hurricane of the year -
Humberto - formed at 5 a.m. Wednesday, one of the latest times on record that
the first hurricane of the season has formed.

Humberto is not expected to threaten land.

Daniel Noah of the National Weather Service said Tampa's best chance of a
hurricane is in the fall, when cold fronts from Canada pushing south toward the
Gulf of Mexico could steer a hurricane toward Tampa. If a hurricane was
fish-hooking north from the Florida Straits while a cold blast headed toward the
Gulf, the front would force the storm to veer west toward Texas or take a sharp
turn north toward Florida's west coast.

Hurricanes are like leaves on a fast-moving river, Noah said. Don't let your
guard down yet.

And Gray noted Tampa wouldn't have to take a direct hit to suffer damage. A
hurricane churning just off the coast could create huge damage from storm surge.

That will drive all the water into Tampa Bay, Gray said. It would be a hell of a
mess.

rreyes@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7920

Twitter:@TBORay

HURRICANES, Page 9

- The statistical peak of hurricane season came and went this week and, just
like it's done for the past 92 years, Tampa dodged a direct hit from a major
storm.

Some scientists attribute the remarkably low frequency of hurricane strikes to
blind luck. Others credit Tampa's location on the Central Gulf Coast as the main
factor why devastating storms seem to skirt by.

Whatever the reason, maps from the National Hurricane Center showing where
hurricanes have made land

fall in the past 60 years reveal a striking pattern: while long stretches of
South Florida and the Gulf Coast are dotted with stricken areas, the Tampa area
remains virtually unblemished.

Looking back on the frequency of hurricanes in the last 150 years, Tampa has
been extremely lucky, said William H. Gray, the former director of the National
Hurricane Center in Miami and the founder of the Tropical Meteorology Project at
Colorado State University.

A major hurricane has not hit Tampa since 1921, decades before the National
Weather Service started naming storms. In 1944, Brandon and eastern Hillsborough
County caught a glancing blow from a no-name, Category 1 hurricane. Two years
later, another weak, no-name hurricane trekked across Pinellas County.

And in 2004, one of the busiest storms seasons for Florida in recent memory,
Hurricane Jeanne, a slow-moving Category 1 hurricane, passed through Pasco
County and doused the entire state with inches of rain over a period of several
days.

A colleague of Gray's said geography plays a big role in the streak.

Some of the reasons why Tampa Bay tends to avoid major hurricane landfalls is
due to its geographic location, said Phil Klotzbach, a meteorology professor at
CSU. Storms have to hit Tampa Bay from the south and west to cause significant
damage. Tracks of tropical cyclones have to be somewhat unusual to hit the area.

Gray said a storm that formed in the Atlantic Ocean has to enter the Caribbean
Sea, then take a sharp turn north around the Florida Straits to make a beeline
toward Tampa.

Those kinds of tracks are not very frequent, Gray said.

Dennis Feltgen, spokesman for the National Hurricane Center, said the Tampa area
is statistically overdue for a Category 3 or stronger storm. Predicting how
often an area will get struck or when a city overdue for a major storm will get
hit is total guesswork, though, he said.

That kind of long-range science doesn't exist, Feltgen said. Hurricanes are
influenced by the weather patterns at the time.

Predictions of the number of named storms in a given season sometimes aren't all
that accurate, either. Before this year's storm season began June 1, the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecast above normal activity
with 13 to 20 named storms, seven to 11 hurricanes and three to six major
hurricanes of category 3 or higher.

Sept. 10 is the statistical peak of hurricane season each year, but only seven
named storms have formed so far this year. The first hurricane of the year -
Humberto - formed at 5 a.m. Wednesday, one of the latest times on record that
the first hurricane of the season has formed.

Humberto is not expected to threaten land.

Daniel Noah of the National Weather Service said Tampa's best chance of a
hurricane is in the fall, when cold fronts from Canada pushing south toward the
Gulf of Mexico could steer a hurricane toward Tampa. If a hurricane was
fish-hooking north from the Florida Straits while a cold blast headed toward the
Gulf, the front would force the storm to veer west toward Texas or take a sharp
turn north toward Florida's west coast.

Hurricanes are like leaves on a fast-moving river, Noah said. Don't let your
guard down yet.

And Gray noted Tampa wouldn't have to take a direct hit to suffer damage. A
hurricane churning just off the coast could create huge damage from storm surge.

That will drive all the water into Tampa Bay, Gray said. It would be a hell of a
mess.

rreyes@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7920

Twitter:@TBORay

Hurricanes

From Page 1

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 68 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                          September 12, 2013 Thursday

Hurricanes bypass;
Experts cite luck, geography for storms skirting region since 1921

BYLINE: RAY REYES; Tribune staff

SECTION: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 1326 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



HIGHLIGHT: Sept. 10 is the statistical peak of tropical cyclone formation during
this year's hurricane season. And we're right in the middle of peak hurricane
season. Yet it does not look like Tampa is in any danger of getting hit by a
major hurricane. We take a look at the reasons why a major storm has not struck
the city since 1921.


Bay area for 92 years

- The statistical peak of hurricane season came and went this week and, just
like it's done for the past 92 years, Tampa dodged a direct hit from a major
storm.

Some scientists attribute the remarkably low frequency of hurricane strikes to
blind luck. Others credit Tampa's location on the Central Gulf Coast as the main
factor why devastating storms seem to skirt by.

Whatever the reason, maps from the National Hurricane Center showing where
hurricanes have made land

fall in the past 60 years reveal a striking pattern: while long stretches of
South Florida and the Gulf Coast are dotted with stricken areas, the Tampa area
remains virtually unblemished.

Looking back on the frequency of hurricanes in the last 150 years, Tampa has
been extremely lucky, said William H. Gray, the former director of the National
Hurricane Center in Miami and the founder of the Tropical Meteorology Project at
Colorado State University.

A major hurricane has not hit Tampa since 1921, decades before the National
Weather Service started naming storms. In 1944, Brandon and eastern Hillsborough
County caught a glancing blow from a no-name, Category 1 hurricane. Two years
later, another weak, no-name hurricane trekked across Pinellas County.

And in 2004, one of the busiest storms seasons for Florida in recent memory,
Hurricane Jeanne, a slow-moving Category 1 hurricane, passed through Pasco
County and doused the entire state with inches of rain over a period of several
days.

A colleague of Gray's said geography plays a big role in the streak.

Some of the reasons why Tampa Bay tends to avoid major hurricane landfalls is
due to its geographic location, said Phil Klotzbach, a meteorology professor at
CSU. Storms have to hit Tampa Bay from the south and west to cause significant
damage. Tracks of tropical cyclones have to be somewhat unusual to hit the area.

Gray said a storm that formed in the Atlantic Ocean has to enter the Caribbean
Sea, then take a sharp turn north around the Florida Straits to make a beeline
toward Tampa.

Those kinds of tracks are not very frequent, Gray said.

Dennis Feltgen, spokesman for the National Hurricane Center, said the Tampa area
is statistically overdue for a Category 3 or stronger storm. Predicting how
often an area will get struck or when a city overdue for a major storm will get
hit is total guesswork, though, he said.

That kind of long-range science doesn't exist, Feltgen said. Hurricanes are
influenced by the weather patterns at the time.

Predictions of the number of named storms in a given season sometimes aren't all
that accurate, either. Before this year's storm season began June 1, the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecast above normal activity
with 13 to 20 named storms, seven to 11 hurricanes and three to six major
hurricanes of category 3 or higher.

Sept. 10 is the statistical peak of hurricane season each year, but only seven
named storms have formed so far this year. The first hurricane of the year -
Humberto - formed at 5 a.m. Wednesday, one of the latest times on record that
the first hurricane of the season has formed.

Humberto is not expected to threaten land.

Daniel Noah of the National Weather Service said Tampa's best chance of a
hurricane is in the fall, when cold fronts from Canada pushing south toward the
Gulf of Mexico could steer a hurricane toward Tampa. If a hurricane was
fish-hooking north from the Florida Straits while a cold blast headed toward the
Gulf, the front would force the storm to veer west toward Texas or take a sharp
turn north toward Florida's west coast.

Hurricanes are like leaves on a fast-moving river, Noah said. Don't let your
guard down yet.

And Gray noted Tampa wouldn't have to take a direct hit to suffer damage. A
hurricane churning just off the coast could create huge damage from storm surge.

That will drive all the water into Tampa Bay, Gray said. It would be a hell of a
mess.

rreyes@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7920

Twitter:@TBORay

HURRICANES, Page 9

- The statistical peak of hurricane season came and went this week and, just
like it's done for the past 92 years, Tampa dodged a direct hit from a major
storm.

Some scientists attribute the remarkably low frequency of hurricane strikes to
blind luck. Others credit Tampa's location on the Central Gulf Coast as the main
factor why devastating storms seem to skirt by.

Whatever the reason, maps from the National Hurricane Center showing where
hurricanes have made land

fall in the past 60 years reveal a striking pattern: while long stretches of
South Florida and the Gulf Coast are dotted with stricken areas, the Tampa area
remains virtually unblemished.

Looking back on the frequency of hurricanes in the last 150 years, Tampa has
been extremely lucky, said William H. Gray, the former director of the National
Hurricane Center in Miami and the founder of the Tropical Meteorology Project at
Colorado State University.

A major hurricane has not hit Tampa since 1921, decades before the National
Weather Service started naming storms. In 1944, Brandon and eastern Hillsborough
County caught a glancing blow from a no-name, Category 1 hurricane. Two years
later, another weak, no-name hurricane trekked across Pinellas County.

And in 2004, one of the busiest storms seasons for Florida in recent memory,
Hurricane Jeanne, a slow-moving Category 1 hurricane, passed through Pasco
County and doused the entire state with inches of rain over a period of several
days.

A colleague of Gray's said geography plays a big role in the streak.

Some of the reasons why Tampa Bay tends to avoid major hurricane landfalls is
due to its geographic location, said Phil Klotzbach, a meteorology professor at
CSU. Storms have to hit Tampa Bay from the south and west to cause significant
damage. Tracks of tropical cyclones have to be somewhat unusual to hit the area.

Gray said a storm that formed in the Atlantic Ocean has to enter the Caribbean
Sea, then take a sharp turn north around the Florida Straits to make a beeline
toward Tampa.

Those kinds of tracks are not very frequent, Gray said.

Dennis Feltgen, spokesman for the National Hurricane Center, said the Tampa area
is statistically overdue for a Category 3 or stronger storm. Predicting how
often an area will get struck or when a city overdue for a major storm will get
hit is total guesswork, though, he said.

That kind of long-range science doesn't exist, Feltgen said. Hurricanes are
influenced by the weather patterns at the time.

Predictions of the number of named storms in a given season sometimes aren't all
that accurate, either. Before this year's storm season began June 1, the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecast above normal activity
with 13 to 20 named storms, seven to 11 hurricanes and three to six major
hurricanes of category 3 or higher.

Sept. 10 is the statistical peak of hurricane season each year, but only seven
named storms have formed so far this year. The first hurricane of the year -
Humberto - formed at 5 a.m. Wednesday, one of the latest times on record that
the first hurricane of the season has formed.

Humberto is not expected to threaten land.

Daniel Noah of the National Weather Service said Tampa's best chance of a
hurricane is in the fall, when cold fronts from Canada pushing south toward the
Gulf of Mexico could steer a hurricane toward Tampa. If a hurricane was
fish-hooking north from the Florida Straits while a cold blast headed toward the
Gulf, the front would force the storm to veer west toward Texas or take a sharp
turn north toward Florida's west coast.

Hurricanes are like leaves on a fast-moving river, Noah said. Don't let your
guard down yet.

And Gray noted Tampa wouldn't have to take a direct hit to suffer damage. A
hurricane churning just off the coast could create huge damage from storm surge.

That will drive all the water into Tampa Bay, Gray said. It would be a hell of a
mess.

rreyes@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7920

Twitter:@TBORay

Hurricanes

From Page 1

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 69 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Mercury News (California)

                          September 6, 2017 Wednesday

Category 5 Hurricane Irma slams Lesser Antilles, and is targeting Florida

BYLINE: The Washington Post

LENGTH: 1335 words



HIGHLIGHT: Hurricane Irma is a "potentially catastrophic" Category 5, barreling
toward the Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, and Southern Florida.


By Brian McNoldy and Jason Samenow |The Washington Post

Hurricane Irma is a potentially catastrophic Category 5, barreling toward the
Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, and Southern Florida. It is the strongest hurricane
ever recorded outside the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico, and is likely to
seriously affect Florida over the weekend.

Source: FEMA almost out of money as Irma looms

Oroville Dam: Experts fault design, construction of spillway

Tsunami siren accidentally sounds in Huntington Beach, panicking residents

Hurricane Irma, strongest Atlantic storm on record, threatens to destroy
Leewards

Bay Areas hot temps drop to warm, muggy  even some rain      This is a
life-threatening storm for not only the United States, but also Puerto Rico, the
U.S. and British Virgin Islands, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Cuba and the
southeastern Bahamas.

Overnight Tuesday, Irma raked across the islands of Barbuda and Antigua in the
northern Leeward Islands. Barbuda took a direct hit and the weather station
there clocked a wind gust to 155 miles per hour before it went offline. The
storm surge on the island, or the rise in water above normally dry land, reached
at least 8 feet.

The storms maximum sustained winds of 185 miles per hour when it struck the
island are the strongest on record for any landfalling hurricane on record in
the Atlantic, tied with the 1935 Florida Keys hurricane.

Antigua just missed the brunt of the storm, but was still lashed by very strong
winds and torrential rain

As the storm heads west, hurricane warnings are in effect for the Virgin
Islands, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, the Turks and Caicos, and
southeastern Bahamas. A hurricane watch covers Haiti and the central Bahamas.

With maximum winds of 185 mph, Irma is tied for the second strongest storm ever
observed in the Atlantic. Late Tuesday night its pressure dropped to 914
millibars (the lower the pressure, the stronger the storm), ranking as the
lowest of any storm on record outside the Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico in the
Atlantic basin.

Like our Facebook page for more conversation and news coverage from the Bay Area
and beyond.

The hurricane is expected to remain at least a Category 4 for the next few days
with minor fluctuations in intensity. The storm has neared the theoretical limit
for how strong it can get given ocean temperatures.

It cannot be overstated that Hurricane Irma is extremely dangerous and will
produce the full gamut of hurricane hazards across the Caribbean and potentially
in South Florida, including a devastating storm surge, destructive winds and
dangerous flash flooding.

All of Florida  especially South Florida and the Keys  should be preparing for a
major hurricane landfall on Sunday. Tropical-storm-force winds are expected to
arrive as soon as early Saturday.

Mainland U.S. landfall threat

Computer models are in strong agreement that by Saturday, Irma will be
approaching the Florida Keys  where dangerous storm conditions are likely. Then,
they show a sharp northward turn by Sunday morning. The precise timing and
location of the turn has huge implications for Florida.

It is impossible to say with certainty whether Irma will track up along the
eastern side of the Florida peninsula, the western side, or straight up the
peninsula or even just off its east coast. Interests in the Gulf of Mexico
should also monitor the storm in case the track shifts west.

For a major hurricane, the exact track of the storms eyewall  the zone
surrounding its calm center  is critical as it will determine where the most
severe effects tend to concentrate. The most violent winds coincide with the
eyewall, and the biggest storm surge occurs just to its right (or north).

But as Irma is such a large and powerful hurricane, very dangerous weather will
also occur up to 200 miles away from the eyewall  including coastal surge,
flooding rains and potentially damaging winds.

The hurricane force winds in Irma are wider than Florida, tweeted Bryan
Norcross, hurricane specialist at the Weather Channel. You wont need a direct
hit to get Wilma-type winds & storm surge on both coasts.

Beyond the weekend, the scenarios really depend on which side of Florida it
tracks. But for now, its safe to say that the southeast United States, including
the Florida panhandle, Georgia and the Carolinas, should also brace for
potential impacts, such as flash flooding, storm surge and strong winds.

Impact on the Leeward Islands, Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico

At 5 a.m. Tuesday, the powerhouse storm was positioned 35 miles east-southeast
of the island of St. Martin and Anguilla. The storm was moving westward at 15
miles per hour as these areas braced for a direct strike.

Destructive winds as well as heavy rain (8 to 12 inches with isolated amounts of
20 inches) that can produce flash flooding and mudslides are possible in the
warning areas. Along the coast, the storm surge height  or rise in water above
normally dry air  could reach 7-11 feet  especially just north of the storm
center.

Irma is likely to become the strongest hurricane on record to hit the Leeward
Islands, even more intense than David, which raked across the central Leeward
Islands in 1979. David was a horrible hurricane for Leeward Islands: 56
fatalities in Dominica, tweeted Phil Klotzbach, hurricane expert at Colorado
State University.

Reading this on your iPhone or iPad? Check out our new Apple News app channel
here and click the + at the top of the page to save to your Apple News
favorites.

Really feel for the northern Leeward Islands, tweeted National Hurricane Center
forecaster Eric Blake. A hurricane this strong there only comes around once a
generation or two.

Areas affected by the core winds near the storms eye face devastating wind
destruction. The Hurricane Center provides this description of the damage
inflicted by Category 5 winds:

A high percentage of framed homes will be destroyed, with total roof failure and
wall collapse. Fallen trees and power poles will isolate residential areas.
Power outages will last for weeks to possibly months. Most of the area will be
uninhabitable for weeks or months.

After passing the northern Leeward Islands, the hurricane will strike the
British Virgin Islands with potentially catastrophic effects.

The U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico may remain south of the storms center
Wednesday and Wednesday night, so less prone to Irmas most hostile conditions.
But even so, damaging winds and torrential rains are likely along with a
significant storm surge at the coast.

The U.S. National Hurricane Center says that Hurricane Irma, a Category 5 storm,
has winds of up to 185 mph as it approaches the Leeward Islands of the northeast
Caribbean. The storm is wielding the most powerful winds ever recorded for a
storm in the Atlantic Ocean. Miami-Dade Countys mayor says residents and
visitors should be prepared to evacuate as the storm heads toward Florida.

Irmas place in history

Irmas peak intensity so far ranks among the strongest in recorded history,
exceeding the likes of Katrina, Andrew and Camille  whose winds peaked at 175
mph.

Among the most intense storms on record, it only trails Hurricane Allen in 1980
which had winds of 190 miles per hour. It is tied for second most intense with
Hurricane Wilma in 2005, Hurricane Gilbert in 1988 and the 1935 Florida Keys
hurricane.

If Irma makes landfall as a Category 4 or higher in the United States, joining
Hurricane Harvey, it will become the first time two storms so strong struck the
United States in the same season.

Tropical Storm Jose forms in eastern Atlantic

While all attention is on Hurricane Irma, Tropical Storm Jose formed in the
eastern Atlantic Tuesday morning. This storm is also predicted to intensify into
a hurricane over the coming days, but the latest track forecast keeps it away
from land areas for the most part.

Reading this on your phone? Stay up to date with our free mobile app. Get it
from the Apple app store  or the Google Play store.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 70 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Property and Casualty 360

                                January 3, 2011

2011 Expected To Be Another Busy Hurricane Season

BYLINE: MARK E. RUQUET & CHAD HEMENWAY

SECTION: ISSUES January-3-2011

LENGTH: 749  words


Two groups of forecasters are predicting another busy hurricane season this year
after coming off nearly spot-on predictions for a very active 2010 season.

The team of Philip Klotzbach and William Gray at Colorado State University's
(CSU)

Tropical Meteorology Project

are projecting 17 named storms in 2011, including nine hurricanes and five major
hurricanes of Category 3 or higher on the Saffir-Simpson scale (sustained winds
of 111 mph or higher).

The team said the numbers are close to what was experienced during the 2010
season in the Atlantic basin.

The hurricane season runs from June 1 through Nov. 30.

Separately, Weather Services International (WSI), part of the Weather Channel
Companies, delivered the same 2011 prediction as CSU-calling for 17 named
storms, nine hurricanes and five intense hurricanes of Category 3 or greater.

The predicted totals are well above the normal levels of 10 named storms, six
hurricanes and two intense hurricanes.

This past season, both teams predicted a well above-average numbers of storms.

In June, at the start of the season, the CSU team called for 18 named storms, 10
hurricanes and five major hurricanes, while Andover, Mass.-based WSI called for
19 named storms, 11 hurricanes and five major hurricanes.

Both forecasts were close to the mark. There were actually 19 named storms, 12
hurricanes and five major hurricanes.

"The United States was extremely lucky in 2010 in that none of the 12 Atlantic
basin hurricanes that formed crossed the U.S. coastline," Mr. Klotzbach said in
a statement. "On average, about one in four Atlantic basin hurricanes makes U.S.
landfall, and therefore, we would expect to see more landfalling hurricanes in
2011."

While noting the uncertainty in the forecast six months ahead of the season,
CSU's Mr. Klotzbach said that current upper ocean heat anomalies in the tropical
Pacific mean an El Niño is unlikely, leading to a more active hurricane season
in 2011.

An El Niño produces wind and atmospheric conditions that are not conducive to
the development of hurricanes.

"This forecast is based on an extended-range early December statistical
prediction scheme we've developed based on 58 years of data," Mr. Gray said. "At
this point, we are uncertain whether La Niña conditions or neutral conditions
are more likely for the 2011 hurricane season. Sea surface temperatures in the
far North Atlantic remain at record warm levels, which is an indication that we
are in an active multidecadal period for Atlantic hurricane activity."

At WSI, Todd Crawford, chief meteorologist, noted that like last year, ocean
temperatures in the Atlantic are expected to be above normal and wind shear is
predicted to be favorable for storm formation. Mr. Crawford also said that WSI's
model calls for an increased chance of U.S. landfall in 2011, especially for the
western Gulf states.

"The forecast numbers are quite similar to those prior to the 2008 season when
hurricanes Dolly, Gustav and Ike impacted Louisiana and Texas," Mr. Crawford
added.

Ike was the costliest hurricane to hit Texas, causing insured property damages
of $9.8 billion, according to the Insurance Services Office. Much of the losses
were shouldered by the state's insurer of last resort, the Texas Windstorm
Insurance Association. Ike ranks as the third costliest hurricane in U.S.
history, causing more than $12.5 billion in insured losses.

Louisiana was impacted by the top three costliest hurricanes in U.S. history,
including Hurricane Katrina in 2005, which cost insurers more than $41 billion.

CSU gave the following probabilities related to potential locations of 2011's
hurricanes:

E A 73 percent chance that at least one major hurricane will make landfall on
the U.S. coastline in 2011. The long-term average probability is 52 percent.

E For the U.S. East Coast, including the Florida Peninsula, the probability of a
major hurricane making landfall is 49 percent. The long-term average is 31
percent.

E For the Gulf Coast from the Florida Panhandle west to Brownsville, the
probability is 48 percent. The long-term average is 30 percent.

E The team predicts the probability of a major hurricane making landfall in the
Caribbean as 62 percent. The average for the last century is 42 percent.

The team has also updated the Landfall Probability

website

that provides probabilities of tropical storm-force, hurricane-force and major
hurricane-force winds making landfall at specific locations along the U.S. East
and Gulf coasts within a variety of time periods.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2011 The National Underwriter Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 71 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Lebanon Daily News (Pennsylvania)

                           September 10, 2017 Sunday
                                   1 Edition

Hurricane's storm surge often deadliest threat

BYLINE: By, Doyle Rice

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 401 words


Storm surge, the massive mound of water that builds up and comes ashore during a
hurricane, is often the deadliest and most destructive threat from the storms.

Storm surge has accounted for about half of the deaths in hurricanes since 1970,
according to the National Hurricane Center. It caused most of the 1,200 deaths
in Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

As Hurricane Irma nears the Florida coast, forecasters are warning of a 10- to
15-foot storm surge in the Naples area and 5 to 8 feet around Tampa. A storm
surge warning was issued for much of Florida's coastline, from north of
Homosassa Springs all the way around the peninsula and up to Titusville, east of
Orlando, in advance of the storm.

The National Weather Service began issuing alerts for storm surge just this
hurricane season.

Storm surge watches and warnings are separated from hurricane alerts because
hurricane-force winds and storm surges don't always occur at the same place or
the same time, said Rick Knabb, the former director of the hurricane center, and
now the hurricane expert at the Weather Channel.

In addition, preparing for hurricane-force winds is different than for storm
surge, he said. For storm surge, people should evacuate, while for wind, they
can stay in place in a strong structure as long as it's away from flood-prone
areas, Knabb said.

A "storm surge watch" is issued when flooding is possible, while a "warning" is
issued when flooding is expected. Every coastal city along the Gulf or East
Coast of the USA is at risk of storm surge, the hurricane center said.

In addition to being the deadliest threat, storm surge is also typically the
most destructive part of a hurricane. In Hurricane Sandy in 2012, storm
surge-induced flooding measured as high as 9 feet above ground in parts of New
York and New Jersey, leading to billions of dollars in damages.

The damage occurred even though Sandy spun ashore as the equivalent of only a
Category 1 hurricane, with winds of about 80 mph, and was downgraded below
hurricane status shortly thereafter.

Storm surge flooding does not include floods caused by the heavy rain from the
hurricane, such as what happened recently in Houston with Hurricane Harvey and
in North Carolina last year during Hurricane Matthew. It also has nothing to do
with tsunamis, large ocean waves generated by offshore earthquakes that are not
related to weather.

Irma takes new track, heads toward Tampa. Page 7A

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Andrew West, USA Today Network
Boaters in Fort Myers, Fla., just south of Tampa, prepare for Hurricane Irma.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ldn


                     Copyright 2017 The Lebanon Daily News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 72 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 1, 2010 Thursday

Earlier hurricanes put Alex in perspective

BYLINE: Jazmine Ulloa, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 670 words


July 01--Meteorologist Barry Goldsmith took a sleeping bag and snacks to work,
prepared to ride out the storm at the National Weather Service headquarters in
Brownsville. But when the path of Hurricane Alex shifted and passed south of the
city, the potential for hurricane-force winds went with it.

Though Alex reached the level of a Category 2 hurricane this evening, its
downpour was no more than expected and wind gusts considerably less.

It was looking like Goldsmith might get to go home.

"We are not quite out of the woods yet," he said. Still, he seemed relieved.

"We were lucky," he said. "If the hurricane had continued moving northwest as it
had been this morning, it would have made landfall a lot farther north into
Tamaulipas, and the core would have scraped us."

Of course, damage has been done. Several parts of the city are seeing extensive
flooding, and it could get worse. Hurricane Alex is expected to dump about 12
inches of rain in the city -- and up to 20 inches in some areas -- by Friday.

At least three tornadoes have touched down in the Rio Grande Valley, though no
injuries have been reported. And on South Padre Island, the storm surge is
expected to reach between 4 to 6 feet, which could damage buildings.

But the worst of the storm threat -- the potential for hurricane-force winds --
is  over, Goldsmith said.

Still, this is only "the first ballgame of the season," Goldsmith said of the
potential for hurricanes this year.

Indeed, the odds favor more hurricanes. The waters in the Gulf of Mexico have
warmed up from the spring, the movement of the La Nina has created the low wind
sheer necessary for hurricanes to form and the atmospheric patterns support such
formation, Goldsmith explained.

"The odds are up for hurricanes," he said. "We just happened to be on periphery
of Number 1 one. We were fortunate it was not a direct hit."

In fact, Brownsville only seems to be in a direct line about every 40 years, he
said. The last three times it happened were in 1933, 1967 and 2008.

But many other storms have come close.

Hurricane history

Looking at the history puts most recent storms in perspective, Goldsmith says.

"All hurricanes are bad -- it is just a matter of which are much worse," he
says. "Looking back gives you a less biased viewpoint of the reality of what
could happen in the area."

Since 1865, 63 hurricanes have struck the Texas coast, 12 of which have been
major storms, according to the national weather agency.

For many Brownsville residents, the most memorable are Hurricane Beulah, which
struck in 1967 just north of where the Rio Grande flows into Mexico, and
Hurricane Dolly, which in 2008 made landfall near South Padre Island.

For longtime residents of the Rio Grande Valley and Deep South Texas, Beulah was
the big one, affecting people from Cameron to Zapata County, according to the
National Weather Service.

The Brownsville Airport recorded hurricane-force winds for some eight hours
straight, with a peak at 109 mph -- before its measuring device was bent and
became inoperable. One ship in port even reported winds of 136 mph.

Across South Padre Island and into Port Isabel, Beulah's storm surge reached 5
to 8 feet, according to NWS. And some homes in Harlingen were flooded up to
their rooftops.

Ruben Garza, a truck driver, was living in Brownsville during Hurricane Beulah
and remembers the disaster it left behind. It puts Hurricane Alex into
perspective, he says.

"Furniture was scattered everywhere," he remembers. "Palm trees were bent. No, I
am not afraid of this one, but I do like to always be prepared."

To see more of The Brownsville Herald, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.brownsvilleherald.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Brownsville Herald,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more
information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail
services@mctinfoservices.com, or call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States,
call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100701-BV-Earlier-hurricanes-put-Alex-in-perspective-20100701

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2010 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 73 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                 The Daily News (Jacksonville, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 17, 2012 Tuesday

Conference focuses on hurricane lessons

BYLINE: Jannette Pippin, The Daily News, Jacksonville, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 512 words


July 17--BEAUFORT -- With the peak of the hurricane season beginning next month,
there are lessons to be learned from hurricanes past.

Hurricane Irene, which made landfall Aug. 27 near Cape Lookout as a category 1
hurricane, is a reminder that the category of a storm isn't the sole indication
of the level of damage it can leave behind.

Despite being classified in the lowest hurricane category based on wind speed,
Irene was large in size and impacted a lot of water area, which resulted in a
significant impact from storm surge.

"Storm surge is not dependent on hurricane category," said John Cole of the
National Weather Service office in Newport.

Hurricane Irene was downgraded from a Category 3 to a Category 1 before making
landfall; but due to its size, its storm surge threat never changed. Pamlico,
Beaufort and Dare counties were the worst impacted, and storm surge ranged from
nine to 11 feet.

Yet, National Weather Service officials said, in a survey about Hurricane Irene,
the overwhelming majority of respondents said their perception of the potential
damage changed significantly once it was downgraded to a category 1.

The National Weather Service, in conjunction with Carteret County Emergency
Services, held a Hurricane Awareness Conference Tuesday at the NOAA Center for
Coastal Fisheries and Habitat Research in Beaufort. The conference was an
opportunity for the National Weather Service to review products available to
help the public and emergency responders stay informed of tropical activity.

Among the information now being provided for the local area is above ground
level inundation, which is the storm surge height expected above ground level.

Hal Austin, also of the NWS office in Newport, said it is a more realistic way
of letting the public know how much water they may expect to see verses height
above sea level.

"If we're saying it will be four feet above ground level, you'll be standing in
four feet of water," he said.

The peak of the hurricane season is August through September, and for
information on tropical activity the public can follow the National Hurricane
Center webpage and on Facebook and Twitter. For local information, the NWS has a
tropical threat information page on its website. The Newport office also has a
Facebook page and is expected to have a Twitter account in the next few months.

While the hurricane season started with two tropical storms prior to the June 1,
NOAA is predicting a near normal 2012 season.

In May, NOAA's Climate Prediction Center said there's a 70-percent chance of
nine to 15 named storms, of which four to eight will strengthen to a hurricane.
Of those, one to three will become major hurricanes. Based on the period
1981-2010, an average season produces 12 named storms with six hurricanes,
including three major hurricanes.

An updated forecast will be made in August.

Contact Daily News reporter Jannette Pippin at 910-382-2557 or
jpippin@freedomenc.com

___ (c)2012 The Daily News (Jacksonville, N.C.) Visit The Daily News
(Jacksonville, N.C.) at www.jdnews.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120717-JN-Conference-focuses-on-hurricane-lessons-0717-20120717

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JN


                         Copyright 2012 The Daily News


                          FOCUS - 74 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                 therecord.com

                            August 7, 2008 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

A witch's brew; Unusually warm Atlantic Ocean may breed more storms, hurricanes

BYLINE: Chris Morris, The Canadian Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D7

LENGTH: 658  words

DATELINE: FREDERICTON


Unusually warm ocean water off Canada's East Coast may attract some unwelcome
visitors this year as it provides a key ingredient for tropical storms and
hurricanes.

Forecasters in the United States have revised their predictions upwards for this
hurricane season based on water temperature and the significant number of named
storms that have developed already, including two hurricanes.

In the North Atlantic, water temperatures are as much as four degrees higher
than normal, providing an invitation to storms and hurricanes that are stoked by
warm oceans.

"These storms depend on warm water as they move northward,'' Dave Phillips,
senior climatologist with Environment Canada, said in an interview Wednesday.

"If the waters are cool, it's like turning the thermostat down.''

In 2003, hurricane Juan lashed Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and parts of
New Brunswick. A Category 2 hurricane, its winds peaked at 185 kilometres per
hour, causing $100 million in damage -- mostly in Nova Scotia.

Warm ocean temperatures were believed to be a major factor in sustaining the
force of Juan as it slammed into the Maritimes.

U.S. forecasters say sea surface temperatures in the tropical Atlantic, combined
with several other factors, have prompted them to increase the number of named
storms that may develop during the next three or four months.

Researchers Philip Klotzbach and William Gray of the Colorado State University
hurricane team are forecasting 17 named storms for this season, which lasts
until November, with nine becoming hurricanes and five becoming intense
hurricanes.

That's up from their earlier prediction of 15 named storms, including eight
hurricanes and four intense hurricanes.

Phillips said that if the forecast turns out to be accurate and there are more
storms in the south, that will increase the odds of at least some of them making
it to the North Atlantic.

"It comes down to odds,'' he said.

"More storms in the south likely will equate to more potential for storms in the
North Atlantic. It is of concern, obviously, if people are raising their
projections. We've already had five tropical storms, including the two
hurricanes, and the peak season doesn't really get going until mid-August."

Phillips said Environment Canada doesn't bother with hurricane forecasts because
they are too speculative and unreliable.

Chris Fogarty, a forecaster at the Canadian Hurricane Centre in Halifax, said
the cool, wet weather that has settled over Atlantic Canada will keep storms and
hurricanes at bay, at least for the time being.

"If the weather pattern is unfavourable for hurricanes in our area, which it
certainly is now, then the water could be 26 degrees here and it wouldn't make
any difference,'' Fogarty said.

However, he said that if the weather pattern shifts back to the kind of hot,
humid weather the Atlantic region experienced earlier in July, then the
situation could change.

Five named storms have formed so far this season, including hurricane Bertha --
the longest-lived tropical cyclone to ever form during July -- and tropical
storm Christobal, which passed south of Sable Island, N.S., in July.

The other hurricane was Dolly, which made landfall as a Category 2 hurricane in
south Texas on July 23.

Canadian hurricane experts say there's no reliable way of measuring the
potential impact in Canada of hurricanes forecast in the United States.

In 2006, Canada was affected by 60 per cent of the named storms that formed that
year. But that number dropped to 13 per cent last year, when there were 15 named
storms.

On average, Canada has been hit by one or two dangerous, damaging storms every
year since 2000, including two last season.

Last November, post-tropical storm Noel knocked out power to 190,000 households
in the Maritimes, while pounding surf washed out roads in some coastal areas.

Three months earlier, post-tropical storm Chantal brought drenching rains to
eastern Newfoundland, causing severe flooding in some areas.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: CANADIAN PRESS FILE PHOTO , Hurricane Juan caused widespread
damage and power outages in Halifax in 2003. Warm ocean temperatures like the
ones being predicted for this year were believed to be a major factor in
sustaining the force hurricane as it slammed into the Maritimes.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: NEWS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2008 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 75 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                 therecord.com

                          September 20, 2008 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricanes; Everything you need to know to look like you know about...

BYLINE: Valerie Hill, RECORD STAFF

SECTION: ETC.; Pg. W11

LENGTH: 547  words


Waterloo Region escaped with just a minor drenching from the tail end of
Hurricane Ike earlier this week. That's the thing about hurricanes, the windy
beggars are unpredictable, at the mercy of weather systems and land which can
break them apart.

According to Environment Canada's senior climatologist Dave Phillips,
"Hurricanes are very slow moving, very lazy. What steers them are other weather
systems. Ike got caught in the westerlies." He added that without outside forces
moving a hurricane forward, it can sit in place.

Slow and steady: Hurricane wind speed refers to the speed winds rotate within
the hurricane which has little effect on the forward momentum of the storm so
it's not usual to have wind speeds of 175 kph in a storm that's moving forward
at less than 40 kph.

Life cycle of a hurricane: A tropical depression is the first stage, followed by
tropical storm and finally a hurricane. However, not all tropical depressions
develop into full-blown hurricanes. In the western Pacific, the storms are
called typhoons and in the Indian Ocean, it's a cyclone.

A storm is designated a hurricane when its winds reach at least 118 kph.
Category one to five on the Saffir-Simpson scale determines the power of the
storm with the highest being a category five. Hurricane season in North America
runs June through November with September being the most active month in
Atlantic Canada.

Tropical depressions are when a group of thunderstorms mesh, developing into one
big, unorganized storm. When viewed from above, a hurricane appears as a
rotating mass with a distinct eye. A tropical depression is more like a blob.

Long life: Hurricanes can live up to three weeks in the tropical oceans, feeding
on warm water.

Eye of the storm: A circular area within the storm -- though not always centred
-- with relatively light winds, little or no precipitation and even clear skies.
These eyes can range in diameter from eight kms to more than 200 kms, though the
average is 30 to 60 kms. The eye is surrounded by the eye wall, where the
strongest winds blow.

What's a storm surge: The rush of sea or lake water caused by high winds,
resulting in extensive flooding. Tidal surges, on the other hand, are caused by
a sudden change in sea level.

The big whoppers: The deadliest hurricane in North American history was in 1900
in Galveston, Texas. It killed 8,000 people. Hurricane Katrina in 2005, did the
most property damage, at $81 billion, with 1,500 deaths. Katrina was only a
category three storm but it hit a vulnerable part of the U.S., causing massive
flooding.

Phillips added "Hurricane Ike was considered to be enormous at almost 1,000
kilometres across." In Southern Ontario, Hurricane Hazel in 1954 was the
deadliest, killing 81 people plus 100 in the U.S. Hurricane Juan hit Halifax in
2003, causing the most damage at $200 million, killing eight people.

What's in a name: The custom of naming large tropical storms over the Atlantic
started in 1950 to make it easier to identify storms by common reference,
starting with women's names. Male names were introduced in 1979. When a storm
has had a particularly devastating effect, its name is retired. To date, more
than 50 names have been retired.

vhill@therecord.com

SOURCES

www.uscg.mil/news/stormcenter

www.atl.ec.gc.ca/weather/hurricane

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: NEWS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2008 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 76 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             May 23, 2007 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Forecasters: Hurricane season won't be easy

BYLINE: Patrick O'Driscoll

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 519 words


Federal weather forecasters Tuesday predicted a busy hurricane season this year,
with as many as 10 hurricanes, up to half of them with major destructive force.

After their nearly identical prediction last year fizzled, weather officials
joined with emergency managers and Homeland Security to warn coastal residents
against being complacent. Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff said 2006
"was an unexpectedly easy season," and there is no guarantee this year "will be
anything less than very tough."

"It just takes one hurricane to make it a bad year for everyone here," said
Conrad Lautenbacher, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, which oversees the National Weather Service and the hurricane
center.  The Census Bureau said 35 million people live in the most at-risk
coastal zone, from North Carolina to Texas.

Tuesday's forecast -- 13 to 17 named storms, seven to 10 of them hurricanes and
three to five of those with destructive winds of at least 111 mph -- closely
mirrors predictions by researchers at Colorado State and North Carolina State
universities and the AccuWeather.com commercial service.

The season officially runs June 1 through Nov. 30, but the peak is usually in
August and September. The first named storm of the year, Andrea, was weeks ahead
of normal.

Last year's federal outlook was for 13-16 tropical storms, eight to 10 of them
hurricanes and four to six in the major category. Instead, just 10 storms
formed. Five grew into hurricanes, but none reached land in the USA, and only
two weaker storms touched the mainland.

Hurricane forecaster Gerry Bell, of the federal Climate Prediction Center, said
key factors for 2007 are a persistent pattern of hurricane-inducing conditions
in the Atlantic and the likelihood of a La Nioa climate episode in the Pacific.

The Atlantic pattern has existed since 1995, Bell said, and could last 25-40
years. La Nioa, a cooling of tropical seawater in the eastern Pacific, could
mean an absence of west winds across the Gulf of Mexico that disrupt tropical
storms, as occurred last year.

Nine of the past 12 years were above normal. The 2005 season, with Hurricanes
Katrina and Rita, shattered the record with 27 named storms. The annual average
since 1995 is 15 tropical storms and eight hurricanes, four of them major.

Predicting how many will actually strike the USA is trickier. Bell said that in
years with similar forecasts, two to four hurricanes might hit the coast.

AccuWeather also predicts that six or seven storms could strike the USA. The
other forecasts are more conservative. The North Carolina State group foresees
one or two hurricanes hitting the Gulf Coast. The Colorado State team sees a 49%
chance of a major hurricane striking land.

No one mentioned Katrina at the announcement, but worries of a repeat were
evident.

"No matter how good your local responders, state responders and federal
responders are, they will not be there instantly at the time a hurricane
arrives," said Chertoff, whose department includes the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, which was blamed for mishandling the response to Katrina.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Marcy E. Mullins, USA TODAY (Bar graph)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 77 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            August 25, 2015 Tuesday
                                 FIRST EDITION

2005's catastrophic storm season gave way to 10-year 'lucky streak' in the USA

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, @usatodayweather, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 463 words


The 2005 hurricane season is most remembered for Hurricane Katrina, which
slammed into the Gulf Coast 10 years ago this week, killing 1,500 people and
forever changing the city of New Orleans. But Katrina was only one of a
record-breaking 28 named storms that disastrous year.

In all, those storms caused 4,000 deaths and almost $160billion in damage in the
USA, Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean.

Nothing like that hyperactive season has occurred since. The USA's remarkable
10-year "lucky streak" without a major hurricane is the longest since a
seven-year lull in the 1860s, said hurricane expert Phil Klotzbach of Colorado
State University.

The 28 named tropical storms and hurricanes that formed a decade ago shattered
the previous record of 21 named storms in the Atlantic, set in 1933, according
to the Weather Channel. A tropical storm has winds of 39-73 mph; a hurricane has
winds of 74 mph and higher.

Other weather records were set that year: most hurricanes, 15; and a record six
of them hit the USA. Four of those that hit the USA were "major" hurricanes,
meaning a Category 3 or stronger with winds of at least 111 mph, the Climate
Prediction Center said.

There were so many storms that the National Hurricane Center ran out of names.
The center turned to a backup list of names using the Greek alphabet, such as
Alpha, Beta, Gamma and Delta.

The final storm of the season, Tropical Storm Zeta, from late December  into
early January 2006, formed a full month after the official end of hurricane
season Nov. 30.

In addition to Katrina, the other major hurricanes that hit the USA in 2005 were
Emily, Rita and Wilma. The threat of Hurricane Rita, a few weeks after Katrina,
created a calamitous evacuation of the Houston area and contributed to dozens of
deaths.

Wilma, which hit southwestern Florida on Oct. 24, 2005, was the last major
hurricane to hit the USA. It was also the last hurricane of any strength to hit
Florida.

Three main weather factors came together that year to fuel the series of storms,
Klotzbach said. He pointed to the unusually warm sea water (which helps
strengthen hurricanes), a lack of strong winds high in the atmosphere (which can
tear apart developing storms) and very high humidity over the Atlantic (which
also can fuel hurricanes).

In addition, wind patterns over North America caused many storms to form very
close to the USA and head directly for the coasts, instead of curving out to
sea, as many storms have done since then, said meteorologist Gerry Bell of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

A record 11 storms formed that year in the Gulf of Mexico, he said.

Since then, strong steering currents in the atmosphere along the East Coast from
2006-2014 tended to push storms away from the U.S. coast, Klotzbach said.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 78 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              June 9, 2017 Friday

Texas Conducts Large-Scale Hurricane Exercise

LENGTH: 595  words




Austin: Department of Public Safety, The State of Texas has issued the following
news release:

 Texas Conducts Large-Scale Hurricane Exercise
 Residents Reminded to Prepare for Hurricane Season Now
The Texas Department of Public Safety's (DPS) Texas Division of Emergency
Management today hosted representatives from approximately 30 agencies at the
Texas State Operations Center in Austin for a large-scale hurricane exercise,
dubbed Hurricane Charlie. The Texas Division of Emergency Management (TDEM),
along with the state agencies and partner organizations with the Texas Emergency
Management Council, are conducting the week-long hurricane exercise with various
local officials and federal partners to prepare for the upcoming hurricane
season, which began June 1 and continues through November 30. DPS is also
reminding Texans to make plans now to protect themselves and their families
before a storm develops.


 Texas Conducts Large-Scale Hurricane Exercise
"This week, our local, state and federal emergency management leaders are
conducting a large-scale hurricane exercise to bolster our preparedness efforts
for this year's hurricane season," said TDEM Chief Nim Kidd. "Early preparation
is critical to saving lives when a hurricane or severe weather occurs, so we are
asking the public to do just that - get ready now."
 Texas Conducts Large-Scale Hurricane Exercise
The Hurricane Charlie exercise enables local, state, federal and private sector
emergency management partners to practice evacuation, sheltering and continuity
of operations plans. The mock Category 3 hurricane will create a 20-foot storm
surge and take aim at the Texas coast, ultimately making landfall just west of
Galveston - and accordingly, numerous local agencies in the area are also
participating in this exercise.
 Texas Conducts Large-Scale Hurricane Exercise
All Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico coastal areas are subject to hurricanes or
tropical storms. It is possible for a storm to severely impact our state, even
prior to or without making direct landfall in Texas. Additionally, the rain
bands associated with a tropical system have an extremely wide reach, so
monitoring changing weather conditions during hurricane season is critically
important for all Texans.
Here are several measures residents can take now to prepare for potential
storms:
    Assemble an emergency kit that includes essential documents, supplies and
provisions.
     Review hurricane evacuation maps, and select a route for you and your
family.
     Plan how all family members and pets will evacuate safely.
     Consider any special needs for individuals with disabilities or the
elderly.
     Stay informed about changing weather conditions in and around your area.
Texas Conducts Large-Scale Hurricane Exercise
If you or someone you know might need assistance during a disaster, please
register for the State of Texas Emergency Assistance Registry (STEAR), a free
registry that provides local emergency planners and responders with additional
information about needs in their communities. To register, contact 2-1-1 Texas,
the state's free 24-hour helpline. No matter where you live in Texas, you can
dial 2-1-1 or (877) 541-7905 for community resources.
 Texas Conducts Large-Scale Hurricane Exercise
Residents are encouraged to review their property's flood risk and current
insurance coverage, and to consider whether a separate flood policy should be
part of their home protection plan.
In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 79 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                      Jacksonville Daily Progress (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 28, 2008 Wednesday

Beware: Hurricane season opens next week

BYLINE: Kelly Young, Jacksonville Daily Progress, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 824 words


May 28--The National Hurricane Center has declared May 25-31 as National
Hurricane Awareness Week, a time when all Americans should prepare themselves
for the coming months of hurricane-friendly weather.

Nationally, hurricane season begins June 1 and runs through Nov. 30, but
according to the National Weather Service, hurricanes are most likely to strike
East Texas during the months of June and November.

"There tends to be a transition early in the hurricane season, in June and early
July, where we tend to see more storm development in the Gulf of Mexico, but as
the season progresses, we tend to see more storms forming in the Atlantic, away
from the gulf," said Meteorologist Glenn Carrin of NWS. "But in late October and
November, as the hurricane season is drawing to a close, we again see storms
developing in the gulf. So the peak time for hurricanes in East Texas is early
and late in the season -- although you can't rule out anything in the middle as
well."

The main hazards associated with hurricanes are high winds capable of reaching
200 mph, the storm surge that can flood coastal regions when the storm makes
landfall, the tornadoes that are often spawned by hurricanes and the inland
flooding that slow-moving storms can cause.

Hurricanes are classified according to the strength of the winds associated with
the storm and by their potential to cause damage. Category 1 is for storms with
winds observed between 74 and 95 mph. Category 2 is 96 to 110 mph, Category 3 is
111-130 mph, Category 4 is 131 to 155 mph and Category 5 includes all storms
with winds in excess of 155 mph. Whereas a Category 1 hurricane is likely to
mostly damage unanchored mobile homes and vegetation, a Category 5 is capable of
causing catastrophic damage; collapsing roofs and walls and completely blowing
small structures away.

"The gulf coast is definitely a high-risk area for hurricane activity, with the
closer your proximity to the coast the greater your risk," Carrin said. "Most of
the hurricanes that hit East Texas will weaken rapidly as they move inland, but
are still able to produce a lot of wind damage."

Carrin said slow-moving hurricanes are particularly dangerous because they can
dump an incredible amount of rain in a small amount of time before leaving the
area. In 1979, Tropical Storm Claudette covered Alvin in 45 inches of water.

"There is also always a tornado threat associated with hurricanes, particularly
in the northeastern quadrant of the storm center. Hurricanes come in all
different shapes and sizes, so there's no set distance you have to be from the
storm before you no longer have to worry about the possibilities of tornadoes,"
he said.

In preparation for hurricane season, homeowners are encouraged to take a few
steps to mitigate the damage a storm could potentially cause:

--install storm shutters to protect windows or board them up with marine plywood
-- tape will not prevent a window from breaking;

--clear clogged rain gutters and downspouts;

--keep trees and shrubs around your home well trimmed; and

--install additional straps or clips to securely fasten your roof to the frame
structure.

Once a hurricane has been confirmed to be inbound, homeowners should secure
their home and bring outdoor objects inside their residence. Turn off utilities
if instructed to do so, otherwise, turn your refrigerator to its coldest setting
and keep the doors closed. Avoid using the telephone except in the event of a
major emergency. Turn off all propane tanks, and fill your bathtub and other
large containers with water.

If told by the authorities to evacuate, do so promptly. People living near a
river or the coast, in a high-rise building or in a mobile home, should evacuate
the area regardless of whether the authorities have announced an evacuation.

Those people who are unable to evacuate should follow a few tips in order to
help them survive. Stay indoors and away from windows and glass doors. Take
shelter in a small interior room, closet or hallway on the lowest level in the
building. Close all interior doors and brace all exterior doors. Lie on the
floor under a table or some other sturdy object.

Families are encouraged during National Hurricane Awareness Week to establish
and practice an disaster preparedness plan, and assemble an emergency kit. For
more information go to www.texasprepares.org or www.redcross.org.

According to NWS, severe weather caused $577 million in property damage and
$2.43 billion in crop damage to the state of Texas in 2006 alone.

To see more of the Jacksonville Daily Progress, or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.jacksonvilleprogress.com. Copyright (c) 2008,
Jacksonville Daily Progress, Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call
800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The
Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20080528-JD-Beware-Hurricane-season-opens-next-week-0528

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JD


                                 Copyright 2008


                          FOCUS - 80 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Packet & Times (Orillia)

                            September 8, 2017 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Irma questions answered; Storm pounding Caribbean began near islands off west
coast of Africa

BYLINE: Seth Borenstein, The Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 797  words


WASHINGTON - A powerful hurricane Irma is threatening millions of people in the
Caribbean and Florida. Some answers to questions about Irma and hurricanes:
Where do theses storms come from? Irma is a classic Cape Verde storm, which
begin near the islands off the west coast of Africa. Some of the worst
hurricanes start as puffs of unstable air and storminess there and chug west,
gaining strength over the warm open Atlantic. Another storm, Jose, has followed
in Irma's footsteps. Some of those storms fizzle from wind shear or other
weather conditions. Still others curve harmlessly north into the mid-North
Atlantic and are called "fish storms." Storms also start in the Gulf of Mexico,
like Katia, which formed off Mexico and was declared a hurricane on Wednesday.
Why are storms happening now? Hurricane season starts June 1 and ends Nov. 30.
That's usually when the water is warm enough and other weather conditions are
conducive to storm formation. Hurricanes need water that's at least 26 C. Peak
hurricane season is from mid-August to mid-October with the peak being Sept. 10
or 11. What's an average season like? An average season produces 12 named
storms, according to the National Weather Service. Wednesday's Katia is the 11th
this season. Storms get names when winds reach 62 km/h. The average season
produces six hurricanes and three of those become major at 178 km/h winds or
higher. So far this year, there have been six hurricanes: Two major ones, Harvey
and Irma; two new ones Wednesday, Katia and Jose; and Franklin and Gert. Did
forecasters see this busy year coming? Yes. In May, the weather service
predicted a 70 per cent likelihood of 11 to 17 named storms with five to nine
becoming hurricanes. They predicted two to four major hurricanes. In early
August, it was changed to a 60 per cent chance of 14 to 19 named storms, five to
nine hurricanes and two to five major hurricanes.

Are back-to-back big hurricanes unusual? Major storms can and do form
back-to-back and did so last year with Matthew and Nicole, but having more than
one hit the U.S. in a season is strange. If Irma hits Florida as a Category 4 or
5 storm, it will be the first time in historical record that the U.S. was hit by
two Category 4 or 5 storms in one year, said Colorado State University
meteorology professor Phil Klotzbach. Why is Irma so strong? Hurricanes use warm
water as fuel. Irma has been over water that is 0.7 to 1 C warmer than normal.
And that warm water goes deeper than usual. High altitude winds, which can fight
or even decapitate storms, are not strong, also helping Irma. While over the
open Atlantic Ocean on Tuesday, Irma's 297 km/h winds set a record for that
region. In the entire Atlantic, Caribbean, and Gulf of Mexico, only hurricane
Allen in 1980 was stronger with 305 km/h winds. Others with 297 km/h winds: A
1935 Florida storm, 1988's Gilbert, and 2005's Wilma.

How unusual is Irma? This is only the second time since satellite-tracking began
about 40 years ago that one maintained 297 km/h winds for more than 24 hours,
said Klotzbach. The other was the massive killer typhoon Haiyan that killed more
than 6,000 people in the Philippines in 2013. Is this global warming? Scientists
take weeks or months to conduct intricate studies, using computer simulations,
to see if a storm was worsened by man-made climate change. There have been a
limited number of hurricanes since record-keeping began in 1851, which makes it
difficult to do robust statistical analyses.

However, scientists have long said future global warming would make some of the
worst storms stronger and wetter and recently have linked climate change to
future rapid intensification of storms. There has been scientific debate over
whether global warming means more storms, but the stronger and wetter is
generally accepted by scientists. Wasn't there a hurricane drought? In the U.S.,
yes. Until Harvey last month, no major hurricane had hit the U.S. since Wilma.
That 2005 storm also was the last major hurricane to hit Florida. Scientists say
the 12-year landfall drought was likely chance. There were still the same number
of hurricanes brewing, they just missed the U.S. or were not major hurricanes.
During that span, Superstorm Sandy was a minor hurricane in terms of wind speed
but catastrophic in damage when it hit in 2012. How are storms forecast?
Forecasters at the U.S. National Hurricane Center rely on dozens of computer
simulations and their own expert experience. They use real-time readings of
wind, temperature, air pressure, humidity and more. But those real-time readings
are sparse and spread out. Figuring out a storm's path and strength is tricky
and usually forecasts do go out farther than five days. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017
Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Associated Press; The eye of hurricane Irma is seen just north of
the island of Hispaniola, with hurricane Katia in the Gulf of Mexico, and
hurricane Jose in the Atlantic Ocean.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 The Packet & Times (Orillia)
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 81 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                              Owen Sound Sun Times

                            September 8, 2017 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Irma questions answered; Storm pounding Caribbean began near islands off west
coast of Africa

BYLINE: Seth Borenstein, The Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 795  words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A powerful hurricane Irma is threatening millions of people in the Caribbean and
Florida. Some answers to questions about Irma and hurricanes: Where do theses
storms come from? Irma is a classic Cape Verde storm, which begin near the
islands off the west coast of Africa. Some of the worst hurricanes start as
puffs of unstable air and storminess there and chug west, gaining strength over
the warm open Atlantic. Another storm, Jose, has followed in Irma's footsteps.
Some of those storms fizzle from wind shear or other weather conditions. Still
others curve harmlessly north into the mid-North Atlantic and are called "fish
storms." Storms also start in the Gulf of Mexico, like Katia, which formed off
Mexico and was declared a hurricane on Wednesday. Why are storms happening now?
Hurricane season starts June 1 and ends Nov. 30. That's usually when the water
is warm enough and other weather conditions are conducive to storm formation.
Hurricanes need water that's at least 26 C. Peak hurricane season is from
mid-August to mid-October with the peak being Sept. 10 or 11. What's an average
season like? An average season produces 12 named storms, according to the
National Weather Service. Wednesday's Katia is the 11th this season. Storms get
names when winds reach 62 km/h. The average season produces six hurricanes and
three of those become major at 178 km/h winds or higher. So far this year, there
have been six hurricanes: Two major ones, Harvey and Irma; two new ones
Wednesday, Katia and Jose; and Franklin and Gert. Did forecasters see this busy
year coming? Yes. In May, the weather service predicted a 70 per cent likelihood
of 11 to 17 named storms with five to nine becoming hurricanes. They predicted
two to four major hurricanes. In early August, it was changed to a 60 per cent
chance of 14 to 19 named storms, five to nine hurricanes and two to five major
hurricanes.

Are back-to-back big hurricanes unusual? Major storms can and do form
back-to-back and did so last year with Matthew and Nicole, but having more than
one hit the U.S. in a season is strange. If Irma hits Florida as a Category 4 or
5 storm, it will be the first time in historical record that the U.S. was hit by
two Category 4 or 5 storms in one year, said Colorado State University
meteorology professor Phil Klotzbach. Why is Irma so strong? Hurricanes use warm
water as fuel. Irma has been over water that is 0.7 to 1 C warmer than normal.

And that warm water goes deeper than usual. High altitude winds, which can fight
or even decapitate storms, are not strong, also helping Irma. While over the
open Atlantic Ocean on Tuesday, Irma's 297 km/h winds set a record for that
region. In the entire Atlantic, Caribbean, and Gulf of Mexico, only hurricane
Allen in 1980 was stronger with 305 km/h winds. Others with 297 km/h winds: A
1935 Florida storm, 1988's Gilbert, and 2005's Wilma. How unusual is Irma? This
is only the second time since satellite-tracking began about 40 years ago that
one maintained 297 km/h winds for more than 24 hours, said Klotzbach. The other
was the massive killer typhoon Haiyan that killed more than 6,000 people in the
Philippines in 2013. Is this global warming? Scientists take weeks or months to
conduct intricate studies, using computer simulations, to see if a storm was
worsened by man-made climate change. There have been a limited number of
hurricanes since record-keeping began in 1851, which makes it difficult to do
robust statistical analyses.

However, scientists have long said future global warming would make some of the
worst storms stronger and wetter and recently have linked climate change to
future rapid intensification of storms. There has been scientific debate over
whether global warming means more storms, but the stronger and wetter is
generally accepted by scientists. Wasn't there a hurricane drought? In the U.S.,
yes. Until Harvey last month, no major hurricane had hit the U.S. since Wilma.
That 2005 storm also was the last major hurricane to hit Florida. Scientists say
the 12-year landfall drought was likely chance. There were still the same number
of hurricanes brewing, they just missed the U.S. or were not major hurricanes.
During that span, Superstorm Sandy was a minor hurricane in terms of wind speed
but catastrophic in damage when it hit in 2012. How are storms forecast?
Forecasters at the U.S. National Hurricane Center rely on dozens of computer
simulations and their own expert experience. They use real-time readings of
wind, temperature, air pressure, humidity and more. But those real-time readings
are sparse and spread out. Figuring out a storm's path and strength is tricky
and usually forecasts do go out farther than five days. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2017
Osprey Media Group Inc. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Associated Press; The eye of hurricane Irma is seen just north of
the island of Hispaniola, with hurricane Katia in the Gulf of Mexico, and
hurricane Jose in the Atlantic Ocean.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 Owen Sound Sun Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 82 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                              May 22, 2017 Monday

MEET THE COOLHEADED HURRICANE HUNTERS;
Their harrowing flights into the eye of the storm are all in a day's work

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: ; Pg. Z1

LENGTH: 1076 words


When storms gather, the NOAA's Doug Macintyre, Billy Bonner and their research
jet "Gonzo" are ready to roll.

The eyewall of infamous Hurricane Katrina on Aug, 28, 2005.

"We fly right through the eyewall into the heart of the storm," says Air Force
Lt. Col. Brian Schroeder.

"Buckle up - bumpy skies ahead."

While that warning could be announced on your next flight, it's virtually an
ironclad guarantee for the crews aboard the fleet of "hurricane hunter"
airplanes and jets, whose sole mission is to fly directly into and around some
of the world's most powerful storms.

The 2017 Atlantic hurricane season officially begins June 1, and the hurricane
hunters will again be on call this year to fly into these meteorological
monsters.

The U.S. Air Force and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
operate the aircraft that fly into the storms. The planes recently were on
display at Washington's Reagan National Airport as part of NOAA's spring
hurricane awareness tour, which visited several East Coast cities.

"We fly right through the eyewall into the heart of the storm at 5,000 to 10,000
feet above the Earth's surface," said Air Force Lt. Col. Brian Schroeder, who
has flown more than 100 missions, including 50 eye-wall penetrations. The
eyewall is a doughnut-like ring of thunderstorms that surrounds the calm eye.

The Air Force Reserve flies 10 WC-130 turboprop planes based at Keesler Air
Force Base in Biloxi, Miss., known as the 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron.
They are the workhorses of the hurricane hunters.

An average weather reconnaissance mission lasts 11 hours and covers almost 3,500
miles, the Air Force said, and the flight typically carries six to 15 people,
who make up the flight crew and the weather crew. In addition to full-fledged
hurricanes, the planes often fly into nascent storms, known as tropical waves or
tropical depressions.

The primary purpose of the missions, Schroeder said, is to locate the storm
center and measure its maximum winds. That key information is then sent back to
the National Hurricane Center. Often, he said, whether a storm gets a name is
based directly on information from the hurricane hunters.

A tropical depression becomes a named tropical storm when its sustained winds
reach 39 mph.

"What makes flying through the eyewall exhilarating and at times somewhat scary
are the turbulent updrafts and down-drafts that one hits," NOAA research
scientist Chris Landsea said. "Those flying in the plane definitely feel these
wind currents" and can end up reaching for their airsickness bags, he said.

The crews also evaluate the storm's size and structure and send that data to the
hurricane center. Most of the data, which are crucial to the hurricane's threat,
cannot be obtained from satellites, Schroeder said.

The weather data, including temperature, dew point, wind speed, barometric
pressure and relative humidity, are gathered by "dropsondes," small, disposable
cylindrical instruments that are dropped out of the planes and float by
parachute down to the surface.

"Those data go into the computer forecast models and help us make a more
accurate track forecast," said Rick Knabb, former director of the National
Hurricane Center.

The data from the hurricane hunters can increase the accuracy of forecasts up to
30%, NOAA said, which is important in helping narrow the "cone of uncertainty"
in storm-tracking computer model forecasts.

No civilians - other than journalists and scientists - are permitted on the
flights.

ABOVE THE STORM

NOAA operates two separate missions into hurricanes: the Gulfstream-IV jet,
which flies above and around hurricanes, and two WP-3D Orion turboprop aircraft,
which fly into hurricanes mainly for research.

The jet is used for hurricane forecasts and for research, hurricane center
spokesman Dennis Feltgen said. There is one Gulf-stream jet and, this year, just
one Orion turboprop (the other Orion is being rewinged), he said. The NOAA
flights are out of MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa.

The Gulfstream jet is the nation's "only high-altitude hurricane reconnaissance
aircraft," pilot Lt. Dave Cowen said. He said it usually does not penetrate the
hurricane eye but instead flies above the storm at 41,000 to 45,000 feet,
deploying 20 to 40 dropsondes along the way.

The jet often flies over hundreds of miles of ocean around a storm, measuring
the winds that are steering it. The information helps forecasters better predict
where a storm is heading.

The Gulfstream also flies research missions into the very tops of hurricanes,
away from the worst turbulence and rain.

NOAA's Orion turboprops collect data from inside storms for research. On those
flights, on-board scientists direct the aircraft to those parts of the storm of
interest, which might not be near the eye of the hurricane. Experiments might be
planned to examine the outer rain bands or the hurricane's interaction with the
environment.

HISTORY OF THE HUNTERS

Army Air Force Colonel Joseph Duckworth piloted the first plane that
intentionally flew into a hurricane near Houston, on July 27, 1943. He made two
flights that day, calling them "experimental instrument flights," according to
the book Hurricane Watch.

With World War II raging, the military knew that tracking and flying into
Atlantic hurricanes and Pacific typhoons were vital, which "motivated leaders to
make airborne hurricane reconnaissance a standard weapon in the forecaster's
arsenal," the book says.

Hurricane fliers had their first success the next year with what came to be
called "The Great Atlantic Hurricane of 1944." (Storm names didn't begin until
1950.) Navy and Army planes tracked the storm from when it was north of Puerto
Rico until it slammed into the eastern end of Long Island and New England after
sideswiping North Carolina.

The hurricane killed 50 people in the USA, but newspapers and magazines as well
as officials credited the warnings the flights made possible with keeping the
death toll much below the 600 dead in a similar hurricane in 1938 that hit Long
Island and New England without warning.

Since the first flights into hurricanes and western Pacific typhoons (as
hurricanes are known there), three Air Force planes have gone down in typhoons
(in 1952, 1958 and 1974), and one Navy plane in an Atlantic hurricane (in 1952).
All 36 crew members and passengers aboard the four airplanes were lost.

The Navy stopped flying into hurricanes in the 1970s. Airplanes no longer fly
into western Pacific typhoons.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 83 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             June 1, 2011 Wednesday

Will Florida's luck hold during this hurricane season?

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 967 words


State spared for 5 straight years, but experts predict busier than normaal
season

This year could be a record-breaking hurricane season for Florida -- that is, if
no hurricanes strike the state.

Florida has gone five years without a direct hit, and a hurricane-free 2011
would mark the sixth year in a row -- longer than any stretch in recorded
history, according to National Hurricane Center records going back to 1851.

But the odds are not in Florida's favor. Since 1851, 113 hurricanes have made
landfall on Florida's coast. That amounts to at least four hurricane strikes
every six years.

During other periods without a hurricane, Floridians have tended to become
complacent about their risk. Not so this year. Devastating tornados in the
Midwest, and other natural disasters globally, have jolted many people,
emergency managers say.

"I'm noticing that a lot of people are asking for the hurricane guides this
year. We've almost depleted our supply and we're ordering more," said Ed
McCrane, director of Emergency Management for Sarasota County. He said the
department has distributed about 40,000 of the safety guides, far more than in
past years.

"They're kind of equating the tsunami and the earthquakes and the tornadoes to
what's going to happen with our hurricane season," he said.

With its coastline jutting out into one of the most active hurricane zones on
the planet, Florida rarely goes more than two years without a hurricane strike
-- let alone six.

The last and only other time the state went five years without a hurricane was
between 1979 and 1985.

Climate scientists are once again predicting that the six-month season,
beginning today, will bring more storms than normal -- as many as 18, with 10
growing into hurricanes.

Further, meteorologists say it is unlikely that the same weather patterns that
steered last year's numerous powerful hurricanes away from the U.S. and Florida
coasts will be repeated.

In 2010, hurricanes formed farther east than usual because Atlantic sea surface
temperatures were a record-breaking 4 degrees above normal. Some meteorologists
say that may have played a role in the storms spinning out to sea before
approaching the U.S. coastline.

Last year also was a strong La Niña year. La Niña -- cooler-than-normal waters
in the tropical Pacific -- shuts down upper-level winds over the Atlantic. That
helps hurricanes form but also could have played a role in the steering patterns
that directed the hurricanes.

This year, the tropical Pacific is returning to normal temperatures and the
Atlantic is 2 degrees above normal. The conditions are much more typical than
last year or the year before, when La Niña's opposite -- El Niño -- created such
wind over the tropical Atlantic that only nine storms formed, three of which
became hurricanes.

Bill Read, director of the National Hurricane Center, and other forecasters
emphasized at recent hurricane conferences that it does not take an active
hurricane season for a hurricane to strike the U.S.

Showing a slide comparing two hurricane years, one with 19 named storms and one
with only six, Read asked, "Which would you prefer?"

The year with 19 storms was last year and the year with six was 1992, when
Hurricane Andrew leveled southeast Florida.

The state has seen two four-year periods without a hurricane strike. Those calm
stretches were broken by Andrew in 1992 and Hurricane Charley in 2004, two of
the most devastating storms in the state's history.

The last storm to tear a path of destruction across the state was Hurricane
Wilma in 2005, a weak Category 3 at landfall in sparsely populated Cape Romano,
south of Naples. The giant storm affected all of South Florida on both
coastlines and caused $23 billion in damage.

Wilma was the last major hurricane, with winds exceeding 110 mph, to hit the
U.S. coast. However, Ike -- a strong Category 2 that struck near Galveston,
Texas, in 2008 -- caused more property damage, $30 billion, and loss of life.

Hurricane season lasts through Nov. 30, peaking in August and mid-September.

Most storms -- about 90 percent -- form after Aug. 1. The earliest hurricane to
make a U.S. landfall was Alma on June 9, 1966, according to National Hurricane
Center statistics.

The storm struck Northwest Florida as a Category 1 and caused major flooding,
with tides rising higher than 10 feet.

ONLINE

IBISEYE.com: Turn to the Herald-Tribune's interactive Ibiseye hurricane tracker
to monitor 2011 developing tropical storms and hurricanes.

TOPIC: Get evacuaction maps, read hurricane coverage and see an online version
of our 2011 Hurricane Guide at heraldtribune.com/hurricanes.

BLOG: Read reporter Kate Spinner's blog on tropical weather:
heraldtribune.com/hurricanereport.

INSIDE

See the list of 2011 storm names. 5A

2011 STORM NAMES

Arlene

Bret

Cindy

Don

Emily

Franklin

Gert

Harvey

Irene

Jose

Katia

Lee

Maria

Nate

Ophelia

Philippe

Rina

Sean

Tammy

Vince

Whitney

HERALD-TRIBUNE STORM RESOURCES

Hurricane Report hurricanereport.blogs.heraldtribune.com - a blog on severe
weather news and science

Ibiseye.com - Keep track of storms.

Topics page: www.heraldtribune.com/section/topic0330 - learn about hurricanes

Other Resources:

National Weather Service Tampa Bay, www.srh.noaa.gov/tbw - In the two days
before a storm strikes, go here to get specific information about the threat to
your neighborhood.

National Hurricane Center, www.nhc.noaa.gov - Visit this site to get technical
details about brewing storms and official forecasts.

Federal Emergency Management Agency,
www.ready.gov/america/beinformed/hurricanes.html - Learn how to prepare for
disaster.

Find your evacuation zone:

Manatee County (941) 749-3507:
public.co.manatee.fl.us/ims/html/viewer.htm?Service=Emergency_Operations

Sarasota County (941) 861-5000: www.scgov.net/kyz/KnowYourZone.aspx

Charlotte County (941) 833-4000: www2.charlottefl.com/stormsurgesearch//

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A woman searches for salvageable items in the wreckage of her
daughter's mobile home in Immokalee after Hurricane Wilma in 2005. Wilma was the
last storm to tear a path of destruction across the state. This year, scientists
are predicting as many as 18 storms, with 10 becoming hurricanes. NEW YORK TIMES
ARCHIVE / OCTOBER 2005

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 84 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            March 28, 2012 Wednesday

Better ways to warn of hurricanes

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: B; ARCHIVES; Pg. BS02

LENGTH: 447 words

DATELINE: ORLANDO


ORLANDO

Sweeping changes are in the works for the National Hurricane Center's visual
warnings on tropical weather, and this time scientists want to make sure the
public understands them.

Within a few years, the cone of uncertainty, which shows a hurricane's predicted
path, will likely be obsolete. Too many people misinterpret it as a forecast for
hurricane winds. Also, new warnings and maps for storm surge are likely to
emerge, a move that will bring the largest change to the hurricane center's
warning program in decades.

Hurricane Ike is the driving force behind the changes, said Jamie Rhome, a storm
surge specialist with the National Hurricane Center. In 2008, Ike's enormous
storm surge trapped thousands of people in Galveston and nearby coastal areas
because they did not evacuate, despite pleas from the National Weather Service.
Later, surveys of residents in Miami and Tampa also revealed major gaps in the
public's understanding of hurricanes, particularly the potential for high winds
and surge beyond the forecast cone.

The cone shows where a storm's eye is likely to travel, not the area of
hurricane impacts. Further, forecasters expect the cone to be wrong one-third of
the time, uncertainty the cone does not clearly convey. It also does not show
the hurricane's size.

The tentative new products include a storm surge map that shows how far inland
and how deep seawater is likely to flow into communities as a storm approaches.
Another shows only a storm surge warning area, similar to the National Weather
Service maps that show tornado and severe thunderstorm warnings. Proposed
hurricane wind graphics show where hurricane and tropical-storm force winds are
forecast, with some showing the cone overlapping the predicted wind field and
others showing the wind alone.

"We kind of want to get people off the idea that the wind and surge stop at the
coast," said Michael Lowry, a meteorologist with the National Hurricane Center.

The proposed storm surge warning would bring the most significant change. There
is no way now for the hurricane center to issue official warnings about storm
surge, even though it is the most deadly and poorly understood risk.

Storm surge is an abnormal rise in sea level caused by the force of a hurricane
as it approaches land. Surges, such as those from Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and
Ike, can cause deadly salt-water flooding miles inland and sometimes more than
100 miles away from where the storm makes landfall.

Similarly, hurricane winds can stretch more than 100 miles from the eye of the
storm and some powerful systems maintain their dangerous winds as they move over
land. Warning systems in place now do not clearly convey that.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 85 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             May 18, 2017 Thursday

Hurricane Center unveils new warnings | Notifications include storm surge
watches, warnings

BYLINE: Elizabeth Djinis

SECTION: A; FL News; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 805 words


WEST PALM BEACH - Following last year's hurricane season, which broke Florida's
nearly 11-year streak without a hurricane making landfall here, new warnings are
being unveiled by the National Hurricane Center to better notify those in a
storm's path, the organization's acting director said Wednesday at the annual
Governor's Hurricane Conference.

The notifications will include new storm surge watches and warnings, which will
be issued if there is a possibility of life-threatening rising sea water washing
inland. Watches will be released within 48 hours of that possibility, and
warnings within 36 hours of the event. Researchers at the National Hurricane
Center found that 90 percent of direct hurricane-related deaths are caused by
water-related injuries, including storm surge.

A change in guidelines also will allow the hurricane center to issue warnings
and watches when a storm is a expected to form, rather than after the storm has
reached high enough winds and other conditions to meet the official definition
of a storm. Often, these systems cannot be defined within the 36- to 48-hour
range defined by watches and warnings, so sending notice about a potential storm
gives people more time to prepare, said acting director Ed Rappaport.

Meanwhile, the "cone graphic" that has become ubiquitous each hurricane season
identifying the potential path of a storm, including the uncertainty that comes
with projecting potential tracks, will reflect the size of the storm, rather
than simply the predicted center of it. A related graphic will offer the
estimated time of arrival for tropical storm-force winds based on specific
locations within a state or region.

These updated warning methods are meant to arm residents with more information
in the event of an emergency, which was a theme state and local emergency
management leaders emphasized at the conference.

Florida officials are especially concerned heading into the 2017 season, after
last season saw the highest total financial damage from natural disasters since
the record 2004 and 2005 hurricane seasons, according to the state's emergency
management director. Hurricane Hermine broke an unprecedented 10-season lull in
which no hurricanes made landfall in Florida. That stretch, following Hurricane
Wilma in October 2005, ended when Hermine came ashore in north Florida in
September.

Although Hurricane Matthew didn't technically make landfall in Florida, it
caused substantial damage as it barely skirted the east coast in October. Both
hurricanes caused an estimated $1.6 billion in damage to the state.

"We need to rethink our expectations of preparedness for our community. First
responders, emergency managers and policymakers should work with our communities
to ensure that they are prepared to meet the response and expectations of their
community in a disaster," said Bill Johnson, director of Palm Beach County
Emergency Management and a conference leader. "We need to tell people exactly
what to do, why and when and repeat it."

Co-sponsored by the National Weather Service, the Florida Emergency Preparedness
Association, the American Red Cross and the Florida Division of Emergency
Management, the 31st annual Governor's Hurricane Conference has almost 1,600
attendees, as well as 138 companies, including representatives from seven
different countries.

This summer also marks the 25th anniversary of Hurricane Andrew, a Category 5
storm that made landfall in South Florida in 1992, a year when El Niño, a global
weather phenomenon marked by warming of water in the equatorial Pacific, was
present. Bryan Norcross, a senior hurricane specialist with The Weather Channel,
led a short session on lessons learned from the hurricane. Andrew gained
intensity quickly with little warning. The storm reached hurricane status, with
sustained winds of more than 73 mph, to a Category 5 system with winds of at
least 157 mph in almost 48 hours, according to Norcross.

Andrew, which hit in late August, was the first named storm of the 1992 season.

"When you think it's not very likely to be that bad, Hurricane Andrew proved
that the worst does happen," said Norcross. "It was worse than we thought it
would ever be and worse than we thought it was at the top end of the scale we
had imagined. When we actually saw what had happened, it was worse."

Experts are expected to release an updated forecast at the end of the week. A
report from Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project has
projected a slightly below average season, with 11 named systems, including four
developing into hurricanes - in part because of an expectation that El Niño
conditions will develop. On average, there are 12 named storms, defined as
systems with sustained winds between 39 mph and 73 mph, with 6.5 of them
becoming hurricanes.

Hurricane season begins June 1 and ends Nov. 30.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A street is blocked from debris washed up from the tidal surge of
Hurricane Hermine on Friday, Sept. 2, 2016, in Cedar Key. Hermine landed as a
Category 1 storm and was downgraded to a tropical storm after landfall. [AP
PHOTO / JOHN RAOUX]

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 86 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            August 10, 2017 Thursday

Forecasters see busier season | This year could be most active | the Atlantic
basin has seen | for named storms since 2010

BYLINE: Elizabeth Djinis

SECTION: A; FL News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 564 words


With six storms already and the peak yet to come, federal forecasters raised the
stakes for the remainder of the 2017 Atlantic hurricane season, saying Wednesday
it could be "extremely active."

Forecasters are now predicting a 60 percent chance that the Atlantic hurricane
season could see between 14 and 19 named storms. That number is an increase from
the preseason forecast from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's National Hurricane Center in May, which offered a 45 percent
chance of an above-normal season with 11 to 17 storms. The number of hurricanes
now predicted, at 5 to 9, remains the same from the preliminary forecast.

Scientists attributed this increase in the outlook to warming waters in the
tropical Atlantic and a lessening El Nino pattern, which often breaks up
hurricanes because of the strong upper level winds it creates that tend to shear

storm systems.

Federal forecasters now say this year could be the most active the Atlantic
basin has seen since 2010. That year had 12 hurricanes and seven tropical
storms, which is double the average amount of hurricanes seen in a typical
season, according to the NHC.

There have been six named storms - including one before the official start of
the six-month season on June 1 - which is double the number that usually form by
this point in the season, according to the NHC.

While most of the season's tropical storms left Florida relatively unscathed,
with Tropical Storm Cindy largely hitting the coastline of southwest Louisiana
and Texas, last month's Tropical Storm Emily intensified overnight and made
landfall on Anna Maria Island. The storm caused power outages to 11,000 people
in Manatee County and 2,700 in Sarasota County, and caused Florida Gov. Rick
Scott to declare a state of emergency in 31 counties, including Sarasota and
Manatee.

Franklin, moving toward the Mexican coastline, became the year's first hurricane
Wednesday afternoon, when a hurricane warning was issued for the coast of Mexico
from Puerto de Veracruz to Cabo Rojo.

"Today's updated outlook underscores the need for everyone to know their true
vulnerabilities to storms and storm surge," said Federal Emergency Management
Agency administrator Brock Long. "As we enter the height of hurricane season,
it's important for everyone to know who issues evacuation orders in their
community, heed the warnings, update their insurance and have a preparedness
plan."

The statistical peak of hurricane season falls between mid-August and
mid-October, according to data from the National Hurricane Center; 78 percent of
tropical storm days, 87 percent of category 1 and 2 hurricane days and 96
percent of the major, Category 3-5, hurricane days occur in that two-month
period.

Sunday also marks the 13th anniversary of 2004's Hurricane Charley, which
ravaged the Charlotte County area and central Florida, causing $3.2 million
worth in damage and destroying 11,000 homes and residential units. Four people
died in Charlotte County, and removing the debris from Charlotte cost $65
million. That storm kicked off an extraordinarily busy period with repeated
hurricane strikes on Florida that continued through 2005 and included Hurricanes
Jeanne, Frances, Ivan, Katrina, Dennis, Rita and Wilma.

That glut gave way to a nearly 11-year streak without a hurricane making
landfall in the state of Florida, broken last year with Hurricane Hermine.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: [Provided by the National Weather Service] [Provided by the National
Weather Service] A street is blocked by debris washed up from the tidal surge of
Hurricane Hermine on Sept. 2, 2016, in Cedar Key. [AP PHOTO / JOHN RAOUX]

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 87 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                           October 24, 2013 Thursday
                                 SVoice Edition

SEASON'S FEW STORMS DEFIED FORECAST

BYLINE: Randy Mann

SECTION: S; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 412 words


Season's few storms defied forecast weather

: Few tropical storms, hurricanes defied forecast

RandyMann

Randy

Mann

The 2013 tropical storm and hurricane season ends Nov. 30.

Over the past three decades, the Atlantic and Caribbean waters have averaged
about 11 named storms. Usually six become hurricanes and two or three are
Category 3 or higher.

For the 2013 season, there have been 11 named storms, including two hurricanes -
Humberto and Ingrid. Neither reached Category 3 status. Since 1960, when
satellites were used to track tropical storms and hurricanes, there have been
only four years with no major hurricanes.

The last time the Atlantic and Caribbean waters did not have a major hurricane
was 1994. That seasonrecorded only seven named storms and three hurricanes.

Although the season isn't over, the chances of a major hurricane developing are
relatively small. Most of the major storms develop in August and September.
Since 1851, a total of 53 hurricanes have hit the U.S. in October with only
three in November. The last big storm to hit the U.S.so late in the season was
Hurricane Kate back in 1985, which came onshore a week before Thanksgiving.
During the record-breaking season in 2005, which had 28 named storms, Hurricane
Wilma, the 13th hurricane and sixth major one of that season, made landfall on
the Yucatan Peninsula on Oct. 20 and 21. Then, Wilma moved into the Gulf of
Mexico and made landfall again in southern Florida on Oct. 24.

Many scientists believed that the 2013 tropical storm and hurricane season was
going to be very active. We had a weak La Nina sea-surface temperature event,
rather than the wind-sheering El Nino, in the waters of the south-central
Pacific Ocean. During weak-to-moderate La Ninas, we often see a higher number of
tropical storms and hurricanes.

For this season, the position of the Bermuda High off the eastern coast of the
United States positioned itself to pump in much drier air from the Sahara Desert
over the Atlantic Ocean. Dry air from the extreme drought in Brazil may have
also contributed to the decreased activity.

In terms of our local weather, the high pressure system that has kept us dry and
relatively mild will hold on into at least the first few days of November.
However, it looks like we'll start seeing some major changes as we get toward
the second week of next month.

If you have any questions or comments, you can contact  at www.facebook.com/
wxmann, or go to www.longrange weather.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                          FOCUS - 88 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                           October 24, 2013 Thursday
                                 VVoice Edition

SEASON'S FEW STORMS DEFIED FORECAST

BYLINE: Randy Mann

SECTION: V; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 411 words


Season'sfew storms defied forecast weather

: Few tropical storms, hurricanes defied forecast

RandyMann

Randy

Mann

The 2013 tropical storm and hurricane season ends Nov. 30.

Over the past three decades, the Atlantic and Caribbean waters have averaged
about 11 named storms. Usually six become hurricanes and two or three are
Category 3 or higher.

For the 2013 season, there have been 11 named storms, including two hurricanes -
Humberto and Ingrid. Neither reached Category 3 status. Since 1960, when
satellites were used to track tropical storms and hurricanes, there have been
only four years with no major hurricanes.

The last time the Atlantic and Caribbean waters did not have a major hurricane
was 1994. That seasonrecorded only seven named storms and three hurricanes.

Although the season isn't over, the chances of a major hurricane developing are
relatively small. Most of the major storms develop in August and September.
Since 1851, a total of 53 hurricanes have hit the U.S. in October with only
three in November. The last big storm to hit the U.S.so late in the season was
Hurricane Kate back in 1985, which came onshore a week before Thanksgiving.
During the record-breaking season in 2005, which had 28 named storms, Hurricane
Wilma, the 13th hurricane and sixth major one of that season, made landfall on
the Yucatan Peninsula on Oct. 20 and 21. Then, Wilma moved into the Gulf of
Mexico and made landfall again in southern Florida on Oct. 24.

Many scientists believed that the 2013 tropical storm and hurricane season was
going to be very active. We had a weak La Nina sea-surface temperature event,
rather than the wind-sheering El Nino, in the waters of the south-central
Pacific Ocean. During weak-to-moderate La Ninas, we often see a higher number of
tropical storms and hurricanes.

For this season, the position of the Bermuda High off the eastern coast of the
United States positioned itself to pump in much drier air from the Sahara Desert
over the Atlantic Ocean. Dry air from the extreme drought in Brazil may have
also contributed to the decreased activity.

In terms of our local weather, the high pressure system that has kept us dry and
relatively mild will hold on into at least the first few days of November.
However, it looks like we'll start seeing some major changes as we get toward
the second week of next month.

If you have any questions or comments, you can contact  at www.facebook.com/
wxmann, or go to www.longrange weather.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                          FOCUS - 89 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                  The National

                            September 8, 2017 Friday

Hurricane Irma will 'devastate' parts of America as 6.3m people are asked to
evacuate

BYLINE: The National

LENGTH: 1908  words


The National

The death toll rises as concerns grow that Hurricane Jose could prove to be just
as powerful as the earlier storm

The head of the US federal emergency agency has warned "the entire south-eastern
United States better wake up and pay attention" to the incoming hurricane as
6.3m people are asked to evacuate Florida.

Brock Long said Hurricane Irma will "devastate" either Florida or neighbouring
states and that parts of Florida would be without power for days. Half a million
people in the state have been ordered to leave their homes.

"Hurricane Irma continues to be a threat that is going to devastate the United
States in either Florida or some of the south-eastern states," Mr Long said.

As Hurricane Irma heads across the Caribbean towards the American mainland, it
was reported that the death toll had moved up to 23 with four more deaths
occurring in the British Virgin Islands and 1.2m being impacted by the extreme
weather. As of Friday noon (local time), the storm was battering Northern Cuba
and the southern Bahamas, its last mainland stop before it reaches Florida.

<figure>

The destruction of Hurricane Irma in St Thomas, US Virgin Islands. All photos
Ian Brown / AP Photo

This image made from video shows damage from Hurricane Irma in St. Thomas, U.S.
Virgin Islands, Thursday, Sept. 7, 2017. Hurricane Irma weakened slightly
Thursday with sustained winds of 175 mph, according to the National Hurricane
Center. The storm boasted 185 mph winds for a more than 24-hour period, making
it the strongest storm ever recorded in the Atlantic Ocean. The storm was
expected to arrive in Cuba by Friday. It could hit the Florida mainland by late
Saturday, according to hurricane center models. (AP Photo/Ian Brown)

This image made from video shows flooding caused by Hurricane Irma on Charlotte
Amalie, in St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, Thursday, Sept. 7, 2017. Hurricane
Irma weakened slightly Thursday with sustained winds of 175 mph, according to
the National Hurricane Center. The storm boasted 185 mph winds for a more than
24-hour period, making it the strongest storm ever recorded in the Atlantic
Ocean. The storm was expected to arrive in Cuba by Friday. It could hit the
Florida mainland by late Saturday, according to hurricane center models. (AP
Photo/Ian Brown)

This image made from video shows several damaged houses by Hurricane Irma in St.
Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, Thursday, Sept. 7, 2017. Hurricane Irma weakened
slightly Thursday with sustained winds of 175 mph, according to the National
Hurricane Center. The storm boasted 185 mph winds for a more than 24-hour
period, making it the strongest storm ever recorded in the Atlantic Ocean. The
storm was expected to arrive in Cuba by Friday. It could hit the Florida
mainland by late Saturday, according to hurricane center models. (AP Photo/Ian
Brown)

In this image made from video, motorists remove debris caused by Hurricane Irma
from the road in St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, Thursday, Sept. 7, 2017.
Hurricane Irma weakened slightly Thursday with sustained winds of 175 mph,
according to the National Hurricane Center. The storm boasted 185 mph winds for
a more than 24-hour period, making it the strongest storm ever recorded in the
Atlantic Ocean. The storm was expected to arrive in Cuba by Friday. It could hit
the Florida mainland by late Saturday, according to hurricane center models. (AP
Photo/Ian Brown)

In this image made from video, neighbors clear debris from the road in St.
Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, Thursday, Sept. 7, 2017. Hurricane Irma weakened
slightly Thursday with sustained winds of 175 mph, according to the National
Hurricane Center. The storm boasted 185 mph winds for a more than 24-hour
period, making it the strongest storm ever recorded in the Atlantic Ocean. The
storm was expected to arrive in Cuba by Friday. It could hit the Florida
mainland by late Saturday, according to hurricane center models. (AP Photo/Ian
Brown)

</figure>

With winds still reaching 150mph, there is a growing fear that the storm will
intensify before it makes landfall - the warm waters around Florida could
reinvigorate Irma from a category four storm back to five, its strength when it
struck Barbuda and Antigua earlier during the week.

Some meterologists were noting that with both Irma and Hurricane Jose currently
at the same strength, natural history was being made in the Atlantic:

2 Atlantic hurricanes currently have winds of 150 mph (#Irma and #Jose) - 1st
time on record Atlantic has had 2 150+ mph storms at same time
pic.twitter.com/SZm1VMTCOs

-- Philip Klotzbach (@philklotzbach) September 8, 2017

It was also pointed out that the eye of the hurricane had doubled in size:

I repeat: eyewall replacement cycle completed. New Irma eye is nearly double the
size it was yesterday. Many more to experience dreaded eye.

-- John Morales (@JohnMoralesNBC6) September 8, 2017

Hurricane Jose, which is following in the path of Irma and is expected to strike
communities across the Caribbean who are still attempting to clean up, has now
grown to a category four storm, the US National Weather Service announced.

In Florida, governor Rick Scott raised the possibility that all 20 million
Floridians should be ready to evacuate the state, if necessary. Even Mar-a-Lago,
Donald Trump's resort in Palm Beach, has been ordered to evacuate along with all
of the Florida Keys.

_______________

Hurricane Irma turns Barbuda to 'rubble' as storm the size of France churns
through the Caribbean

_______________

More than 100,000 Palm Beach County residents were given mandatory evacuation
alerts on Thursday night and Friday morning, and more than a million people
ordered to leave their homes along coastal areas, mostly from the densely
populated Miami-Dade County.

The storm surge also could be deadly across southern Florida and the Florida
Keys during the next 36 hours. The threat of significant storm surge flooding
along the southwest coast of Florida has now increased, with 6 to 12 feet of
inundation above ground level possible in this area.

The National Hurricane Center says this is a life-threatening situation, so
everyone in these areas should take all actions to evacuate before rising water
makes it impossible.

<figure>

Deputy chief of mission, Omar Al Shamsi welcomes Emiratis arriving from Florida.
Photos by UAE in the US

UAE in the US

UAE in the US

UAE in the US

UAE in the US

UAE in the US

</figure>

Governor Scott also said that traffic officials have decided against reversing
the direction of southbound lanes because they still need to move gas and
supplies south. A massive evacuation has clogged Florida's major highways.

Scott says most of the state will have hurricane impacts and "we are running out
of time -- the storm is almost here." They will be opening up the shoulders to
drivers on Interstate 75 from Wildwood, where the Florida turnpike ends, to the
Georgia state line.

The National Weather Service of Florida's Key West sent an unusually blunt and
urgent Twitter message to residents who may be considering staying in the area.

***THIS IS AS REAL AS IT GETS***

***NOWHERE IN THE FLORIDA KEYS WILL BE SAFE***

***YOU STILL HAVE TIME TO EVACUATE***

Please RT. #Irma pic.twitter.com/VWLMEDWoUs

-- NWS Key West (@NWSKeyWest) September 8, 2017

One rare piece of good news came from the US Army Corps of Engineers, who told
Florida's governor that the structural integrity of the Herbert Hoover Dike
containing Lake Okeechobee "will not be compromised" by Hurricane Irma. But
voluntary evacuations for communities surrounding the lake's southern half are
now mandatory, because it's possible Irma's winds will push water over the dike.

President Donald Trump meanwhile urged people to "be safe" as Irma approached.
On Twitter Friday, Trump wrote, "Hurricane Irma is of epic proportion, perhaps
bigger than we have ever seen. Be safe and get out of its way, if possible."

Trump added that the federal government is ready, and in another tweet, he said:
"Our incredible U.S. Coast Guard saved more than 15,000 lives last week with
Harvey. Irma could be even tougher. We love our Coast Guard!"

Hurricane Irma, centre, approaches Cuba and Florida, with Hurricane Katia, left,
in the Gulf of Mexico, and Hurricane Jose, right, in the Atlantic Ocean

The destruction of Hurricane Irma in St Thomas, US Virgin Islands. All photos
Ian Brown / AP Photo

This image made from video shows damage from Hurricane Irma in St. Thomas, U.S.
Virgin Islands, Thursday, Sept. 7, 2017. Hurricane Irma weakened slightly
Thursday with sustained winds of 175 mph, according to the National Hurricane
Center. The storm boasted 185 mph winds for a more than 24-hour period, making
it the strongest storm ever recorded in the Atlantic Ocean. The storm was
expected to arrive in Cuba by Friday. It could hit the Florida mainland by late
Saturday, according to hurricane center models. (AP Photo/Ian Brown)

This image made from video shows flooding caused by Hurricane Irma on Charlotte
Amalie, in St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, Thursday, Sept. 7, 2017. Hurricane
Irma weakened slightly Thursday with sustained winds of 175 mph, according to
the National Hurricane Center. The storm boasted 185 mph winds for a more than
24-hour period, making it the strongest storm ever recorded in the Atlantic
Ocean. The storm was expected to arrive in Cuba by Friday. It could hit the
Florida mainland by late Saturday, according to hurricane center models. (AP
Photo/Ian Brown)

This image made from video shows several damaged houses by Hurricane Irma in St.
Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, Thursday, Sept. 7, 2017. Hurricane Irma weakened
slightly Thursday with sustained winds of 175 mph, according to the National
Hurricane Center. The storm boasted 185 mph winds for a more than 24-hour
period, making it the strongest storm ever recorded in the Atlantic Ocean. The
storm was expected to arrive in Cuba by Friday. It could hit the Florida
mainland by late Saturday, according to hurricane center models. (AP Photo/Ian
Brown)

In this image made from video, motorists remove debris caused by Hurricane Irma
from the road in St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, Thursday, Sept. 7, 2017.
Hurricane Irma weakened slightly Thursday with sustained winds of 175 mph,
according to the National Hurricane Center. The storm boasted 185 mph winds for
a more than 24-hour period, making it the strongest storm ever recorded in the
Atlantic Ocean. The storm was expected to arrive in Cuba by Friday. It could hit
the Florida mainland by late Saturday, according to hurricane center models. (AP
Photo/Ian Brown)

In this image made from video, neighbors clear debris from the road in St.
Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, Thursday, Sept. 7, 2017. Hurricane Irma weakened
slightly Thursday with sustained winds of 175 mph, according to the National
Hurricane Center. The storm boasted 185 mph winds for a more than 24-hour
period, making it the strongest storm ever recorded in the Atlantic Ocean. The
storm was expected to arrive in Cuba by Friday. It could hit the Florida
mainland by late Saturday, according to hurricane center models. (AP Photo/Ian
Brown)

Deputy chief of mission, Omar Al Shamsi welcomes Emiratis arriving from Florida.
Photos by UAE in the US

UAE in the US

UAE in the US

UAE in the US

UAE in the US

UAE in the US


http://imgs.syndigate.info/233/818/31/150503074292.jpg

Hurricane Irma, centre, approaches Cuba and Florida, with Hurricane Katia, left,
in the Gulf of Mexico, and Hurricane Jose, right, in the Atlantic Ocean

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 818


                     Copyright 2017 Abu Dhabi Media Company
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 90 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                          September 5, 2007 Wednesday

Eastern Canada could get turbulent end to storm season; Forecasters warn
unsettled weather off Florida spells trouble for this area

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 719  words


The Canadian Hurricane Centre says people living in Eastern Canada should be
ready for a stormy fall as forecasters warn that conditions are right for a
turbulent close to the annual hurricane season.

Peter Bowyer, a meteorologist at the centre in Dartmouth, N.S., said unsettled
weather off Florida could spell trouble for the region if it develops over the
next few days.

Bowyer said it's always a bit of a guessing game, but the average frequency and
intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes means it is highly likely Eastern
Canada will be affected in some way before hurricane season ends in November.

"We know in Eastern Canada that we seem to be impacted by one or more storms
every year," he said yesterday.

"Newfoundland already has been hit hard by post-tropical storm Chantal,
experiencing tremendous flooding from that storm as it went by. Over the last
three years, we have had six different storms in each of the last three years
that have had significant impact."

U.S. hurricane expert William Gray predicted Tuesday above-average activity for
the remaining three months of the season, with six more hurricanes, three of
them major.

Gray and his team at Colorado State University said a combination of a weak La
Nina and low pressure readings in the Atlantic usually indicate an active
season.

La Nina refers to a pattern of unusually cold surface temperatures in the
eastern Pacific Ocean. The east-to-west winds of La Nina tend to be more
favourable for producing hurricanes in the Atlantic.

"We expect the remainder of the season to be active," Phil Klotzbach, lead
author of the U.S. hurricane forecast, said in a news release from Colorado
State University.

"The conditions in the Pacific are transitioning to a weak La Nina. We have seen
low pressure readings in the tropical Atlantic during August. The combination of
these two factors usually implies an active season."

The latest prediction came as Hurricane Felix -- at one point the most powerful
type of hurricane at Category 5 -- lashed the coast of Honduras.

The Atlantic hurricane season, which runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, averages 9. 6
named storms, 5.9 hurricanes and 2.3 intense hurricanes per year.

The devastating 2005 season set a record with 28 named storms, 15 of them
hurricanes. Four of those hurricanes hit the U.S. coast, the worst among them
Katrina, which devastated New Orleans and levelled parts of the Gulf Coast
region.

Bowyer said 2007 is already a year for the record books, with two Category 5
hurricanes -- Dean and Felix -- making landfall within weeks of each other. In
Newfoundland, damages from a weakened Chantal were estimated in the millions of
dollars after several roads and bridges were washed out.

Up to 155 millimetres of rain fell in some towns in eastern Newfoundland -- more
rain than most communities there get in a typical month.

Bowyer said that despite the storm warnings from hurricane forecasters, it is
difficult to predict the impact.

He said a number of factors are involved in brewing violent weather, although
the most critical ingredient -- a warm ocean surface -- is present in the North
Atlantic.

"Ocean temperatures are the big driver for hurricanes," he said.

"But what we learned last year is that you can have plenty of warm water out
there but that's not necessarily the only ingredient because we saw that last
year was just a normal season even though all the forecasts were predicting a
very busy season."

While there is no scientific proof that global warming and the buildup of
greenhouse gases breeding more hurricanes, some experts believe atmospheric
change could be contributing to the unusual power of big, destructive storms.

Bowyer said accurate figures are not available from earlier years to determine
whether there has been a rise in the number of tropical storms and hurricanes.

But he said there is no question that in the past decade, Eastern Canada has
been regularly affected by violent weather during hurricane season.

"There have been only one or two years in the last 10 to 15 where we have not
had a significant tropical storm or hurricane that has caused some grief for
somebody," Bowyer said.

"Let's just prepare for hurricane season the same way -- knowing it will
probably happen somewhere in this region. We all hope it won't be our own
backyard, but we just don't know."

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 91 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                          November 28, 2007 Wednesday

Hurricane numbers off again this year; Canadian Hurricane Centre stays clear of
long-range predictions

BYLINE: Charles Perry Weather

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 420  words


Long-range forecasting of hurricane activity is not an easy chore.

This fact has been brought home, in a big way, to weather prognosticators in the
last three years in their efforts to predict the numbers and severity of the
massive tropical storms.

Two years ago, predictions by hurricane specialists fell well below what turned
out to be a record-shattering year for named storms. Last year, their forecasts
were well above the actual numbers and strength of hurricanes.

This year, their prognostications are once again above the actual hurricane
activity that did occur, although not as far above as the previous year.

The official hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30. To be designated as a
named storm, a disturbance has to reach tropical storm status, the level
immediately below that of a hurricane.

Just before the season started this year on June 1, the nationally prominent
Gray-Klotzbach team at Colorado State University predicted there would be 17
named storms this year, nine of which would develop into hurricanes. They
forecast that five of them would be especially severe with winds above 110 miles
(177 kilometres) an hour. Another team at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration predicted 13 to 17 named storm, seven to 10 of which would become
hurricanes and three to five, intense hurricanes.

So far, this year, there have been 14 named storms, five hurricanes and two
intense hurricanes.

This has led to speculation from some meteorological sources as to whether there
is any value to predicting hurricane activity that far ahead. Some weather
experts expressed concern that discrepancies in full-season predictions might
undermine the public's faith in their accurate forecasts of actual storms.

Chris Fogarty of Halifax, a meteorologist for the Canadian Hurricane Centre,
said they do not engage in long-term predictions of hurricane numbers or
severity. He said they forecast individual storms from the time they begin to
develop until they peter out or blow out to sea.

Fogarty said the centre's interest is in tracking and analyzing named storms
that affect Canada. And by the time they reach the cold waters, here, they have
a very different structure, he said.

The normal number of hurricanes per year is six, said Fogarty, which would
suggest that 2007 is an average year for the tropical storms. But most of them
tended to be on the weak side, he added.

The only one causing any problems for Atlantic Canada was the last one,
Hurricane Noel.

n Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 92 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                 Independent Tribune (Concord, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          February 21, 2007 Wednesday

Kannapolis assistant city manager chases hurricanes

BYLINE: Ben McNeely, Independent Tribune, Concord, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 592 words


Feb. 21--KANNAPOLIS -- Eddie Smith likes hurricanes.

The Kannapolis assistant city manager has been headed into the paths of
hurricanes since 1998 as a part of a private group that collects weather data.

"A lot of it is the desire to learn more about how hurricanes form," Smith said.
"And how they can have such an explosive impact on a community."

Now, he hopes to collect hurricane data for the federal government.

Smith will travel to the National Hurricane Center in Miami next week to undergo
training as a disaster assistance employee for the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. He will then be a part of the Hurricane Liaison Team -- a group of 25
people who distributes information from forecasters at the National Hurricane
Center to local, state and federal officials in the field.

"The idea is to have rapid communication to folks in the field," said Brandon
Bolinski, hurricane program specialist at the FEMA Region Four office in
Atlanta.

"We help field questions about the hurricane, the emergency preparedness. Part
of out role is just being there and getting the information out."

The team is called to the hurricane center in Miami usually within three to five
days of a hurricane landing in the United States, Bolinski said.

Part of the training will be learning hurricane tracking and forecasting models,
getting a feel for operations at the hurricane center and learning what roles
the hurricane liaison team plays in the event of a hurricane, Bolinski said.

Smith is no stranger to working in hurricanes. He worked as an emergency planner
in coastal New Hanover County and went through six hurricanes in Wilmington. He
also is a part of the Hurricane Intercept Research Team, a private venture that
collects weather data about hurricanes that make landfall.

Smith has been in the group since 1998.

"We purposefully go out and collect weather data and video to share with NOAA
(National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration) and with the National
Hurricane Center," Smith said.

Using vehicles specially equipped with advanced weather tracking gear, the team
tracks the hurricane and gathers data as it makes landfall.

The Hurricane Intercept Research team is not a government group, Smith said. The
team gets sponsorships from Lowe's Home Improvement and Sprint.

In the offseason, the team travels the East Coast, putting on hurricane
preparedness fairs at schools, civic groups and at Lowe's stores.

"What our group does is share information with the hurricane center and with the
local public safety agencies so they know what is going on," Smith said.

When the team is in the middle of a hurricane, members live-stream video on
their Web site.

What separates the research team from other groups is they practice safety
first, Smith said.

"There are guys that their career is to shoot hurricanes and sell the footage,"
Smith said. "We don't do that."

Smith said he likes storm chasing because he can help communities prepare and
recover from the storms. His background is in emergency management and Smith
said he can use his skill set to "absorb information, turn around and respond to
the communities and help them respond and recover from the event."

--Contact Ben McNeely at bmcneely@independenttribune.com or 704-789-9131.

Copyright (c) 2007, Independent Tribune, Concord, N.C. Distributed by
McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20070221-IP-0221-Kannapolis-assistant-city-manager-chases-hurricanes

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IP


                       Copyright 2007 Independent Tribune


                          FOCUS - 93 of 881 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                           December 2, 2006 Saturday
                                National Edition

Blown away: NOAA was totally wrong in its predictions of catastrophe in this
hurricane season

BYLINE: Steven Milloy, Financial Post

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST: COMMENT; Pg. FP15

LENGTH: 790  words


During this past Wednesday's oral argument in the U.S. Supreme Court global
warming case of Massachusetts v. EPA, a seemingly perplexed Justice Antonin
Scalia pointedly asked the Massachusetts assistant attorney general, "When is
the predicted cataclysm?"

That's a question with more than a little irony this week -- the end of the much
dreaded hurricane (non-)season.

On May 22, 2006, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
issued its "2006 Atlantic Hurricane Outlook," forecasting an "80% chance of an
above-normal hurricane season, a 15% chance of a near-normal season, and only a
5% chance of a below-normal season." NOAA called for "a very active 2006 season,
with 13 to 16 named storms, eight to 10 hurricanes, and four to six major
hurricanes."

NOAA based its forecast on "an expected continuation of conditions associated
with the multi-decadal signal, which has favoured above-normal Atlantic
hurricane seasons since 1995. These conditions include considerably warmer than
normal sea-surface temperatures, lower wind shear, reduced sea level pressure,
and a more conducive structure of the African easterly jet [stream]."

And NOAA was quite sure of upcoming calamitous storms. "The main uncertainty in
this outlook is not whether the season will be above normal, but how much above
normal it will be," the agency stated in the section of the report entitled,
"Uncertainties in the Outlook."

NOAA's forecast prompted scary headlines on May 23, including: "Brutal string of
hurricanes threatens U.S. once again" (The Globe and Mail, Toronto); "Coming
hurricane season looks to be another tempestuous one" (San Francisco Chronicle);
"Hectic hurricane season predicted" (Charlotte Observer); and "U.S. braced for
another battering by storms" (Financial Times, London).

Though the predicted storms were slow to develop during the ensuing months, NOAA
remained confident of an above-average hurricane season when it issued the
"August 2006 Update to Atlantic Hurricane Season Outlook." NOAA continued to
predict a 75% chance of an above-average season, a 20% chance of a near-normal
season and only a 5% chance of a below-normal season, including 12 to 15 named
storms, seven to nine hurricanes and three to four major hurricanes.

NOAA attributed the slight change in forecast due to three reasons: less
conducive atmospheric and oceanic conditions; unexpected changes in rainfall
patterns; and the absence of upper-atmospheric conditions present during the
hyperactive 2003-05 hurricane seasons.

NOAA has yet to issue its final seasonal summary for 2006, but one thing is
clear -- NOAA's predictions for the 2006 hurricane season were way off. During
the 2006 hurricane season there were only nine named storms, five hurricanes,
and two major hurricanes -- none of which hit the United States. According to
NOAA's own classification system, these numbers classify 2006 as a
"below-normal" hurricane season -- something NOAA gave only a 5% chance of
happening.

How can so many smart folks be so wrong? What's the lesson to be learned from
NOAA's big whiff? Could it possibly be that predicting weather and climatic
events isn't so easy?

Consider NOAA's predictions for the 2006 hurricane season in the context of the
manmade global-warming hypothesis.

Despite the vast collective expertise of NOAA scientists, immense quantities of
atmospheric and oceanic data, and unprecedented computing power, NOAA failed
miserably in predicting weather events a mere six months into the future -- and
reiterated those same ill-conceived predictions at mid-season.

Yet global-warming alarmists, including those at NOAA, expect us to unthinkingly
buy into their dire forecasts of global warming -- predictions that extend 100
years or more into the future. Forecasting global climate change decades into
the future can only be described as orders of magnitude more complex than
forecasting an imminent, six month-long hurricane season.

Let's not forget that the mathematical climate models used to forecast future
global climate gloom-and-doom don't come close to matching up with historical
climate change. How can we reasonably expect them to be predictors of the future
climate change? Is it wise to spend trillions of dollars based on such
predictions?

The point here is not that the "below-normal" 2006 hurricane season disproves
the global-warming hypothesis. It doesn't any more than the "above-normal" 2005
hurricane season proves the hypothesis.

What the 2006 hurricane season reveals is our -- or in this case NOAA's? --
susceptibility to producing and relying on wildly wrong climate-related
predictions. This failure should temper our rush to try modifying weather
through economy-killing greenhouse gas regulation -- not embolden it.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Black & White
Photo: Courtesy of NOAA; Hurricane Katrina isseen churning in the Gulf of Mexico
last year.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business; Opinion

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2006 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 94 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              May 20, 2007 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

UNDERSTANDING THE TERMS

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 373 words


When tropical weather threatens, agencies from the local to federal levels watch
the systems and try to gauge their strength. When a hurricane is approaching
land, the National Hurricane Center will begin issuing watches and warnings.
Here's how to decipher those:

HURRICANE: The storm has winds of more than 73 mph.

HURRICANE WATCH: Hurricane-force winds of more than 73 mph are possible within
36 hours.

HURRICANE WARNING: Hurricane-force winds are possible within 24 hours.

EYE: This is the hurricane's roughly circular center area where the winds are
comparatively lighter.

TROPICAL STORMS: These generate winds of 39 to 73 mph. Watches and warnings also
are issued for these.

LANDFALL: The place where the center of a storm intersects with land. Because
the storm's strongest winds are not in the center, an area can be greatly
affected even if the storm doesn't make landfall there.

ERROR CONE: This shows a broad path that a storm could take. Because of
uncertainty in forecasting a storm's path and strength, watches and warnings
cover large areas of coastline. Those alerts mean anyone in a watch or warning
area could be hit by a storm.

STORM SURGE: The abnormal rise in sea level accompanies a hurricane or other
intense storm. This dome of water (often 50 to 100 miles wide) sweeps the
coastline near where the hurricane's eye makes landfall.

Source: National Weather Service

MEASURING A HURRICANE

Emergency officials use the Saffir-Simpson scale to decide which areas to
evacuate. It ranks hurricanes from Category 1 (minimal) to Category 5
(catastrophic).

Category 1

Wind: 74 to 95 mph

Storm surge: 4 to 5 feet

Damage: Minimal

Example: Hurricane Gaston in 2004

Category 2

Wind: 96 to 110 mph

Storm surge: 6 to 8 feet

Damage: Moderate

Example: Hurricane Frances in 2004

Category 3

Wind: 111 to 130 mph

Storm surge: 9 to 12 feet

Damage: Extensive

Example: Hurricanes Jeanne and Ivan in 2004

Category 4

Wind: 131 to 155 mph

Storm surge: 13 to 18 feet

Damage: Extreme

Example: Hurricane Charley in 2004

Category 5

Wind: 156 mph plus

Storm surge: Higher than 18 feet

Damage: Catastrophic

Example: Hurricane Andrew in 1992

Photo: satellite image of a hurricane

Copyright © 2007, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: HURRICANE GUIDE 2007

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 95 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             March 22, 2016 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Below-average storm season forecast;
Leading expert points to frigid waters flowing from North Atlantic.

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: ORLANDO


A below-average hurricane season this year? Floridians will take that, even if
it is just an early prediction.

Phil Klotzbach, a leading hurricane expert, made that prediction Monday, based
partly on the fact that frigid waters flowing out of the North Atlantic Ocean
might limit activity as warm seas that feed energy to storms cool.

"The far North Atlantic is one of the few really cold areas on the globe right
now, and those cold anomalies are bleeding down toward the west coast of
Africa," said Klotzbach, a researcher with Colorado State University's
Department of Atmospheric Science. "From there, they alter pressure patterns,
winds and churn up the sea surface making the Atlantic not as conducive for a
super active season."

Klotzbach, who made his prediction Monday at the week long National Hurricane
Conference in Orlando, won't deliver his official storm forecast until April.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is also weeks away from
releasing its official 2016 hurricane forecast, but meteorologists have been
buzzing about whether the end of El Niñ o will leave the U.S. more vulnerable to
storms.

El Niñ o, a global weather phenomenon that begins with a periodic warming of the
Pacific Ocean, is characterized by strong westerly winds that cut down Atlantic
storms.

The 2015-2016 El Niñ o, one of the strongest on record, is expected to weaken by
summer.

But like a pendulum, the mighty trade winds that take a back seat during El Niñ
o, can roar back, awakening La Niñ a -- a more accommodating hurricane host.

The most recent forecast by the Climate Prediction Center says there is a 50
percent chance La Niñ a will arrive by September. Hurricane season runs June
through November.

"The higher the chances of La Niñ a, the higher the chances for a bigger than
usual hurricane season," said Bob Henson, a meteorologist and blogger for
Weather Underground, in an interview earlier this month. "You have less wind
shear and more favorable conditions for showers and thunderstorms to develop
into hurricanes."

But Klotzbach stressed Monday that the atmosphere doesn't always react
immediately to change, meaning an El Niñ o hangover might linger to help thwart
storms. Also, other factors, such as an area of low pressure he says has been a
predominant factor over the East Coast have acted against storms. Low pressure
turns in a counter-clockwise direction, pushing hurricanes away from the U.S.
coast and to the north.

"I think the best example of this was 2010 when there were 12 hurricanes in the
Atlantic and not one hit the U.S.," Klotzbach said. "We were extraordinarily
lucky that year."

In fact, while Klotzbach looks at decades worth of data to see what patterns
produce weak or active hurricane seasons, he said sometimes a hurricane miss is
just providence.

The U.S. has not been hit by a major hurricane -- Category 3 or higher -- in 10
years. Florida's last hurricane was 2005's Wilma.

"There has been a significant luck component," he said. "There have been 27
major hurricanes in a row with none hitting the U.S. The odds of that are one in
several thousand."

Klotzbach is lead author on the annual hurricane forecasts by Colorado State
University's Tropical Meteorology Project. He took over the task in 2006 from
noted hurricane researcher William Gray.

This past year, the duo's April hurricane forecast said there would be seven
named storms, three hurricanes and one major hurricane. The season ended in
November with 11 named storms, four hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

"2016 will be a good test since we won't have El Niñ o," said Klotzbach, who
believes the Atlantic might have entered a climatic pattern of fewer hurricanes.
"It would definitely increase confidence that we are moving out of an active
time for storms."

Klotzbach is among dozens of weather and emergency management experts speaking
at this year's National Hurricane Conference. About 1,500 people are registered
for the week long event.

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

STORM 2016

Palm Beach Post weather reporter Kimberly Miller is providing news and insights
from this week's National Hurricane Conference in Orlando.

Follow her updates all week at PalmBeachPost.com/weatherplus and on Twitter at
@kmillerweather

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2016 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 96 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             May 12, 2016 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Are hurricane season forecasts too specific for safety's sake?

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: ORLANDO


Research groups nationwide churn out hurricane forecasts as fast and furious as
the spin of a tropical cyclone as the June 1 start of storm season approaches.

Already at least four predictions have been issued, with the big daddy of all
storm forecasters -- the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration -- waiting
until May 27 to offer its guidance.

But National Hurricane Center Director Rick Knabb, who spoke Wednesday at the
Governor's Hurricane Conference in Orlando, criticized forecasts that are overly
specific about how many storms will hit the U.S. and where.

His concern: People won't prepare if they believe they aren't on the hurricane
hit list.

"If we at the hurricane center, with all the technology and tools and expertise
we have, can't tell you for sure even within five days if a hurricane is going
to hit anywhere on the East Coast of the U.S., how can anyone reliably make a
forecast months in advance?" Knabb said. "The science just isn't there."

An April report from the Hurricane Genesis and Outlook Project at Coastal
Carolina University said the most probable scenario this season is that no
hurricanes will make landfall along the East Coast, but one will hit the Gulf
Coast.

The Pennsylvania-based AccuWeather was less specific in its April forecast about
where a storm would strike , but did predict three U.S. landfalls.

"The seasonal forecast is a good pursuit of the science, but nobody's seasonal
forecast can reliably tell you where a storm is going to go," Knabb said. "We
all have a hurricane problem every year."

With more than a decade passed since a hurricane hit Florida, emergency managers
worry about complacency. Bill Johnson, Palm Beach County's director of emergency
management, called it "hurricane amnesia" during Wednesday's conference.

And Len Pietrafresa, a research professor who leads the Hurricane Genesis
project at Coastal Carolina, understands the complacency concern, but argues the
science has advanced to a point where landfall predictions are possible.

Pietrafresa is a former chairman of both NOAA's Science Advisory Board and the
hurricane center's External Advisory Panel.

"There is internal resistance at NOAA to predict landfalls," he said. "The
National Hurricane Center is a great lab -- they are like rock stars -- but we
are not just blowing smoke. We are presenting the science as we know it."

The Hurricane Genesis project developed forecast algorithms that included
historical and climatological factors. They even looked at how much snow fell in
the Tibetan Plateau, which can change the atmosphere over the Pacific Ocean,
Pietrafresa said.

The second most-likely scenario forecast by the project is that one hurricane
will make landfall on the East Coast and two on the Gulf Coast.

The project's overall forecast is for 13 named storms, seven hurricanes and
three major hurricanes. That's more than the historical average of 12 named
storms, six hurricanes and three major hurricanes, but it jibes with the other
published forecasts, all of which called for a storm season that is near average
or above average.

"We tell everyone that you can't rule any coastal area out," said Dan
Kottlowski, a hurricane expert with AccuWeather. "There is always a chance."

Kottlowski said he also understands the concern that people won't prepare if
they're not in the cross-hairs, but defended a more specific seasonal forecast,
which he said businesses especially want.

"You are going to see a lot more people trying to get into predicting landfalls,
because that's where the insurance industry is looking," Kottlowski said. "We're
in a changing science."

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

weather online

Follow weather reporter Kimberly Miller at the Governor's Hurricane Conference
this week on Twitter at @kmillerweather and on the WeatherPlus blog at
weatherplus.blog.PalmBeachPost.com.

get the app

Check local conditions, see live radar and keep up with reporter Kimberly
Miller's weather updates. The free PBPost Weather app is available on iTunes and
at Google Play. Search for Palm Beach Post WeatherPlus.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2016 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 97 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            April 5, 2017 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Matthew report: 165 mph hurricane shocked forecasters

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller     Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 730 words


Hurricane Matthew's explosive intensification to a dangerous Category 5 storm
was not predicted by any National Hurricane Center models and shocked
forecasters who watched its winds grow to 165 mph in a day.

A nearly 100-page report released Tuesday by the hurricane center said the
October storm's surprise escalation occurred in an area where forecasters
thought heavy wind shear would allow for "only slow or no strengthening."

Matthew, which gave South Florida its first real scare from a tropical cyclone
since 2005's Hurricane Wilma, instead experienced a "remarkable" intensification
marked by an unusually high number of lightning strikes and a dramatic eye-wall
contraction from 34 miles across to about 6 miles.

The peak wind speed of 165 mph that is listed in the report is 5 mph higher than
the original forecast.

"I have never seen a storm intensify this much in the path of what we would
consider to be adverse conditions," said NHC senior hurricane specialist Stacy
Stewart, who wrote the report on Hurricane Matthew. "We are fortunate this
occurred over the open Caribbean because if it happened over the Gulf Stream,
and suddenly you have a Category 4 or 5, it's going to make a big difference if
people aren't prepared."

The storm was about 90 miles north of Punta Gallinas, Colombia, when it
experienced the unexpected rapid intensification, with the strongest winds no
threat to land.

The National Hurricane Center conducts a post-storm analysis at the end of each
hurricane season. Matthew was the last of 16 reports for the Atlantic basin's
2016 hurricane season, which was the most active since 2012. Seven hurricanes,
eight tropical storms and one tropical depression formed in 2016.

The hurricane season runs June 1 through November.

Stewart said besides the inability of the models to predict Matthew's rapid
intensification, there was little that was a surprise in the re- analysis. The
track forecast that kept the storm off the east coast of Florida was better than
the five-year average.

Matthew brushed by Palm Beach County as a Category 4 storm on Oct. 6 with no
hurricane-force winds recorded on land. Palm Beach International Airport
measured sustained winds of 33 mph with gusts of 50 mph during the storm.
Sustained tropical storm-force winds of 56 mph were measured in Jupiter with
gusts up to 66 mph.

The storm made landfall as a Category 1 hurricane just south of McClellanville,
S.C., on Oct. 8.

While Matthew caused widespread damage to roofs, trees and power lines from
Florida to North Carolina, it devastated Haiti, killing more than 500 people and
either destroying or damaging more than 200,000 homes.

In the U.S., 34 deaths were directly attributed to Matthew, including two in
Florida.

The number of people killed made Matthew the deadliest hurricane since 2005's
Hurricane Stan.

Matthew was also the southernmost Category 5 hurricane in the Atlantic basin on
record, surpassing Hurricane Ivan in 2004.

But it was the 24-hour deepening to a Category 5 storm that was the most
remarkable aspect climatologically. That kind of growth has only "been exceeded
a few times in Atlantic historical record."

"It's extremely unusual, and there are only a few hurricanes that intensified
faster than that," said Weather Underground co-founder Jeff Masters. "Hurricane
Wilma did 90 knots (103 mph) in 24 hours, but it's rare."

In 2015, the Pacific basin's Hurricane Patricia ramped up from a Category 1
storm to 207 mph in just 24 hours. Also that year, Hurricane Joaquin grew from a
tropical storm to a Category 3 hurricane in 24 hours.

While forecasting intensity has improved, it is still a challenge, and Stewart
said what caused Matthew's rapid growth remains a mystery.

Even though recalculations in the analysis resulted in lower wind-shear speeds
to tear at the storm, they were still moderately high at up to 17 mph.

"Either the models were wrong or the data going into the models was wrong or
something else occurred internally that allowed it to intensify," Stewart said.
"Our worst-case scenario as forecasters is to have a storm go through an
explosive intensification and not be forecast."

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

get the app

Check local conditions, see live radar and keep up with reporter Kimberly
Miller's weather updates. The free PBPost Weather app is available on iTunes and
at Google Play. Search for Palm Beach Post WeatherPlus.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2017 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 98 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                              April 7, 2017 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Prediction: Fewer hurricanes in '17;
Early forecast based on consensus that El Niño is expected to reappear.

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL & BUSINESS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 751 words


An early hurricane forecast from Colorado State University calls for a
below-average 2017 storm season, but was released on a day when the atmosphere
reminded Florida of its impulsive and destructive nature.

A line of thunderstorms ahead of a cold front spawned a possible tornado in
Okeechobee County on Thursday morning that destroyed two homes, damaged up to 16
structures and injured one person who was trapped briefly under a car that
flipped over in the high winds.

Four recreational vehicles were also destroyed in the Kissimmee Prairie Preserve
State Park, said Okeechobee County sheriff spokeswoman Michele Bell.

"These homes are leveled and devastated," Okeechobee County Sheriff Noel Stephen
said during a news conference Thursday as damages were still being assessed.

The National Weather Service office in Melbourne is sending a team to
investigate the area today to determine whether there was a tornado. Forecasters
had issued a tornado warning at 9:52 a.m. that lasted until 10:45 a.m.

The damage wrought in Okeechobee County underscores a postscript hurricane
forecasters add to their predictions every year -- that even in a slow season,
it takes only one storm to wipe out a community.

"I think there are a lot of people in Florida that have not experienced a
full-blown hurricane and need to understand that you always prepare for the
worst," said AccuWeather hurricane expert Dan Kottlowski.

AccuWeather released its 2017 hurricane forecast Wednesday, which also called
for a below-average storm season. Hurricane season runs June 1 through November.

Both AccuWeather and CSU are basing their forecasts on early predictions that El
Niño may reappear this year. The global climate pattern, marked by a warming of
the equatorial Pacific Ocean, works against hurricanes. Its west-to-east wind
pattern can shred storms as they develop in the Atlantic basin.

Led by hurricane researcher Phil Klotzbach, CSU is predicting 11 named storms,
four hurricanes and two major hurricanes of Category 3 strength or higher.

AccuWeather's forecast includes 10 named storms, five hurricanes and three major
hurricanes.

An average hurricane season based on 30 years of climatology consists of 12
named storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

Klotzbach said early forecasts are always difficult, but that this year is
especially tricky because of the El Niño wild card.

"April predictions are never super-confident, but this year I'm a little less
confident given the El Niño issue," said Klotzbach, who released the report at
the National Tropical Weather Conference in South Padre Island, Texas. "If El
Niño does ramp up, that will make for a more quiet hurricane season."

Computer models have hinted at an El Niño since at least December, but its
appearance would be unusual because it would be on the heels of the strong El
Niño that occurred in 2015-2016.

"We really shouldn't be getting another one already," Klotzbach said.

And there's something else strange about the developing El Niño. It's evolving
in an east-to-west pattern in the Pacific when it usually moves from west to
east, sending warm water from Indonesia toward South America, Klotzbach said.

"There is some consensus that this will be a weak-to-moderate, El Niño and if
that works out, it will be a lower-than-normal season," Kottlowski said.

"But because we still have warm water in the Gulf of Mexico and parts of the
Atlantic, that will still give us enough support for development," he said.

CSU's forecast also considers the probabilities of at least one major hurricane
making landfall in the U.S. The chances for a hurricane to hit the East Coast,
including the Florida peninsula, are 24 percent this season, below the average
for the last century of 31 percent.

For the Gulf Coast, including the Florida Panhandle, the chances are 24 percent,
below the average of 30 percent.

The 2017 hurricane season was the most active since 2012 with 15 named storms
and seven hurricanes, including Category 1 Hurricane Hermine, which broke a more
than decade-long hurricane drought in Florida when it made landfall in the
Panhandle in September.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Climate Prediction Center
is scheduled to release its 2017 hurricane forecast May 25.

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

get the app

Check local conditions, see live radar and keep up with reporter Kimberly
Miller's weather updates. The free PBPost Weather app is available on iTunes and
at Google Play. Search for Palm Beach Post WeatherPlus.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2017 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 99 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             October 1, 2017 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Yes, we went through Irma, but October is month to fear

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 811 words


Hurricane King came swinging at Florida in 1950 with an open palm, like it
planned a smack that would leave the peninsula holding a stinging cheek, but
largely unscathed.

In the final hours before landfall, however, King balled up a Category 4 fist
and punched South Florida dead on the chin, tearing up Miami before slicing
through the center of the state in a narrow swath of carnage that observers said
resembled the aftermath of a tornado.

King was the most severe hurricane to hit Miami since the city was devastated in
1926, and it came ashore in the pre-dawn darkness of Oct. 18.

While much of the Gulf Coast and Eastern Seaboard experience a winding down of
hurricane season in October, Florida remains vulnerable -- a sore thumb
surrounded by warm waters, and a target for anything that spins up in the Gulf
of Mexico or Caribbean Sea.

"Unfortunately, on the heels of Irma, the riskiest time of year is still ahead
of us," said Michael Brennan, acting branch chief of the hurricane specialists
unit at the National Hurricane Center in Miami. "If you are going to get a major
hurricane landfall in October, it's likely going to be in South Florida."

Since 1851, Florida has had 36 hurricanes make October landfalls, including 10
major hurricanes, which is considered a Category 3 or higher. That's five times
higher than runner-up Louisiana, which has experienced seven October hurricane
hits, including three major hurricanes.

Florida's October hurricane numbers are nearly as high as the peak month of
September, when Florida has experienced 39 October hurricane landfalls, 19 of
which were Cat 3 or higher, according to Colorado State University hurricane
expert Phil Klotzbach.

"You can certainly see the west coast of Florida is under the gun in October,"
Klotz­bach said, noting that 24 hurricanes targeted areas from the far western
reach of the Panhandle to Chokoloskee, which is south of Everglades City at the
mouth of the Turner River.

Before Hurricane Irma tore into Cudjoe Key on Sept. 10 as a Category 4 storm,
the last major hurricane to hit Florida was 2005's Hurricane Wilma, which ran
aground Oct. 24 as a Category 3 on the west coast near Cape Romano.

Hurricane Matthew, which swept by Palm Beach County on Oct. 6, 2016, as a
Category 4 hurricane, eventually made landfall near McClellanville, S.C.

The reason for Florida's vulnerability deep into October is largely a function
of seasonal shifts in wind patterns and sea-surface temperatures.

In early summer, most storms form in the Caribbean Sea as the atmosphere starts
its summer wind up and the mid-level African Easterly Jet is just beginning to
spin up waves that will begin rolling off the continent in August and September.

Those tropical waves, which become the big Cape Verde hurricanes, travel the
Atlantic east to west and have more options for routing, heading into the Gulf
of Mexico, smacking the East Coast or wandering harmlessly off into the northern
Atlantic.

But by October, mid-latitude wintertime air starts to seep into the tropical
Atlantic, increasing the westerly wind shear to muzzle African tropical waves
that also find cooler sea surface temperatures.

Instead, storms find room to grow in the deeply warm waters of the Caribbean and
Gulf of Mexico. Once in the Gulf, early wintertime troughs of low pressure
digging down through the U.S. can pick storms up and fling them at Florida.

"In this strange twist of fate, cold fronts can introduce thunderstorms over the
warm waters and lead to tropical formation," said Greg Postel, a hurricane
expert with The Weather Channel. "In October, Mother Nature likes to put all the
ingredients closer to home."

Hurricane King was one of three major hurricanes to hit Florida's east coast in
October. It came during a year where hurricane names were picked form the joint
British-U.S. World War II spelling alphabet and followed hurricanes How, Item
and Jig.

King was described as a "small, but violent," hurricane in a January 1951
weather review from the Weather Bureau Office in Miami. It is noted for having
an eye that contracted from 20 miles to 5 in only a few hours. Total damage for
Florida, including agriculture, was about $27.7 million. Three people were
killed and there were 199 injuries.

"Despite the good warning service provided, many people remained complacent and
failed to take adequate precautions," the 1951 report said.

Brennan is hoping that's not the current sentiment in South Florida.

"I think people feel like they had their turn this year already with Irma, but
you can't think that way," he said. "Just because you've been hit once, doesn't
mean you won't be affected again."

If you haven't yet, join Kim on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter.
kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

GET THE APP

The free Palm Beach Post Weather app is available on iTunes and at GooglePlay.
Search for Palm Beach Post WeatherPlus.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  This satellite image from NASA shows Hurricane Matthew in 2016,  which
was a major Category 4 hurricane as it brushed by South  Florida on Oct. 6, on
its way to eventual landfall near  McClellanville, S.C. NASA 2016

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2017 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 100 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                              April 6, 2018 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

There's good -- and bad -- news with first hurricane forecast

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 738 words


A leading hurricane forecast is calling for an above average storm season, but a
repeat of 2017's tropical system conveyor belt isn't expected.

Colorado State University, which has issued annual hurricane forecasts since
1984, released its 2018 prediction Thursday calling for 14 named storms, seven
hurricanes and three major hurricanes of Category 3 or higher.

The average season has 12 named storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

Hurricane researcher Phil Klotzbach, who is lead author of CSU's report, said
the forecast is largely based on a prediction that El Niño will be a no-show
this summer into fall. The atmosphere is instead predicted to transition from a
weak La Niña phase to neutral.

"Typically in the Atlantic, El Niño is our friend because it increases upper
level winds, and that increases shear," said Klotzbach, who emphasized that
April tropical cyclone forecasts are less accurate than ones made closer to the
June 1 start date of hurricane season.

CSU will update its forecast May 31.

Thursday's prediction is similar to one made this week by the Pennsylvania-based
AccuWeather, which called for 12 to 15 named storms, six to eight hurricanes and
three to five major hurricanes.

"I try to tell people that even though we are saying it's not going to be as
active as last year, it's like saying we're not going to have as many traffic
accidents as last year. If you are involved in one accident, it's bad," said Dan
Kottlowski, a hurricane expert with AccuWeather. "Floridians shouldn't think
they can't get hit again."

CSU's forecast says there is a 62 percent probability that Florida will be
impacted by a hurricane this season, 11 percent higher than the climatological
average.

"Bottom line is, we're going into a neutral situation with neither an El Niño or
La Niña influence," Kottlowski said.

El Niño is a periodic warming of the water temperatures across the eastern path
of the Pacific Ocean. The warm water shifts rainfall patterns, suppressing rain
over Indonesia and moving it to the eastern part of the Pacific.

This changes upper air patterns, shifting the subtropical jet stream so it is in
a better position to cut the tops off Atlantic hurricanes with strong vertical
shear -- winds moving at different speeds and directions in different levels of
the atmosphere.

If the prediction for a neutral atmosphere holds true, Kottlowski said there
will be fits of storm-killing wind shear but also opportunities for hurricanes
to brew between those periods.

The tipping point this season, which contributed to the above average storm
forecasts, is the warm waters of the Atlantic -- a source of energy for
hurricanes.

"We are concerned that with the water as warm as it is, it will certainly be
enough to get some storms going," Kottlowski said. "If there are times of low
wind shear, there will be a lot of opportunity for development."

At least 20 research groups, private companies and universities churn out annual
hurricane forecasts, including the University of Arizona, The Weather Company
and Pennsylvania State University's Earth System Science Center.

The federal forecast from the Climate Prediction Center will be released near
the end of May.

CSU's is a much-anticipated report because it is one of the earlier ones issued
each year and is based on research from seasonal forecast pioneer William Gray,
who died in 2016 at age 86.

Still, April forecasts are notably fallible, as the atmosphere is still
adjusting to seasonal changes.

In 2017, CSU forecast a below average hurricane season in its April prediction.

The season ended Nov. 30 with 17 named storms, 10 hurricanes and six major
hurricanes. Three Category 4 hurricanes crashed into the U.S.: Harvey, Irma and
Maria. Harvey was the first major hurricane to hit the continental U.S. since
2005's Hurricane Wilma.

"Unlike when you are forecasting the daily weather and get it wrong, someone
might give you grief the next day, but when you do a bad seasonal forecast,
people talk about it all year," Klotzbach said.

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

GET THE APP

Check local conditions, see live radar and keep up with reporter Kimberly
Miller's weather updates. The free Palm Beach Post Weather app is available on
iTunes and at GooglePlay. Search for Palm Beach Post WeatherPlus.

NAMES FOR 2018 tropical cycloneS

Alberto

Beryl

Chris

Debby

Ernesto

Florence

Gordon

Helene

Isaac

Joyce

Kirk

Leslie

Michael

Nadine

Oscar

Patty

Rafael

Sara

Tony

Valerie

William

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2018 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 101 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                            October 30, 2017 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

HOW DID THE 2017 HURRICANE SEASON END UP?

BYLINE:  STEVEN A. ACKERMAN and JONATHAN MARTIN , UW-Madison department of
atmospheric and oceanic sciences

SECTION: LOCAL; ASK THE WEATHER GUYS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 309 words


Q: How did the 2017 hurricane season end up?

A: The 2017 Atlantic hurricane season will officially end on November 30. It was
an active season. There were 16 tropical storms, 10 hurricanes, and 6 major
hurricanes.

A tropical storm is a rotating weather system with low pressure, strong winds
and a storm center with heavy rain producing thunderstorms arranged in a spiral
pattern.

When the highest sustained winds in a tropical storm reach 74 mph, the storm is
reclassified as a hurricane if it is over the Atlantic Ocean or is called a
typhoon if over the Pacific Ocean. When the sustained winds reach 97 mph the
storm is considered a major hurricane.

In an average year there are 12 tropical storms, six or seven of those go on to
become hurricanes, and two of those reach major hurricane intensity.

It was also a very destructive season and may turn out to be the costliest on
record. Preliminary economic costs total over $188 billion in damages, nearly
all of which was due to just three of the major hurricanes - Harvey, Irma, and
Maria. The 2017 season is one of only six seasons on record to feature multiple
Category 5 hurricanes. This was the second season on record (after 2007) to
feature two hurricanes making landfall, with Category 5 Irma's landfalls on
multiple Caribbean islands and Maria's landfall on Dominica.

This season had the highest number of major hurricanes since 2005. Ophelia, a
Category 3 hurricane, was the sixth major hurricane of the season and the
easternmost storm of such strength in the Atlantic basin on record. Ophelia
transitioned into a hurricane-strength midlatitude cyclone that made landfall on
Ireland and Britain.

Back in late May NOAA seasonal forecasts were predicting about 11-17 tropical
storms, five to nine hurricanes and two to four major hurricanes. So, they
predicted an active year and it was above normal.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2017 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 102 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            The Eagle (Bryan, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 25, 2014 Sunday

Experts urge caution despite expecting slow hurricane season

BYLINE: Caitlin Perrone, The Eagle, Bryan, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 502 words


May 25--Hurricane season starts the first of June and continues through the end
of November, and although forecasters expect another slow season, they're urging
Texas residents to keep an eye on developments.

The state experienced a mild hurricane season last year, with only 11 storms,
two of which developed into hurricanes, said Brian Kyle, a senior forecaster
with the National Weather Service. He expects to see another slow year: the
agency is forecasting eight to 13 storms, three to six of which will turn into
hurricanes, and one to two that will become major hurricanes.

The forecasted numbers don't always mean much, though, he said.

"If there's just one storm all year, and you're the one that gets hit, it can be
a bad year," he said.

Texas State Climatologist John Nielsen-Gammon of Texas A&M University said
residents living along the coast are most vulnerable, but storms with high winds
and heavy rainfall can still affect the Brazos Valley.

"Fortunately, we'll be at least 120 miles from any hurricane landfall, so the
main danger from hurricanes in this area would be high winds if it's an
especially strong hurricane, or heavy rain, especially if it's a slow moving
storm," he said.

All Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico coastal areas are subject to hurricanes or
tropical storms. Because the strongest winds in a hurricane are not located
precisely at the center of the storm, it's possible for a hurricane that hasn't
yet gone inland to affect conditions over land, Kyle said.

The senior forecaster said the upper Texas coast only sees a landfalling
hurricane about once every nine years.

"Of course, they're weakened by the time they move inland, so it's very rare
that College Station experiences actual hurricane-force winds, but it can
definitely happen," he said.

In the event of a major hurricane, the Bryan-College Station area can be hit
with 50 to 80 mph winds and heavy rains that could lead to flooding.
Nielsen-Gammon said to pay attention for watches and warnings released by the
National Weather Service and to prepare a supply of food and water in the case
of a power outage.

Kyle also suggested noting if you live near a creek or stream, which could rise
steadily in the event of heavy rainfall, and recommended trimming tree limbs
early in the summer, which could be blown away with high-level winds.

"Just pay attention to the track of the hurricane so you see the projected
rainfall, how fast it's going and how fast it's expected to weaken," he said.

Info Box:

The Texas Department of Public Safety urges residents to prepare for potential
storms by preparing an emergency kit with supplies and provisions, as well as
any necessary documents, selecting an evacuation route, planning how family
members and pets will evacuate safely, considering any special needs for those
with disabilities or the elderly, and staying informed about changing weather
conditions.

___ (c)2014 The Eagle (Bryan, Texas) Visit The Eagle (Bryan, Texas) at
www.theeagle.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20140525-EG-Experts-urge-caution-despite-expecting-slow-hurricane-season-0525-20
140525

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EG


                            Copyright 2014 The Eagle


                          FOCUS - 103 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          Kilgore News Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 4, 2014 Wednesday

El Nino could ease chances of hurricanes

BYLINE: Chelsea Katz, Kilgore News Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 711 words


June 04--The saying goes, "April showers bring May flowers," but June can bring
hurricanes.

June 1 marked the start of the Atlantic hurricane season, but experts are
anticipating this year's activity to be either near-normal or below-normal,
according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

A normal Atlantic hurricane season records twelve named storms, six hurricanes
and three major hurricanes over the course of the six-month season. This year's
prediction includes eight to thirteen named storms, three to six hurricanes and
one to two major hurricanes.

Tropical storms are given a name once they become a tropical storm with wind
speeds between 39 and 73 miles per hour. Once a tropical storm develops into a
hurricanes, they are divided based on wind speeds: Category 1, 74-95 mph;
Category 2, 96-110 mph; Category 3, 111-129 mph; Category 4, 130-156; Category
5, 157-plus mph. A hurricane is classified as "major," once it reaches a
Category 3.

Part of the reason for the prediction of a below-average season is the expected
development of El Nino during the summer months. According to the NOAA
explanation, El Nino brings with it wind shear that has the ability to limit the
number of tropical storms forming off the coast of Africa or limit their
intensity.

Another factor listed was the relatively cooler water temperatures in the
Atlantic Ocean. Although the temperatures will not be cold, NOAA's prediction
includes that temperatures should be nearaverage instead above-average.
Hurricanes feed off warm ocean waters directly below it, and cooler water
"suggests fewer Atlantic hurricanes," Gerry Bell, lead seasonal hurricane
forecaster with NOAA's Climate Prediction Center, said in the explanation.

More than 250 miles inland from Galveston Island and the Texas Gulf Coast, the
threats associated with a hurricane are different in Kilgore than at a potential
landfall location.

"Inland as [you] are in East Texas, be prepared for extended periods of power
outages," said C.S. Ross, hydrologist at the National Weather Service's
Shreveport office. He suggested keeping trees trimmed.

Long-lasting power outages can leave businesses and homeowners without
refrigeration, and Ross said outages will affect water wells in more rural
areas. If a major hurricane travels inland toward East Texas, he said people can
anticipate effects similar to when Texas took a direct hit from Hurricane Ike in
September 2008.

Double the size of an average hurricane, Hurricane Ike made landfall with a
width of about 171 miles with hurricane force winds extending out about 120
miles from the eye, according to NASA data.

"As we enter hurricane season, it is important that Texans understand that
powerful hurricanes and tropical storms have the capacity to endanger lives of
residents throughout the state, not just coastal regions," Texas Department of
Public Safety Director Steven McCraw said in a press release. "We urge Texans
who have not already made preparations to safeguard their families and property
from potential storms, to do so now."

Hurricane season lasts until November 30.

With the storms that have rolled through the area so far this year, especially
in May, Ross said the accompanying rain could help prevent the area from going
into a drought situation.

East Texas Regional Airport, one of the National Weather Service's official
rainfall locations, has received 8.73 inches this year -- 3.93 inches above
average.

All of the rain has "timely refilled (the) reservoirs and kept the soil moisture
high," Ross said.

In addition to helping stave off a drought situation, the above-average rainfall
could also help put off the beginning of triple-digit summer temperatures, he
said.

"Through mid-June, I don't think we're going to have triple-digit highs," he
said. While rainfall and cloud cover can keep temperatures cool, Ross said if
the area goes many days without either, it can result in conditions similar to
those felt during the drought and heat wave of 2011.

The National Weather Service will issue heat advisories once heat indexes get to
105-plus degrees, he said.

___ (c)2014 the Kilgore News Herald (Kilgore, Texas) Visit the Kilgore News
Herald (Kilgore, Texas) at www.kilgorenewsherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140604-KQ-El-Nino-could-ease-chances-of-hurricanes-0604-20140604

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: KQ


                       Copyright 2014 Kilgore News Herald


                          FOCUS - 104 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                       May 31, 1991, Friday, City Edition

HURRICANE FACTS

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; HURRICANE 91; Pg. 5G

LENGTH: 216 words



Half of Florida's 20th-century hurricanes made landfall between Sept. 1 and
Sept. 15. Elena, which Suncoast residents are unlikely to forget, was a Labor
Day weekend visitor in 1985.
 The Hurricane Center, in Miami, is on the sixth floor of an office tower across
from the University of Miami. Thirty-four employees sit at desks, computer
terminals and weather screens in a 20,000-square-foot work place.
 Only three hurricane hunter airplanes have crashed since 1943, according to
Hurricane Center officials.
 Taking their cue from Hurricane Gilbert and the stepped-up activity of the 1988
hurricane season, the experts have noted that hurricane seasons seem to come in
cycles of roughly 20 years.
 Hurricane Hugo, which hit the Atlantic Coast in 1989, did $ 10-billion in
damage and killed 43 people.
 Gilbert, the storm of the century, hit the Yucatan Peninsula with 185-mph winds
in September 1988.
 Grady Norton, the first director of the National Hurricane Center, died of
heart failure while tracking Hurricane Hazel in 1954.
 As with other devastating storms, Hurricane Gilbert, which devastated Jamaica
in 1988, and Hurricane Hugo, which battered South Carolina in 1989, have been
banished from the World Meteorological Association's list of Atlantic hurricane
names.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 105 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                            November 30, 2012 Friday

Busy hurricane season ends Friday

BYLINE: Dinah Voyles Pulver, Dinah Voyles Pulver ENVIRONMENT WRITER

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1183  words


As the official Atlantic hurricane season expires Friday, coastal- dwelling
residents can heave a sigh of relief that it's finally over, after a season that
delivered 19 named storms.

Facts

2012 Hurricane Season

Alberto, tropical storm, May 19-22

Beryl, tropical storm, May 25-30

Chris, hurricane, June 19-22

Debby, tropical storm, June 23-27

Ernesto, hurricane, Aug. 1 - 10

Florence, tropical storm, Aug. 3 - 6

Gordon, hurricane, Aug. 15 - 20

Helene, tropical storm, Aug. 9 - 19

Isaac, hurricane, Aug. 21 - 30

Joyce, tropical storm, Aug. 22 - 24

Kirk, hurricane, Aug. 28 - Sept. 2

Leslie, hurricane, Aug. 30 - Sept. 11

Michael, hurricane, Sept. 3 - 11

Nadine, hurricane, Sept. 11 - Oct. 4

Oscar, tropical storm, Oct. 3 - 5

Patty, tropical storm, Oct. 11 - 13

Rafael, hurricane, Oct. 12 - 17

Sandy, hurricane, Oct. 22 - 29

Tony, tropical storm, Oct. 22 - 25

Photo Galleries

* Superstorm Sandy Slams Into U.S.

The season proved a long, and at times challenging, one for National Hurricane
Center forecasters. It also added to the fears of local emergency management
officials that local residents might be complacent or unprepared for a major
hurricane.

The "season" really started before the official June 1 date, with tropical
storms Alberto and Beryl appearing in late May. And it just kept on. It was the
second time in three years the Atlantic produced storms all the way up to the
letter T, about seven storms more than average.

The procession of storms spared Volusia and Flagler counties from some of the
worst winds and rains, even though four different storms caused impacts.

The rough surf, rainfall and winds from the storms serve as a reminder that "you
don't need a major hurricane to have problems," said Bart Hagemeyer,
meteorologist-in-charge of the National Weather Service in Melbourne.

Chief among them was the death of an Orlando teenager, who drowned in Tropical
Storm Beryl's rough seas off Daytona Beach.

"Even passing hurricanes can still have an impact," Hagemeyer said.

But, while Irene and Sandy caused major impacts elsewhere in terms of property
damage, the east Central Florida region "got through the hurricane season in
pretty good shape considering how active it was," Hagemeyer said. "We were
fortunate that we were never really under the gun."

The rain produced by the tropical storms was especially beneficial, given the
area's recent drought conditions, said Hagemeyer and Charlie Craig, emergency
management director for Volusia County.

The season wasn't without its scary scenarios, Craig said. It was "a little
frightening" to have storms walk right up the coast, just 200 miles offshore, he
said. "We were very lucky."

For Troy Harper, emergency services chief for Flagler County, the primary
message of the last two seasons is that "any one along the Eastern Seaboard
could have an impact during any year."

One of his ongoing fears is the number of people who have moved here and haven't
experienced a major storm. "There are people who continue to trickle into our
counties from other areas that may not understand the hazards of even a small
tropical system," Harper said.

"Add to that the complacency of long-term residents," he said, including those
who think they survived a hurricane because they were here during the storms of
2004.

"Folks that went through the '04 season with Charley, Frances and Jeanne think
they've survived a hurricane, when they've really not seen the brute force that
can be exhibited," he said. "We haven't had a catastrophic weather disaster in
Northeast Florida in the history of record-keeping."

This year's big storms, such as Sandy, illustrated that people - individuals,
families and businesses - need to develop a "culture of preparedness that would
enable them to survive and exist for three to five days on their own," Craig
said.

And just because hurricane season is over, doesn't mean the job of the emergency
officials is done.

"We continue to preach and teach all year long," Harper said. "Honestly, I worry
just as much about severe thunderstorms and our tornadoes that we've witnessed
as I do about hurricanes. The threat never goes away. Thunderstorm season is 365
days of the year."

Emergency officials really do need to preach preparedness "all year round, all
hazards," said Craig.

Looming next on the calendar are spring tornado season and wildfire season.

2012 Hurricane Season

Alberto, tropical storm, May 19-22

Beryl, tropical storm, May 25-30

Chris, hurricane, June 19-22

Debby, tropical storm, June 23-27

Ernesto, hurricane, Aug. 1 - 10

Florence, tropical storm, Aug. 3 - 6

Gordon, hurricane, Aug. 15 - 20

Helene, tropical storm, Aug. 9 - 19

Isaac, hurricane, Aug. 21 - 30

Joyce, tropical storm, Aug. 22 - 24

Kirk, hurricane, Aug. 28 - Sept. 2

Leslie, hurricane, Aug. 30 - Sept. 11

Michael, hurricane, Sept. 3 - 11

Nadine, hurricane, Sept. 11 - Oct. 4

Oscar, tropical storm, Oct. 3 - 5

Patty, tropical storm, Oct. 11 - 13

Rafael, hurricane, Oct. 12 - 17

Sandy, hurricane, Oct. 22 - 29

Tony, tropical storm, Oct. 22 - 25

The predictions

How did the season compare to the pre-season and mid-season outlooks?

- Actual: 19 named storms, 10 hurricanes

- Colorado State spring outlook: 10 named storms, 4 hurricanes

- Colorado State summer outlook: 14 named storms, 6 hurricanes

- NOAA spring outlook: 9-15 named storms, 4-8 hurricanes

- NOAA summer outlook: 12-17 named storms, 5-8 hurricanes

Volusia-Flagler impacts

Four storms affected Volusia and Flagler counties: Beryl, Debby, Isaac and
Sandy.

Tropical Storm Beryl brought rainfall and rough surf along local beaches.
Ritchey Dauphin, 18, of Orlando, drowned in the storm- tossed surf off Daytona
Beach. While Beryl dumped up to 15 inches of rain in Suwannee County, it dropped
anywhere from 4 to 5.6 inches across Palm Coast, 3 inches in Ponce Inlet and 1.5
to 2 inches of rain elsewhere in Volusia.

Tropical Storm Debby also dumped heavy rainfall across the area. A weather
monitoring station in Pierson recorded 8.82 inches of rain, while a station in
DeLand reported 5.48 inches. But Debby's heaviest rain - 28.78 inches - fell on
Curtis Mill in Wakulla County. The highest sustained winds at Daytona Beach
International Airport were 21 mph with 32 mph gusts, while gusts of up to 30 mph
were reported in Bunnell.

Isaac swept east of Central Florida with wind and rain as it passed through the
Florida Straits as a tropical storm. While Isaac dropped 16.5 inches of rain in
Vero Beach, it left only 1.27 inches in Daytona Beach. Peak gusts up to 40 mph
were reported in Flagler County, while the peak gusts in Daytona Beach were 30
mph. Gusts up to 19 mph were reported in DeLand.

Hurricane Sandy forced tropical storm warnings along the coast, gusty winds and
pushed in large breaking waves that created beach erosion from Volusia County
south, with more severe erosion from Brevard to Martin counties. Sandy left 4.3
inches of rain in Daytona Beach and 2.43 inches of rain in Edgewater. Gusts up
to 43 mph were reported in Palm Coast and a few crossbeams and pilings were lost
from the Flagler Beach Pier.

SOURCE: National Hurricane Center, National Weather Service, Flagler County
Emergency Management and Volusia County

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2012 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2012 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 106 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                              May 23, 2008 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Prepare for storms: Forecasters; U.S. weather agency's predictions not accurate
in past 2 years

BYLINE: Christopher Doering, Reuters

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 577  words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON -- The 2008 Atlantic hurricane season will be active with as many as
nine hurricanes expected to form, U.S. government forecasters predicted on
Thursday.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecast 12 to 16 named
storms this season, with six to nine developing into hurricanes. Two to five
could be major ones of Category 3 or higher with winds above 177 kilometres per
hour, the agency said in its annual forecast.

NOAA said there was a 60 to 70 per cent probability of its prediction being
accurate, the first time the agency has issued a probability with its forecast.
It follows the last two years when NOAA called for active hurricane seasons only
to see little or no impact on the United States.

"We can't predict with 100 per cent certainty. Science is not that exact," said
Conrad Lautenbacher, head of NOAA. "It only takes one to make it a bad season,"
he added.

NOAA cited warm ocean water, favourable atmospheric conditions and the impact
from La Nina in making its forecast of an active season.

The hurricane season officially starts on June 1 and typically peaks between
late August and mid-October.

The United States has made it through largely unscathed during the last two
years. Only one minor storm reached the United States during the 2007 season and
it escaped any impact in 2006.

The quiet seasons were a reprieve for U.S. residents after two devastating
years.

The U.S. Gulf Coast, Mexico, Caribbean and Central American countries were
battered during 2005. A record four major hurricanes hit the United States,
including Katrina, which devastated New Orleans, killing around 1,500 people on
the U.S. Gulf Coast and causing $80 billion in damage. The 2004 season saw
Florida struck by four powerful hurricanes.

An average Atlantic hurricane season brings 11 tropical storms with six
hurricanes, including two major hurricanes, NOAA said.

The agency said conditions remained similar to those seen since 1995 when the
Atlantic moved into a period of heightened hurricane activity expected to last
up to 40 years. They include favourable atmospheric winds and warmer sea surface
temperatures. Hurricanes draw energy from warm water.

A wild card in the weather this season could be La Nina, which is beginning to
fade in the eastern Pacific.

La Nina is an unusual cooling of Pacific Ocean surface temperatures that can
trigger widespread weather changes around the world.

It generally results in conditions that favour hurricanes in the Atlantic while
its opposite effect, El Nino, generates wind shear that makes it difficult for
hurricanes to stay together.

"One of the uncertainties for this year's outlook is the strength of La Nina
impacts during the peak of the season," said Gerry Bell, lead seasonal hurricane
forecaster at NOAA's Climate Prediction Center.

"If La Nina stays substantial the (hurricane) activity could certainly be up at
the higher end of the predicted ranges."

U.S. weather forecasters, including private and university researchers, also
have predicted that 2008 will be an active hurricane season.

A Colorado State University team of hurricane experts has predicted 15 tropical
storms, with eight growing to hurricane strength. WSI Corp and London-based
Tropical Storm Risk have issued similar forecasts.

David Paulison, administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, said
the agency had doubled in size in two years.

The agency was widely criticized for a slow response following hurricane
Katrina.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Getty Images File Photo; BAD MEMORIES: Two residents wade through
chest deep water after finding bread and soda from a local grocery store after
hurricane Katrina came through the area on Aug. 29, 2005 in New Orleans. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2008 Windsor Star, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 107 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                 May 31, 2005 Tuesday 0 South Pinellas Edition

HURRICANE SEASON 2005;
 SUMMER RERUNS

BYLINE: KELLEY BENHAM

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 564 words


Editor's note: Every word of this story is taken verbatim from past articles in
the St. Petersburg Times.

It's that time again. (1994, 2002)

That giant whirlwind that blows cyclone-force winds and brings mammoth waves and
flooding is coming into season. (1976)

On Wednesday of this week, June 1, the national hurricane center in Miami once
again begins its six-month season of scanning the warm tropical waters of the
Atlantic and Caribbean for signs of the circulating weather patterns that signal
the spawning of killer hurricanes. (1977)

Gordon E. Dunn, chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau in Miami, refuses to predict
whether the state will suffer a hurricane this year. He said there is no way to
tell. (1960) Nature's whirling dervish is as unpredictable as the girls for whom
it is named. (1964)

It was in 1921 that Suncoast residents experienced their last major hurricane
and the experts feel the area is "long overdue for a direct hit." (1976)

"I don't think we realize how lucky we have been," said William Gray, the
Colorado State University professor who forecasts the number of hurricanes each
year. (2003)

"Florida is the luckiest state," he said. (1995) "It is a sitting duck." (1990,
1995)

Every year, the experts say this streak of luck cannot continue. (2003) It's
just a matter of time before the big killer hurricanes return. (1991) Don't
decide "it can't happen to us!" (1964)

"It's not a question of if, but when," said Jerry Jarrell, the newly installed
director of the National Hurricane Center. "The hurricane will come." (1998)

"It's inevitable," Gray said. "There's no way out." (1999)

Hurricane fury should not be underestimated. (1968) Storm surge is the
hurricane's biggest threat. (1987) It has long been recognized that a
hurricane's menace increases ten-fold when it has water to hurl before it.
(1951)

Wind can be a big problem too. (2003) Hurricanes are big winds. They kill
people. They destroy places. In total damages, they have exceeded any other
natural catastrophe. They're bad weather even for ducks. (1964)

Today, adequate warning systems, the best in history, insure the bay area
against being caught unprepared. (1951)

But that doesn't mean forecasters know where hurricanes will actually go. (2003)

It's a highly scientific activity that in recent years has come to be
intertwined with a psychological riddle - how to persuade perfectly rational
people to save their own necks. (1977)

One weather expert suggests assuming a kneeling position, hands clasped tightly
together. (1968) If Florida is to survive what forecasters say will be a notably
intense hurricane season, prayer alone won't suffice. (1999)

It's not known whether evacuation will work. It may or may not be a problem.
(1976)

Better to stay in a fortified home or building than risk getting killed in
nightmarish traffic jams. (1993) Keep emotionally under control. (1951)

J.T. Drip, Times poet of the rain gauge, was busy yesterday regarding the unwet
skies. (1961)

In fact, he was busy staring hurricane season squarely in the face - an
unpleasant experience for both parties. (1950)

"One thing about it. This month has a tendency to start dry but finish wet."
(1961)

Now we wait. (2000)

Kelley Benham can be reached at (727) 893-8848 or benham@sptimes.com. Times
researchers Caryn Baird and Mary Mellstrom contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, (8); Satellite photo of Hurricane Andrew, 1992; Satellite photo
of Hurricane Fran, 1996; Satellite photo of Hurricane Georges, 1998; Satellite
photo of Hurricane Floyd, 1999; Satellite photo of Hurricane Charley, 2004;
Satellite photo of Hurricane; Frances, 2004; Satellite photo of Hurricane Ivan,
2004; Satellite photo of Hurricane Jeanne, 2004

TYPE: Newspaper

                    Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 108 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

              December 2, 1995, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

A year of heavy hammerings One of the worst Atlantic hurricane seasons on record
is officially over

BYLINE: by Steve Stone (THE VIRGINIAN-PILOT) SPECIAL TO THE STAR

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. C6

LENGTH: 1003 words


   THE BUSIEST Atlantic hurricane season since 1933 and the second most active
on record wrapped up Thursday.

It was none too soon for most folks. The hammerings by the hurricanes left 124
people dead and caused upward of $10 billion (U.S.) in damage.

The big killer was Opal, which claimed 63 lives in Guatemala, Mexico and the
United States and caused more than $3 billion in damage, much of it in Florida.

The season brought 21 tropical depressions, of which 19 became named tropical
storms and 11 intensified into hurricanes. Only 1933 was busier, with 21
tropical storms, including 10 hurricanes.

And 1995 also established a near-record for the total number of hurricanes,
second only to 1969 when 12 of 18 tropical storms attained hurricane strength.
National Hurricane Center records date back to 1871.

Five storms struck the U.S. mainland this year, four blasting Florida and one
heading into Texas. A sixth hit the U.S. Virgin Islands.

The vulnerable East Coast was spared, although Hurricane Felix taunted North
Carolina and Virginia for days before finally turning away.

"The East Coast and Norfolk (Virginia) in particular were very fortunate," says
hurricane forecaster William Gray of Colorado State University. "Do the people
realize how lucky they were? They would still be working to pick up the pieces
there had Felix proceeded in."

They weren't just lucky with Felix, either. Of the season's 21 tropical
depressions, 13 formed in the far eastern or central Atlantic, traditional
breeding grounds for hurricanes. Of those, a dozen became named tropical storms
and seven grew into hurricanes.

Yet none made it to the U.S. coast.

Thanks goes to an invisible wall that nature built this year - a persistent arc
of low pressure, a trough, just off the East Coast. It served as a guide for
winds in the upper atmosphere that snagged most of the storms and steered them
to the northeast before they could reach the coast.

"The mainland is really very fortu-nate to have had that low pressure trough in
place most of the season," says John Hope, senior meteorologist at The Weather
Channel in Atlanta.

While not surprised that 1995 was a busy season, Hope says he "didn't expect to
see 19 out there, and I was very surprised to see five major hurricanes."

Scientists from the National Weather Service and Colorado State University
blamed a number of factors for the busy season.

"Favorable wind patterns, below normal sea-level pressure, above normal
sea-surface temperatures and strong easterly waves were the right ingredients in
the right proportions," says David Miskus, a meteorologist with the Weather
Service's Climate Prediction Center.

It's fascinating to study now. But 1995 served up some scary days.

"I think it's a mess," says Jim Talbot, Norfolk's deputy co-ordinator of
emergency services, as he pondered the spaghetti- like tangle of the year's
hurricane tracks. "We were extremely lucky."

The same barrier that protected the East Coast proved the undoing of Florida. It
helped snare Opal and guide it inland.

The storm initially moved slowly over the northern Yucatan and into the Gulf of
Mexico where it became a hurricane on Oct. 2. It turned northeast and
accelerated.

Early on Oct. 4, Opal exploded with winds reaching 240 km/h and gusting to 290
km/h.

Mercifully, Opal lost some of its punch as it moved into cooler waters near the
coast of the western Florida panhandle. But it still packed winds of 200 km/h
when it crossed the coast near Pensacola.

The National Hurricane Center did not issue hurricane warnings the night before
the storm made landfall. At the time, it appeared the storm would not hit for 36
hours and would do so well east of Pensacola.

But Opal surprised forecasters by speeding up and cutting into the coast earlier
than anticipated.

Pensacola residents woke to warnings that they had only hours to find safety.

"Had they known it would be a Category 5 storm, they would have issued warnings
sooner," Hope says. "But this was an unprecedented rate of increase in hurricane
strength. I don't think I've ever seen one strengthen as fast."

The coastline from Pensacola east for 160 kilometres was devastated. Thousands
of homes and businesses were destroyed by storm surge and high waves.

Opal weakened rapidly after moving inland.

It was the deadliest storm of the year, claiming half of all lives lost in the
season: 50 people died from flooding in Guatemala and Mexico; 13 deaths in the
U.S. were directly or indirectly related to the hurricane. Damage estimates, now
set at $3 billion, could eventually reach $4 billion.

There were three other costly storms in 1995:

* Hurricane Iris, born on Aug. 23, moved through the islands of the northeastern
Caribbean as a tropical storm. It brought heavy rains and damaging winds. Five
people drowned.

* Hurricane Luis formed to the south of Cape Verde Islands on Aug. 28 and moved
west across the tropical Atlantic, but then turned toward the northwest as it
neared the Leeward Islands.

It was a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Scale with winds of 225 km/h
when it moved across the islands of the extreme northeastern Caribbean.

The intense inner core of the huge hurricane devastated the islands of Antigua,
Barbuda and St. Martin, killing 16 people and causing $2.5 billion in damage.

* Hurricane Marilyn formed on Sept. 12 and followed a track through the
Caribbean that was parallel to but just southwest of the track taken by Luis.

It hit Dominica and Guadeloupe as a minimal hurricane. A day later, however, it
strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane when it struck the U.S. Virgin Islands.
St. Thomas was particularly hard hit. Eleven people died and $2 billion in
damage was wreaked.

Both Marilyn and Opal caused enough damage that their names may be retired. The
decision rests with the World Meteorological Organization, which picks names and
meets early next year.

THE VIRGINIAN-PILOT

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: REUTER file photos: GATHERING STORM: Intense inner core of huge
Hurricane Luis spins towards northeastern Caribbean Sept. 5. It devastated the
islands of Antigua, Barbuda and St. Martin, killing 16 people and causing $2.5
billion (U.S.) in damage.  OPAL'S AFTERMATH: Resident sits inside remains of
Crestview, Fla., home after killer Hurricane Opal passed through Oct. 5.

                  Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                          FOCUS - 109 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             May 27, 2015 Wednesday

Forecast is for fewer hurricanes, but experts warn it only takes one

BYLINE: Jonathan Austin, The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 629 words


May 27--ST. THOMAS -- While many on the mainland pay attention to the weather,
residents of the U.S. Virgin Islands keep a keen weather eye as hurricane season
approaches.

"Forecasts are for a below average to average hurricane season but it only takes
one major hurricane to devastate our islands," said Mona Barnes, director of the
Virgin Islands Territorial Emergency Management Agency. "We were fortunate in
the last few years because we were spared the negative impact of a major storm
or hurricane. But let us not become complacent. Continue to prepare and to be
aware."

The NOAA hurricane forecast is due out today.

Last month, Colorado State University's Philip Klotzbach and William Gray, who
specialize in understanding tropical weather, predicted seven named storms,
three hurricanes and one major hurricane for the 2015 season. The historical
averages are 12 named storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes. The
season officially begins on June 1 and ends on Nov. 30.

In preparation for the coming season, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration has designated this week as National Hurricane Preparedness Week,
hoping to prepare those in hurricane-prone areas to be prepared and stay aware.

"It only takes one storm to change your life and community. Tropical cyclones
are among nature's most powerful and destructive phenomena. If you live in an
area prone to tropical cyclones, you need to be prepared," NOAA said in its
announcement.

"Our Hurricane Ready Campaign is about encouraging everyone to begin preparing
by putting together an emergency supply kit with items they would need to
survive the aftermath of a major storm," Barnes said. "What essential items
would you and your family need if a major storm or hurricane caused an
island-wide power outage that lasted more than a day? Do you care for an elderly
person or have young children or pets? Have you given careful consideration to
their specific needs?"

VITEMA launched its Hurricane Ready Campaign this month to encourage the
community to take steps now to prepare for the Atlantic Hurricane Season. VITEMA
is asking the public to make the commitment to preparedness by developing a
family disaster plan and building an emergency supply kit.

"Start today by assessing your needs and make a pledge today to stock up on at
least one essential item," Barnes said. "It could be water, canned goods or
personal care products -- whatever is doable. Then continue preparing in the
weeks ahead."

Historically, St. Croix and St. Thomas are brushed or hit every 3.04 years,
according to statistics published online.

In September 1995, Hurricane Marilyn hit St. Croix, St. Thomas and St. John with
105 mph winds, causing very heavy damage. On St. Thomas 40 percent of the homes
were destroyed, as well as 80 percent of the businesses.

In September 1989, Hurricane Hugo caused heavy damage across the territory. St.
Croix recorded sustained winds of 140 mph, as Hugo killed two people, destroyed
90 percent of the buildings and caused more than $1 billion in damage.

Barnes recently met with FEMA Region II Administrator Jerome Hatfield and FEMA
Caribbean Area Division Director Alejandro de La Campa, to discuss federal
support for the U.S. Virgin Islands.

In June, Barnes is also scheduled to visit FEMA's Caribbean Distribution Center,
which is an 80,000 square-foot facility that receives, ships, and recovers
disaster commodities and equipment. The center will provide commodities to the
U.S. Virgin Islands in the event of a major disaster.

- Contact Jonathan Austin at 714-9104 or email jaustin@dailynews.vi

___ (c)2015 The Virgin Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) Visit The Virgin
Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) at www.virginislandsdailynews.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20150527-1VI-Forecast-is-for-fewer-hurricanes-but-experts-warn-it-only-takes-one
-0527-20150527

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2015 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 110 of 881 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                             October 2, 2006 Monday
                                Toronto Edition

Where's the stormy weather?

BYLINE: Lorne Gunter, National Post

SECTION: ISSUES & IDEAS; Lorne Gunter; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 798  words


Hurricane Isaac is currently churning away in the mid-Atlantic. It became a
hurricane Saturday morning, but will probably lose that designation sometime
today before its western edge passes over Newfoundland tomorrow.

Unless you live in the eastern half of Newfoundland, though, it's unlikely you
were even aware of Isaac. It is the fifth hurricane of the season. Yet like the
other four, Isaac has come nowhere near the North American mainland. Only two of
the five have even crossed land as 'canes.

Tropical storm Ernesto was briefly upgraded to Category 1 status on the morning
of Aug. 27. It barely clipped the western tip of Hispaniola. Yet even that brush
with the deforested Haitian half of the island sapped enough oomph from Ernesto
that it was downgraded to a tropical storm.

It was a hurricane for less than 12 hours. The other storm to cross land was
Florence, which reached hurricane strength on Sept. 10, only after it had turned
away from the eastern seaboard. It breezed over Bermuda with winds of 130 km/h
-- barely hurricane strength -- kicking up "dangerous surf," but little else.
And although it would later push a family home into the sea on Newfoundland's
south coast, by then, it too had reverted from hurricane to mere storm.

That's been it in 2006.

This season, which was expected to be nearly as bad as last year's brutal one,
has seen hurricane numbers below the norm of the past decade and no greater than
the average of the past 40 years.

Admittedly, the hurricane season has two months left to run. A killer 'cane or
two could still be in the works. But that seems unlikely now since the peak of
the season typically occurs in August and September and there have been very few
years with active Octobers that didn't also have above-average hurricane
activity during August and September.

Last year at this time there had been 17 named storms, of which nine had become
full-blown hurricanes. So far this year there have been just nine storms, of
which Isaac is just the fifth hurricane.

It seems unlikely that 2006 will come anywhere near to last year's records: 27
named storms and 14 hurricanes, of which seven became major ones (Category 3 or
higher).

El Nino has been given as the reason this season has not been as busy as
predicted. Before the season began, forecasters expected it to be nearly as bad
as last year. But an unexpected El Nino formed in the Pacific, which increased
the west-to-east winds blowing out off North America into the Atlantic. Higher
winds not only push hurricanes out to sea, away from land, they also blow the
tops off of the storms, which keeps them from drawing power and moisture from
the ocean and prevents them from gathering strength and momentum.

But this is only a partial explanation for the lower number of hurricanes. It
explains why there have been so few mega-storms and why the ones there have been
were offshore. It doesn't adequately explain why there have been so few named
storms or so few of the weather phenomenon from which storms calve -- tropical
depressions.

Weather conditions in and around Africa have contributed to the lack of tropical
depressions -- and thus the lack of hurricanes. But so has another phenomenon
that has gone almost unreported -- a rapid loss of heat in the upper ocean.

According to the global warming alarmists, this should not have happened. None
of the major climate change models predicted it. But between 2003 and 2005, the
upper ocean layers -- particularly the hurricane spawning Atlantic -- lost 20%
of their heat. And warm water is the essential fuel of hurricanes.

It appears perhaps that the sun builds up energy in the oceans over a decade or
two; energy that is then released spasmodically in one or more seasons of
powerful storms.

It may well be that recent strong hurricanes have nothing to do with alleged
man-made global warming. The warming that is causing them is solar -- i.e.,
natural. The panic that our use of SUVs and air conditioners is fanning
so-called "supercanes," may be unwarranted.

For an understanding of the sun versus global warming debate on hurricanes,
think of the ocean as a pot of water on your stove, the burner below it as the
sun and the air around it as the atmosphere.

Scientist all agree that warmer water makes bigger and badder hurricanes. So
which is more likely to heat your ocean and drive hurricane formation, turning
on the burner (the sun) or turning up your thermostat to raise the atmospheric
temperature around your pot (global warming)?

If solar activity is behind recent climate changes, rather than carbon dioxide
emission -- as many reputable scientists believe -- then running around capping
our CO2 production, banning this and taxing that, will cripple our economy
without doing a thing to prevent a warming Earth.

lgunter@shaw.ca

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2006 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 111 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Telegram & Gazette (Massachusetts)

                             May 28, 2016 Saturday
                              Worcester TG Edition

Feds predict more Atlantic tropical storms

BYLINE: The Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; 13

LENGTH: 1054 words


MIAMI -- U.S. government forecasters expect a near-normal Atlantic hurricane
season, after three relatively slow years. But they also say climate conditions
that influence storm development are making it difficult to predict how many
hurricanes and tropical storms will arise over the next six months.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's outlook Friday called for
a near-normal season with 10 to 16 named storms, with four to eight hurricanes
and one to four "major" ones with winds reaching 111 mph and up.

The long-term season averages are 12 named storms, with six hurricanes and three
major ones.

The Atlantic hurricane season officially starts June 1, but tropical weather got
a head-start this year: Hurricane Alex made an unseasonable debut in January
over the far eastern Atlantic.

The National Hurricane Center says an area of low pressure between Bermuda and
the Bahamas had a high chance of brewing into something bigger Friday or today.

Hurricane hunter aircraft was investigating the disturbance Friday, and
communities along the coasts of Georgia and the Carolinas should monitor its
development, said NOAA Administrator Kathryn Sullivan.

Forecast challenges

While they can't predict whether any storm will strike the U.S., and more
tropical storms are expected than in the last three years, NOAA officials said
significant variables are at play.

It's unclear whether a decades-long high-activity era for Atlantic hurricanes
has ended, said Gerry Bell, lead seasonal hurricane forecaster with NOAA's
Climate Prediction Center. Meanwhile, El Nino is dissipating while La Nina looms
for the season's peak from August through October.

El Nino is the natural warming of parts of the Pacific Ocean that changes
weather worldwide. That tends to reduce hurricane activity in the Atlantic,
while La Nina tends to increase it.

The active storm era associated with warm Atlantic temperatures and stronger
West African monsoons began in 1995, but recent hurricane seasons showed shifts
toward a cooler phase marked by colder waters and a weaker monsoon, Bell said.

Each era can last 25 to 40 years, and it might take years to determine whether
the transition has happened, Bell said.

The last transition to a less active hurricane era happened in the 1970s,
without the data and computer models that forecasters have now. "We're watching
it for the first time with very new eyes," Sullivan said.

2015 tally

The 2015 season was slightly below average with 11 named storms, including two
tropical storms that made landfall and caused flooding in South Carolina and
Texas. Hurricane Joaquin, one of two storms to reach major hurricane strength,
killed all 33 mariners aboard a cargo ship that sank off the Bahamas in October.

During U.S. Coast Guard investigative hearings this month into the sinking of
the El Faro, one federal investigator characterized the disaster as "a colossal
failure" of management.

Initial forecasts for Joaquin also were wildly inaccurate. Sullivan said NOAA is
on track to meet storm track and intensity forecast improvement goals, and a new
weather satellite launching this fall will produce much sharper images of
hurricanes and other severe weather.

Coastal risks

The last major hurricane to strike the U.S. mainland was Hurricane Wilma, which
cut across Florida in 2005. Wind speeds, not damage estimates, determine whether
a hurricane is classified as "major" -- that's Category 3 and up on the
hurricane wind scale .

Since 2005, the population in the 185 coastline counties most threatened by
hurricanes has grown 8.7 percent to 59.2 million people, according to U.S.
Census estimates. Overall, 143.6 million people -- 44.7 percent of the U.S.
population -- from Maine to Texas could be living in harm's way.

Other Census figures hint at the potential financial risks throughout those
states: 60.1 million housing units and 3.3 million business establishments with
52.3 million paid workers.

Ferocious storm winds aren't the deadliest threat. According to the National
Hurricane Center in Miami, storm surge and rainfall flooding combine for
three-quarters of all U.S. deaths from hurricanes, tropical storms or tropical
depressions.

MAJOR DAMAGE

In the Bahamas, Joaquin caused over $60 million in damage, according to the
hurricane center. The islands reported widespread flooding that contaminated
drinking water, cut off an airport and swamped a local fishing fleet.

Even "minor" storms can leave misery behind. After Tropical Storm Erika swept
through the Caribbean last year, damage estimates on the island of Dominica
ranged up to $500 million for homes, roads, bridges and infrastructure, and
Puerto Rico reported $17.4 million in agricultural losses for plantains, bananas
and coffee.

The Northeast was wracked by catastrophic flooding, first from Hurricane Irene
in 2011 and again from Superstorm Sandy in 2012. Damage estimates tallied in the
tens of billions of dollars.

Due to the financial hardships left in Sandy's wake, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency said Monday that it's overhauling its appeals process for
flood insurance claims with more transparency and oversight. Homeowners will be
able to take disputes directly to FEMA instead of first going through the
insurance companies they're fighting.

CLIMATE CHANGE

Rising sea levels are expected to increase the vulnerability of coastal
communities to flooding from tropical systems. Recent research indicates climate
change is likely to make hurricanes more intense in the future.

Improved computer models show that warming atmospheric conditions may hinder
tropical cyclone development worldwide, says David Nolan, a University of Miami
professor of atmospheric sciences.

But the hurricanes that do form could grow more intense because ocean
temperatures will be higher, Nolan says. Warm ocean waters feed hurricanes like
fuel in an engine.

"The ones that do occur could be a little bit stronger," Nolan says, "but the
changes over the next 10, 20, 30 years would be very small, almost
undetectable."

Craig Fugate, administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, right,
talks about the status of Hurricane Joaquin as it moves through the eastern
Bahamas as Rick Knabb, director of the National Hurricane Center, participates
in a media briefing at the National Hurricane Center, in this 2015 file photo.
The Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2016 Worcester Telegram & Gazette, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 112 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 31, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Near-Normal Atlantic Hurricane Season is Most Likely this Year

LENGTH: 968  words




 Washington: U.S Department of Commerce has issued the following news release:



 Following NOAA's 2016 Atlantic hurricane season outlook last week, President
Obama today will visit the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
headquarters for a briefing on the annual outlook and hurricane preparedness.
NOAA's Climate Prediction Center says the 2016 Atlantic hurricane season, which
runs from June 1 through November 30, will most likely be near-normal, but
forecast uncertainty in the climate signals that influence the formation of
Atlantic storms make predicting this season particularly difficult.





 NOAA predicts a 70 percent likelihood of 10 to 16 named storms (winds of 39 mph
or higher), of which 4 to 8 could become hurricanes (winds of 74 mph or higher),
including 1 to 4 major hurricanes (Category 3, 4 or 5; winds of 111 mph or
higher). While a near-normal season is most likely with a 45 percent chance,
there is also a 30 percent chance of an above-normal season and a 25 percent
chance of a below-normal season. Included in today's outlook is Hurricane Alex,
a pre-season storm that formed over the far eastern Atlantic in January.



 "This is a more challenging hurricane season outlook than most because it's
difficult to determine whether there will be reinforcing or competing climate
influences on tropical storm development," said Gerry Bell, Ph.D., lead seasonal
hurricane forecaster with NOAA's Climate Prediction Center. "However, a
near-normal prediction for this season suggests we could see more hurricane
activity than we've seen in the last three years, which were below normal."



 Bell explained there is uncertainty about whether the high activity era of
Atlantic hurricanes, which began in 1995, has ended. This high-activity era has
been associated with an ocean temperature pattern called the warm phase of the
Atlantic Multi-Decadal Oscillation or AMO, marked by warmer Atlantic Ocean
temperatures and a stronger West African monsoon. However, during the last three
years weaker hurricane seasons have been accompanied by a shift toward the cool
AMO phase, marked by cooler Atlantic Ocean temperatures and a weaker West
African monsoon. If this shift proves to be more than short-lived, it could
usher in a low-activity era for Atlantic hurricanes, and this period may already
have begun. High- and low-activity eras typically last 25 to 40 years.



 In addition, El Ni'o is dissipating and NOAA's Climate Prediction Center is
forecasting a 70 percent chance that La Ni'a -- which favors more hurricane
activity -- will be present during the peak months of hurricane season, August
through October. However, current model predictions show uncertainty as to how
strong La Ni'a and its impacts will be.



 Despite the challenging seasonal prediction, NOAA is poised to deliver
actionable environmental intelligence during the hurricane season with more
accuracy to help save lives and livelihoods and enhance the national economy as
we continue building a Weather-Ready Nation.



 "This is a banner year for NOAA and the National Weather Service -- As our
Hurricane Forecast Improvement Programoffsite link turns five, we're on target
with our five-year goal to improve track and intensity forecasts by 20 percent
each," said NOAA Administrator Kathryn Sullivan, Ph.D. "Building on a successful
supercomputer upgrade in January, we're adding unprecedented new capabilities to
our hurricane forecast models -- investing in science and technology infusion to
bring more accuracy to hurricane forecasts in 2016."



 Coming online later this season are major new investments to further improve
NOAA's ability to monitor hurricanes as they form and provide more timely and
accurate warnings for their impacts. NOAA's new National Water Model -- set to
launch later this summer -- will provide hourly water forecasts for 700 times
more locations than our current flood forecast system, greatly enhancing our
ability to forecast inland flooding from tropical systems. In the fall, NOAA
will launch GOES-R, a next generation weather satellite that will scan the Earth
five times faster, with a resolution four times greater than ever before, to
produce much sharper images of hurricanes and other severe weather.



 NOAA works with a number of partners in the private and public sectors to
ensure communities and businesses have the information they need to act well
ahead of a land-falling hurricane.



 "While seasonal forecasts may vary from year to year -- some high, some low --
it only takes one storm to significantly disrupt your life," stated FEMA Deputy
Administrator Joseph Nimmich.  "Preparing for the worst can keep you, your
family, and first responders out of harm's way. Take steps today to be prepared:
develop a family communications plan, build an emergency supply kit for your
home, and make sure you and your family know your evacuation route. These small
steps can help save your life when disaster strikes."



 NOAA also issued its outlook for the eastern Pacific and central Pacific
basins. The central Pacific hurricane outlook calls for equal 40 percent chance
of a near-normal or above-normal season with 4-7 tropical cyclones likely. The
eastern Pacific hurricane outlook calls for a 40 percent chance of a near-normal
hurricane season, a 30 percent chance of an above-normal season and a 30 percent
chance of a below-normal season. That outlook calls for a 70 percent probability
of 13-20 named storms, of which 6-11 are expected to become hurricanes,
including 3-6 major hurricanes.



 NOAA will issue an updated outlook for the Atlantic hurricane season in early
August, just prior to the peak of the season.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 113 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    December 6, 2002, Friday, FINAL EDITION

Number of U.S. hurricanes predicted to double next year

BYLINE: Patrick O'Driscoll

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 862 words

DATELINE: FORT COLLINS, Colo.

FORT COLLINS, Colo. -- It's a weather double-whammy: Snow and ice now, and more
Atlantic hurricanes than usual next year.

As the East and Southeast recover from Thursday's first notable blast of winter,
the nation's leading tropical storm researchers issue their first forecast today
for 2003.

Scientists with Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project predict
twice as many hurricanes as last year will develop from June 1 to Nov. 30, the
traditional season in the Atlantic.


The forecast is for a dozen tropical storms -- those with winds of 39 mph to 73
mph. From those, eight are expected to become hurricanes, three of them major.
They also forecast a 30% greater chance that at least one major or "intense"
hurricane -- a storm with winds of at least 111 mph -- will strike land
somewhere along the Eastern seaboard, Florida or the Gulf Coast.

After a quiet 2002 and several years of mostly close calls, the USA's coastline
is overdue for a major and costly hit, says tropical storm expert William Gray,
the project's founder.

Only one of four hurricanes reached U.S. shores this year. Hurricane Lili caused
an estimated $ 335 million in damage along the Gulf Coast in October. Over the
past eight years, just four of 62 Atlantic hurricanes hit the USA.

"The United States has been extremely lucky," says Gray, in his 20th year of
forecasting tropical storms at Colorado State. "With such large coastal
population growth in recent decades, it is inevitable that we will see
hurricane-spawned destruction in coming years on a scale many times greater than
what we have seen in the past."

If so, blame it in part on the predicted demise of El Nino, the warming of
Pacific Ocean waters along the equator. The phenomenon, which can trigger
abnormal weather across the continent, also tends to suppress Atlantic
hurricanes. Blowing east from the Pacific, El Nino's winds can disrupt
hurricanes as they churn toward the USA.

Hurricanes form in the Atlantic when midyear storms over Africa drift west and
build intensity and moisture when they reach warm ocean waters.

They begin as tropical storms blowing at 39 mph or more. With winds from 74 mph
to more than 180 mph, hurricanes inflict the most damage when they come ashore.

In 1992, Hurricane Andrew pummeled South Florida and Louisiana, killing 23
people and causing $ 26.5 billion in damage. In 1998, Hurricane Mitch killed at
least 10,000 people in Honduras and Nicaragua, leaving 2 million homeless.

But until Lili hit Louisiana on Oct. 3, a record 21 consecutive Atlantic
hurricanes had failed to make it to U.S. shores.

"If El Nino goes neutral and the Atlantic stays warm, it'll be an active year,"
says Philip Klotzbach, one of Gray's research associates.

Although it's still nearly seven months until hurricane season, today's forecast
is a first look for insurers and state, local and federal emergency managers as
they prepare for potential hits.

The Colorado State researchers will update and refine their predictions several
times next year. And the National Weather Service will make its hurricane
predictions in the coming year.

Gray's team makes its predictions using data from more than half a century of
hurricane observation and measurement. Long term, the Atlantic averages about 9
1/2 tropical storms, six hurricanes and 2 1/3 major hurricanes a year.

TEXT OF INFO BOX BEGINS HERE

Predicting hurricanes

Each December, Colorado State University's tropical storm research team
forecasts the coming year's Atlantic hurricane season, which is June 1 through
Nov. 30.

1998

Named storms (Winds of at least 39 mph)

Forecast: 9

Actual: 14

Hurricanes (Winds of at least 74 mph)

Forecast: 5

Actual: 9

Major hurricanes (111 mph or more winds)

Forecast: 2

Actual: 3

1999

Named storms (Winds of at least 39 mph)

Forecast: 14

Actual: 12

Hurricanes (Winds of at least 74 mph)

Forecast: 9

Actual: 8

Major hurricanes (111 mph or more winds)

Forecast: 4

Actual: 5

2000

Named storms (Winds of at least 39 mph)

Forecast: 11

Actual: 14

Hurricanes (Winds of at least 74 mph)

Forecast: 7

Actual: 8

Major hurricanes (111 mph or more winds)

Forecast: 3

Actual: 3

2001

Named storms (Winds of at least 39 mph)

Forecast: 9

Actual: 15

Hurricanes (Winds of at least 74 mph)

Forecast: 5

Actual: 9

Major hurricanes (111 mph or more winds)

Forecast: 2

Actual: 4

2002

Named storms (Winds of at least 39 mph)

Forecast: 13

Actual: 12

Hurricanes (Winds of at least 74 mph)

Forecast: 8

Actual: 4

Major hurricanes (111 mph or more winds)

Forecast: 4

Actual: 2

2003

Named storms (Winds of at least 39 mph)

Forecast: 12

Actual: -

Hurricanes (Winds of at least 74 mph)

Forecast: 8

Actual: -

Major hurricanes (111 mph or more winds)

Forecast: 3

Actual: -

Source: Department of Atmospheric Science, Colorado State University

LOAD-DATE: December 06, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 114 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                           September 25, 2017 Monday
                             Politifact.com Edition

12 HURRICANES COMING TOWARD U.S.? FAKE POST IS TOTALLY WRONG

BYLINE: EMILY TANAKA

SECTION: POLITIFACT; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 589 words


"12 more hurricanes headed towards U.S."

- Bloggers on Thursday, September 21st, 2017 in a post on the Internet

* * *

The Ruling: PANTS ON FIRE!

A phony online news article that says the United States is expecting 12 more
hurricanes was created as a prank on a site that allows people to generate fake
news. Its claims were deemed "absurd" by the National Hurricane Center.

With a headline "12 More Hurricanes Headed Towards US," the post was published
on react365.com and alleged to be sourced to the National Hurricane Center.

"The National Hurricane Center has issued 12 more hurricane warnings for the
East Coast of the U.S.," read the post, "'Regardless of which coast you live on,
be prepared to evacuate at least 12 times, the National Weather Services said
Thursday, not ruling out the possibility of a 13th hurricane by the end of the
year."

Despite the assumed validity of the sources, the entirety of this post is false.

PolitiFact has written about similar "prank" posts in the past. This post and
React365.com are part of a social media trend that allows people to create bogus
news articles and publish them as if they are true.

These so-called prank posts can leave users vulnerable to "like-farming," where
scammers use click-bait posts to get as many likes as possible and spread
malware through popularly clicked links.

We first saw the post on Sept. 21, 2017, but it appears to have been updated by
the publisher to look more current. The content of the post hasn't changed.

Since we first saw the post, there have been only three hurricanes in the
Atlantic: Jose, Maria and Lee.

Jose, which was quickly downgraded to a tropical storm when it came close to the
East Coast, has fallen off the National Hurricane Center radar since Sept. 22.
Maria has moved north off the shores of North Carolina and is predicted to move
northeast, farther away from the East Coast. And Lee remains a idle swirl in the
middle of the Atlantic with no apparent intent to touch American shores.

The National Hurricane Center has yet to issue anything more severe than a
tropical storm warning for any of these storms.

Though the post is false, Dennis Feltgen of the National Hurricane Center
advises people to stay vigilant during this active hurricane season.

Since May, the National Weather Service has forecast that this year's Atlantic
hurricane season would be more active than past seasons. On Aug. 9, they updated
their forecast, stating that this may be the most active hurricane season since
2010.

But, in the eyes of the National Hurricane Center, the react365.com claim is
still nothing more than fake news and, according to Feltgen, "totally unfounded,
totally baseless and totally irresponsible."

We rate this claim as Pants on Fire!

* * *

About this statement:

Published: Monday, September 25th, 2017 at 5:04 p.m.

Researched by: Emily Tanaka

Edited by: Angie Drobnic Holan

Subjects: Fake news, Weather

Sources:

React365.com, "Twelve More Hurricanes Headed Towards US", Sept. 21, 2017

Nhc.noaa.gov, "Atlantic Tropical Cyclones and Disturbances,"

PunditFact, "Story about Checkers shooting came from fake news generating
website," July 6, 2017.

PunditFact, "Carnival isn't giving hurricane victims a free cruise, despite fake
news post," Sept. 21, 2017.

Nhc.noaa.gov, "Post-Tropical Cyclone Jose Public Advisory", Sept. 22, 2017

Nhc.noaa.gov, "HURRICANE MARIA", Sept. 25, 2017

Interview with Dennis Feltgen, spokesperson from the National Hurricane Center

Noaa.gov, "Early-season storms one indicator of active Atlantic hurricane season
ahead" Aug. 9, 2017

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2017 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 115 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  June 13, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'38 Hurricane Still a Lesson in Ruin

BYLINE: By JOHN RATHER

SECTION: Section 14LI; Page 1; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1798 words


THE unnamed hurricane that slammed into the South Shore of Suffolk County on the
afternoon of Sept. 21, 1938, with such force that it registered on a seismograph
in Sitka, Alaska, is about to go into the record book as the Long Island storm
of the century.

In the little time that remains, it is a record no one wants broken.

"Let's hope it stays that way," said David H. Fischler, the commissioner of Fire
Rescue and Emergency Services for Suffolk County, one of a number of government
agencies bracing for a 1999 hurricane season that arrived this month amid
ominous forecasts.

The 1938 hurricane, which took forecasters and residents by surprise, devastated
eastern Long Island and then tore into New England, leaving nearly 700 dead in
its wake. Many of the deaths were drownings resulting from the powerful storm
surge accompanying the fast-moving hurricane.

In Westhampton Beach, which bore the brunt on Long Island, more than 150 summer
homes were swept from the barrier island during a three-hour siege that punched
open the Shinnecock Inlet.

Some survivors escaped death by clinging to blown-off rooftops and debris
propelled by the storm surge over raging Moriches Bay to improbable landings on
high land in places like the Westhampton Country Club golf course. Several
bodies followed the same route. About 100 people died in New York State. Water
in the village of Westhampton Beach, which is behind the barrier island, was
more than seven feet deep.

For miles around -- and particularly in the area east of the hurricane's eye in
eastern Suffolk -- roofs lifted off, chimneys and church steeples toppled
soundlessly in shrieking winds and trees crashed down on roads and houses,
flattened by sustained winds from 90 to well above 100 miles an hour.

With Long Island untouched by a major hurricane since 1815, many residents in
1938 had never heard of hurricanes. Those who had never expected one to hit so
far north.

Indeed, government forecasters, without radar or other modern monitoring
devices, thought the storm had turned harmlessly out to sea after threatening
Miami and passing by Cape Hatteras. Instead, it drew a bead on Long Island,
heading north at 50 to 60 miles an hour toward the unsuspecting South Shore.

"People that lived there had no warning," said Wallace Broege, director of the
Suffolk County Historical Society in Riverhead. "It took them by complete
surprise. I can't imagine the horror of all of a sudden looking out your window
and a hurricane is there."

Nassau, on the less-punishing western side of the eye, escaped with rain, wind,
fallen trees and damage to homes including the J. P. Morgan estate in Glen Cove,
which was left in shambles. But there was little to suggest the ferocity of the
storm farther east.

In the years since, the 1938 storm has been the benchmark for the destructive
force of hurricanes that annually threaten Long Island, and a reminder of what
may yet come. While better forecasting, emergency preparedness and forced
evacuation from low-lying areas and barrier islands would be expected to keep
deaths to a minimum, insurance companies say a storm identical to the 1938
hurricane would produce up to $18 billion in damage in the New York metropolitan
area. Hurricane Andrew produced $33 billion in damage, the highest amount ever
for a hurricane, when it ravaged South Florida in 1992.

This season, a prediction by the hurricane forecasting expert William M. Gray of
Colorado State University issued in April and updated on June 4 anticipates 14
named storms including nine hurricanes and four intense hurricanes in the
Atlantic basin, which includes the East Coast. The historic average for the past
100 years is about nine named storms, including about six hurricanes.

Dr. Gray estimated that there was a better than an even chance one or more of
the intense hurricanes, meaning hurricanes rated a Category 3, 4 or 5 on the
Saffir-Simpson scale, would make landfall somewhere in Florida or on the East
Coast, a far higher probability than the century's one-in-three average.

In an address to government agencies earlier this month, Michael E. Wyllie, the
meteorologist in charge at the National Weather Service forecast office in
Upton, also sounded a warning. Mr. Wyllie said that five key atmospheric and
aquatic factors cited by Dr. Gray, including the impact of an unexpectedly
enduring, water-cooling La Nina in the Pacific, were aligned in a troubling way.
"All the pointers are pointing toward a large number of storms in the Atlantic
basin," he said last week.

As living memory of the 1938 hurricane fades, weather service maps show in
detail what might be expected if a Category 4 hurricane, defined as a storm with
sustained winds of 131 to 155 miles an hour, hit the South Shore.

The 1938 hurricane, a Category 5 with winds in excess of 155 m.p.h. in earlier
phases, had become a Category 3 storm with winds of 111 to 130 m.p.h. by the
time it arrived unannounced on Long Island on a rising tide during equinox,
factors that maximized storm surge.

Meteorologists and emergency agencies say a Category 3 hurricane is the
strongest that can be expected on Long Island except in extraordinary weather
circumstances.

The weather service maps show that a Category 4 making landfall in southwestern
Nassau County could bring a storm surge that would wash over the barrier island
where the City of Long Beach is and inundate downtown streets as far inland as
Lynbrook and Rockville Centre.

If the storm hit in western Suffolk, the surge would sweep over parts of Fire
Island, inundating mainland communities from Amityville to East Islip, another
map shows.

In a strike near Montauk, sandy Napeague would disappear beneath the waves and
Montauk would be cut off from the South Fork.

Since the mid-1980's, when the Long Island Regional Planning Board decried a
lack of hurricane preparedness and growing vulnerability on the South Shore,
local and state governments have greatly improved hurricane emergency planning,
said Lee E. Koppelman, the planning board's executive director.

But plans designed to get residents out of harm's way when hurricanes menaced
Long Island would do nothing to lessen the cost of property damage, Dr.
Koppelman said. He estimated that storm damage on Fire Island alone following an
intense hurricane would exceed $1 billion.

In the 1938 hurricane, scores of houses in Fire Island summer communities, which
were then far less populated, were destroyed as the barrier island was overrun
by storm waves. Saltaire took the worst beating.

All along the South Shore, Dr. Koppelman said, "the danger to property is much
greater than when we did the study in 1985," reflecting continued development of
barrier island and shoreline areas.

Jay Tanski, a coastal geologist at the New York Sea Grant program, said that
barrier islands battered by punishing fall and winter storms in the early 1990's
are in far better shape as the decade nears its end.

"It was not a bad winter, we have not had very energetic conditions in the
water, so most of the beaches are in pretty good shape," he said.

If a hurricane should strike this season, Mr. Tanski said, "you are far better
off if the beaches are built up."

Gerard Stoddard, president of the Fire Island Association and chairman of the
Long Island Coastal Alliance, a group representing coastal property owners, said
that now, as in the years after 1938, hurricanes and forecasts of hurricanes had
not dampened enthusiasm for houses on the sand. He said there were 3,850 homes
and buildings on Fire Island, where the summer population, with day-trippers
included, swells to over 50,000.

"He has been issuing grim predictions for several years now," Mr. Stoddard said
of Dr. Gray. "But none of the hurricanes have come this way."

In the event of a hurricane, the Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, is
the official charged with ordering an evacuation of Fire Island. To allow time
for ferries to evacuate people on the island, Mr. Gaffney would have to act at
least 24 hours before the hurricane arrived. The difficult of predicting the
path of a hurricane adds an element of guesswork to the decision. Mr. Gaffney
could also order an evacuation of Montauk, though an evacuation of the South
Fork is unlikely.

Mr. Stoddard and others said new building requirements that had to be met for
homeowners to qualify for Federal flood insurance meant houses would stand up
far better to wind and water. One requirement is that roofs be more firmly
attached. New homes now being constructed in the Village of West Hampton Dunes,
in the same area where the 1938 hurricane caused devastation, are elevated on
pilings.

But people who remember the 1938 hurricane said there is little that can resist
the power of such a storm.

"If we get another like that one we're in deep trouble," said Edward V. Ecker
Sr. of Montauk, who was 8 years old when the 1938 hurricane struck and his
family, like many in Montauk, fled to high ground at Montauk Manor. "The slates
were flying off the roof like knives," he said.

"I had never even heard the word 'hurricane' until everyone started talking
about it the next day," Mr. Ecker said.

In Amagansett, Elizabeth Davis, then 35 years old, watched as a cellar door
blown loose by the wind smashed through a window on the third floor of her
house. "Oh, it was blowing so awful," said Mrs. Davis, now 96.

She recalled that she ran to the third floor with her mother. They managed to
push a dresser against the broken window to keep the rain out. "Someone told us
later we were lucky we weren't drawn out by the wind," she said.

Carleton Kelsey of Amagansett, then a 25-year-old schoolteacher, recalled that
at around 3 P.M. on the day of the hurricane the wind started blowing water
through his seventh-grade classroom windows just as he began a geography class.
He and his students stayed there for the duration as winds rose.

"I went out once to get the kids some goodies from a store, and this large piece
of slate went by at a great rate of speed," Mr. Kelsey said. "It could have
taken my head off."

Ria Del Bene, born in Westhampton Beach in 1919 and still a resident there, said
that when the hurricane's leading east winds began to blow, "we thought it was
just another nor'easter."

"Nobody thought we were getting a hurricane," she said.

With winds rising, she went outside to look around and noticed the water being
sucked out of a canal near her home. "Then it came back like a tidal wave," she
said. "I decided I'd better not hang around there much longer."

Mrs. Davis said she knew about predictions about an active hurricane season.
"I've heard that over television," she said. "I just hope we don't get one. I
don't ever want to see another."


http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The 1938 hurricane has had lasting impact. Hurricane-resistant
construction is being used on a house, above, on Dune Road in Westhampton Dunes.
Shinnecock Inlet, above left, was formed by the hurricane, which leveled West
Bay Bridge homes and a bath clubhouse, below left. (The New York
Times)(Photographs by Richard Lee for The New York Times)(pg. 10)



                          FOCUS - 116 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           December 1, 2004 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

LATECOMER STORM JUST MAKES SEASON

BYLINE: By ELIOT KLEINBERG Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 9C

LENGTH: 633 words


As if to taunt hurricane-weary forecasters, a system between the Azores and
Bermuda became Tropical Storm Otto Tuesday afternoon, in the last hours of the
hurricane season. It was not expected to threaten land.

Otto is the last jab in a season in which damage from four hurricanes - Charley,
Frances, Ivan and Jeanne - could exceed the $34.9 billion, adjusted to 2000
dollars, caused by Hurricane Andrew in 1992, the head of the National Weather
Service said Tuesday in an end-of-the-season roundup.

Some 9.4 million people fled the four storms, which prompted 21 disaster
declarations in 13 states, weather service Director David L. Johnson said at the
National Hurricane Center west of Miami.

Hardest-hit, of course, was Florida. It became the first state since Texas, in
1886, to be struck by four hurricanes in a single year. One in five Florida
homes was damaged by at least one of the hurricanes, according to the Insurance
Information Institute. As many as 250 tornadoes formed.

Other highlights of the season, according to hurricane prognosticator William
Gray and his Colorado State University team: it was the first time a major
hurricane struck the stretch of coast between West Palm Beach and Savannah since
1893, the first time eight storms had struck the U.S. mainland in a single year
since 1916, the first time four hurricanes struck the U.S. mainland in a year
since 1985, the first time two major hurricanes struck Florida since 1950, and
the first time a Category 4 hurricane (Charley) struck Florida since 1995
(Opal).

Also Tuesday, during a daylong tour of hurricane strike zones that took him to
Pensacola, Vero Beach and Punta Gorda, Gov. Jeb Bush called the end of the
season a time of "reflection and celebration."

"This was a historic time," he said. "As a state we learned a lot about
ourselves, and it's important to reflect on that. I think Florida is a better
place and a stronger place because of this."

Bush said he would push during a special legislative session for passage of tax
relief for residents who lost their homes and elimination of multiple
deductibles on insurance policies for those who had damage from more than one
hurricane.

The hurricane center's director, Max Mayfield, said Tuesday it was too early to
know if the conditions that sent so many storms to Florida would be repeated
next year.

Mayfield noted that more storms have formed in the past decade than in any other
decade on record, but until this year few struck land. This year, only three of
the 14 named storms (before Otto) that formed missed land.

"People who were running around . . . at the last minute were a lot more
stressed than those who planned in advance," Mayfield said. In 2005, he said,
"It's going to be real easy to sell, in Florida anyway, to have a hurricane
plan."

The next hurricane season begins June 1.

The Associated Press contributed to this story.

eliot_kleinberg@pbpost.com

Rare season

According to the National Weather Service, Florida has been struck by 71
hurricanes since 1851, an average of once every 2.2 years. This year, four
struck the state. This chart shows the number and frequency of hurricane strikes
during the past 154 hurricane seasons.
               Hurricanes Major hurricanes*
Landfalls              71                33
Frequency             2.2               4.7
2+ in one year         30                 4
Frequency             5.1              38.5
3+ in one year          7                 1
Frequency              22               154
4+ in one year          7                 1
Frequency             154                 -
Landfalls              71                33
Frequency             2.2               4.7
2+ in one year         30                 4
Frequency             5.1              38.5
3+ in one year          7                 1
Frequency              22               154
4+ in one year          7                 1
Frequency             154                 -

Longest time between hurricane landfalls: 6 years (1859-1865, 1979-1985)

Longest time between major hurricane landfalls: 19 years (1851-1870)

Longest time between multiple hurricane landfalls in a year: 19 years
(1966-1985)

*Major hurricane: At least Category 3 on Saffir-Simpson scale, with sustained
winds of at least 111 mph.

Source: National Weather Service

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Did not run MSL. Info box at end of text.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC (B&W)
 MARK HEMPHILL/Staff Artist Rare Season (see box)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2004 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 117 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                Evening Gazette

                             August 18, 2017 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Get ready... Gert's a cert;
batten down the hatches, there's a hurricane on the way to the uk

BYLINE: JAMES CAIN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 365 words


YOU might as well shove your BBQ back in the shed - there's a hurricane coming
and they've called it Gert.

Hurricane Gert is brewing up something fierce ahead of her arrival on UK shores
over the weekend.

The rotating storm system is forecast to sweep across the country over tomorrow
and Sunday, so here's everything you need to know about the next significant UK
weather event on the way.

What is Hurricane Gert? A hurricane is what experts call a storm system with a
low-pressure centre surrounded by a rapidly rotating spiral arrangement of
thunderstorms that forms in the Atlantic or northeastern Pacific.

When the same thing happens in the northwestern Pacific it's called a typhoon -
they call it a cyclone if it's in the south Pacific or Indian Ocean.

Hurricane Gert is currently a category one storm and is the north Atlantic's
second hurricane this year. Who called it Gert? There's a strict procedure
established by the World Meteorological Organization for naming hurricanes. For
Atlantic hurricanes, there is a list of male and female names which are used on
a six-year rotation.

Aren't hurricanes a bit unusual in Blighty? Turns out hurricanes hitting the UK
aren't as unusual as you might think. In fact, last year, the UK was lashed by
Hurricane Gaston, while in 2015 it was Hurricane Kate and Hurricane Bertha a
year before that.

Met Office meteorologist Clare Nasir said: "This time of year, mid summer to
autumn time, occasionally we see the odd hurricane modified by the cool waters
of the north Atlantic that slowly move up."

She added the hurricane will become a "typical depression" by the time the cool
water has moved across to western Europe.

When will Gert arrive in the UK? Gert will cross the waters to the UK coast
tomorrow and will arrive fully by "the latter part of the weekend and into next
week".

In short, we should expect a lot of wet and windy weather.

Should I hide in the cellar? The Met office said: "Currently we are expecting
some wet and windy weather, some heavy rain from time to time, particularly in
the northern half of the UK."

While there is a small chance of some "fine and warm weather", it is more likely
to be "heavy rain and perhaps strong winds".

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Hurricane Gert is on the way

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EGM


                    Copyright 2017 Gazette Media Company Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 118 of 881 DOCUMENTS


             The Press of Atlantic City (Pleasantville New Jersey)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           November 17, 2012 Saturday

Sandy's classification as 'post-tropical cyclone' saving homeowners thousands on
hurricane deductibles

BYLINE: Richard Degener, The Press of Atlantic City, Pleasantville, N.J.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 923 words


Nov. 17--Sandy marched up the coast every bit a hurricane, but a last-minute
decision to classify the storm as a "post-tropical cyclone" as it made landfall
is saving homeowners thousands of dollars in insurance deductibles.

The decision to classify Sandy, even as it landed in New Jersey with
hurricane-force winds as high as 80 mph, will potentially cost insurance
companies millions of dollars in claims.

"If this was a court case, you'd have multiple meteorologists on the stand,"
said Campbell H. Wallace, an attorney for the Professional Insurance Agents of
New Jersey.

There is no court case. Insurance companies in New Jersey, New York and
Connecticut have agreed to waive costly hurricane deductibles, which could have
run in the millions of dollars along the three-state area.

Wallace said the insurance industry accepts the fact that the National Weather
Service is "legally tasked" with making such determinations. He said
meteorologists are judged by their peers and credibility is paramount to them.

"You might have a storm that is a hurricane in the middle of the Caribbean or in
the Atlantic, but if it's no longer technically a hurricane when it hits New
Jersey you no longer have the hurricane deductibles. It was a storm, and a
superstorm, but not a storm that triggers hurricane deductibles," Wallace said.

Gov. Chris Christie issued an executive order Nov. 2 prohibiting insurance
companies from imposing hurricane deductibles. He said they can be as high as 5
percent of a property's insured value. That puts the deductible for a $500,000
house at $25,000. This compares with a typical deductible ranging from $500 to
$2,000, Christie said.

But in a press release explaining his order, even Christie referred to the storm
as a hurricane.

"While Hurricane Sandy was a devastating storm, it did not meet the regulatory
threshold to trigger the application of hurricane deductibles by insurance
companies in New Jersey. This executive order makes it clear that consumers do
not have to pay these unusually large and often unexpected amounts," Christie
said.

Marshall McKight, a spokesman for the state Department of Banking and Insurance,
said the two main regulatory thresholds triggering the deductibles in New Jersey
are that the storm has to be a named hurricane by the National Weather Service
and it must have sustained winds measured on the ground greater than 74 mph.

Sandy appeared to meet both measures at 8 p.m. Oct. 29 as she made landfall five
miles southwest of Atlantic City. The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale lists
a Category 1 hurricane as having sustained winds of 74-95 mph. Mitchell Gaines,
a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Mount Holly, said sustained
winds at landfall were 80 mph.

The service, however, is not concerned with the rules in individual states that
trigger the deductibles. Gaines said the storm's status was downgraded because
it lost hurricane characteristics after hitting cooler ocean waters and mixing
with a separate northeast storm, which may have helped keep winds at such a high
level.

"It interacted with another frontal boundary moving into the region and
transitioned into a post-tropical cyclone. This was not a hurricane. It was
classified as a post-tropical cyclone upon landfall," Gaines said.

McKnight said the storm has spawned an unprecedented number of claims, and
waiving hurricane deductibles is potentially saving shore dwellers millions of
dollars.

"Insurance companies are aware of the governor's order, and they're going to
comply with it," McKnight said.

Measuring instruments

There may be no dispute about Christie's order, but there is some concern
whether instruments to measure storms are adequate. Deana Lykins, president of
the Insurance Council of New Jersey, which represents insurance companies,
questions the number of wind gauges along the coast. Lykins noted New Jersey's
hurricane deductible rules require winds of 74 mph for at least one minute,
measured on land 10 meters above the ground.

Lykins said the service measures wind speeds a lot of ways, including from
airplanes and dropping devices into storms, but she noted most anemometers on
the ground are located at airports inland of the coast. She said no ground
readings from Sandy met the requirement.

"The reading wasn't there. It wasn't 74 on the ground. It could have been in the
air. The language says the reading must be in New Jersey, and that's taken to
mean on the ground," Lykins said.

The insurance industry has been pushing for more anemometers along the coast
since Hurricane Irene in August 2011, though Lykins said it is not disputing the
call in this case. Hurricane deductibles, Lykins said, result in lower premiums.

"If the event never occurs, everybody wins. You get lower premiums, and
insurance companies don't pay. Without hurricane deductibles, premiums would be
higher," Lykins said.

It might be the one bright spot from the storm once called a hurricane, later
called a superstorm, which finally retained the label post-tropical cyclone.
Since most homeowners along the shore have a hurricane deductible, the insurance
industry is playing its part to create this silver lining.

"We were not triggering it, even before the (Christie) order. We agree this
absolutely was the right reading for this storm," Lykins said.

Contact Richard Degener:

609-463-6711

RDegener@pressofac.com

___ (c)2012 The Press of Atlantic City (Pleasantville, N.J.) Visit The Press of
Atlantic City (Pleasantville, N.J.) at www.pressofatlanticcity.com Distributed
by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20121117-1AC-Sandy-s-classification-as-post-tropical-cyclone-saving-homeowners-t
housands-on-hurricane-deductibles-1117-20121117

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1AC


                   Copyright 2012 The Press of Atlantic City


                          FOCUS - 119 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                 The Daily News (Jacksonville, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           November 30, 2013 Saturday

Hurricane season fizzles after quiet year

BYLINE: Jannette Pippin, The Daily News, Jacksonville, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 529 words


Nov. 30--As the hurricane season neared an end this week, it was overshadowed by
winter weather arriving just in time for Thanksgiving.

The 2013 Atlantic hurricane season fizzled away without making much of an
impression on Eastern North Carolina. Tropical Storm Andrea, the first named
storm of the season, swept through the area in early June.

Meteorologist Casey Dail of the National Weather Service office in Newport said
the storm brought notable widespread rain of 2 inches to 5 inches across the
forecast area and was the only storm system of the season to impact the area.

"That was it," she said.

The 2013 hurricane season ends Saturday.

The season logged the fewest number of hurricanes since 1982, according the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

The area was fortunate to be spared from any significant impacts this season;
but it shouldn't make residents complacent, said Onslow County Emergency
Services Director Norman Bryson.

Bryson said it's not a matter of if, but when the area will see another
hurricane. And emergency preparedness, he said, doesn't end with the close of
the hurricane season.

Severe weather and emergency events can happen at any time.

"Hurricane season has ended, but that doesn't mean we won't have other storm
events," he said.

While it was a quiet hurricane season, it stands out after falling short of
forecasts of an above-normal, and potentially very active hurricane season.

NOAA issued a news release this week that said the reason the season fizzled was
due in large part to persistent, unfavorable atmospheric conditions over the
Gulf of Mexico, Caribbean Sea and tropical Atlantic Ocean.

"This unexpectedly low activity is linked to an unpredictable atmospheric
pattern that prevented the growth of storms by producing exceptionally dry,
sinking air and strong vertical wind shear in much of the main hurricane
formation region, which spans the tropical Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea,"
said Gerry Bell, lead seasonal hurricane forecaster at NOAA's Climate Prediction
Center. "Also detrimental to some tropical cyclones this year were several
strong outbreaks of dry and stable air that originated over Africa."

Thirteen named storms formed in the Atlantic basin this year. Two, Ingrid and
Humberto, became hurricanes, but neither became major hurricanes.

Although the number of named storms was just above the average of 12, the
numbers of hurricanes and major hurricanes were well below their averages of six
and three, respectively. Major hurricanes are categories 3 and above, according
to the NOAA information.

Tropical Storm Andrea was the only named storm to make landfall in the United
States this year.

While the United States missed the brunt of the season, Mexico was hit by eight
storms, including three from the Atlantic Basin and five from the eastern North
Pacific. Of the eight, five struck as tropical storms and three as hurricanes,
NOAA said.

Contact Daily News reporter Jannette Pippin at 910-382-2557 or
jannette.pippin@jdnews.com Visit JDNews.com to comment.

___ (c)2013 The Daily News (Jacksonville, N.C.) Visit The Daily News
(Jacksonville, N.C.) at www.jdnews.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131130-JN-Hurricane-season-fizzles-after-quiet-year-1130-20131130

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JN


                         Copyright 2013 The Daily News


                          FOCUS - 120 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              May 11, 1998, Monday

Seminar urges preparation for hurricanes

BYLINE: JORGE SANCHEZ

SECTION: CITRUS TIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: CRYSTAL RIVER



Citrus County enjoys distinct advantages and disturbing disadvantages over
other parts of the state when it comes to hurricanes.

First the good news. The majority of hurricanes form off the African coast.
They cross the Atlantic to make landfall on the state's east coast. These are
seldom a threat to Citrus County. Their impact here is no more than a feeble
exit after they exhausttheir energy over land.

Now for the bad news. Should the rare Caribbean-spawned hurricane cross the
Gulf of Mexico to make direct landfall over Citrus County, the shallow coastal
basin holding the gulf waters would produce catastrophic flooding.

The gulf coast lacks the deep drop-off found in the Atlantic, which is  capable
of absorbing a large storm surge. Here, the elevation between land and  water is
very gradual and sloping, so a storm surge could easily push its way  far
inland.

Think of the gulf as a shallow saucer filled nearly to the edge with water,  and
the storm surge as a coffee mug suddenly placed in the center.

To alert area residents to the beginning of hurricane season, which starts  on
June 1 and continues until November 1, a hurricane preparedness expo was  held
Saturday at the Crystal River Mall. Visitors saw demonstrations from many
emergency service agencies and displays by local businesses.

The keynote speaker was meteorologist Dick Fletcher, from WTSP-Ch. 10.  Fletcher
spoke about the need to plan ahead for hurricanes and the effect of  El Nino on
last year's relatively subdued hurricane season.

Fletcher predicted the El Nino weather pattern will disappear this summer,
causing conditions for a typical hurricane season.

Hurricane forecasters are predicting 10 tropical storms will form in the
Atlantic, and six of those will become hurricanes. Two of these are predicted
to become intense hurricanes with winds in excess of 111 miles per hour.

Fletcher said the Florida gulf coast has its own hurricane weather pattern.

"We get hit early and late in the hurricane season. This means in late  June and
July, and late September and October. That's when hurricanes  traditionally move
across the gulf," he said.

Among Fletcher's tips for preparing for hurricane season were:

+ Have a plan to protect your home and property. This includes shutters or
plywood for windows and evacuation procedures.

+ Monitor weather reports daily. Keep a close watch on storms which develop  in
the northwest Caribbean. These pose the greatest threat and can reach the
Florida gulf coast in two or three days.

+ Discuss hurricane preparedness plans at work, church and service groups.  This
way, people can make arrangements for evacuations without having to  overload
local emergency shelters.

Recounting the history of hurricanes in Florida, Fletcher said six of the
nation's 10 costliest hurricanes hit the state. He said studies showed the
hurricanes which struck Miami in 1926 and Palm Beach County in 1928 were the
costliest. Making adjustments for inflation and increased earning power, the
combined damage from these two storms was about $ 80-billion. Hurricane Andrew
caused about half that in damages.

"Every now and then we need to be reminded that, although we can put a man  on
the moon, we can't tame nature. We have to learn how to deal with it. It's
important to do what you can to cut down property loss," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITRUS TIMES

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, STEVE HASEL; COLOR PHOTO; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, STEVE
HASEL; A display offers facts about lightning and floods at Saturday's
Hurricane-Disaster Expo '98.; Anne Robertson, a volunteer with the American Red
Cross, was at the hurricane preparedness expo at Crystal River Mall on Saturday
to check people's blood pressure.; Dick Fletcher, a meteorologist for WTSP-Ch.
10, provided residents information on how to prepare for the coming hurricane
season.

                    Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 121 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              May 31, 1998, Sunday

Hurricane facts at a glance

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; 1998 HURRICANE GUIDE; Pg. 24I

LENGTH: 1298 words



   The first hurricane warning in the United States was flashed in 1873, with
the Signal Corps warned of a storm approaching the coast between Cape May,
N.J., and New London, Conn.

The earliest observed hurricane in the Atlantic was on March 7, 1908; the
latest, on Dec. 31, 1954, which persisted as a hurricane until Jan. 5, 1955.

The earliest hurricane to strike the United States in this century was Alma,
which struck northwest Florida on June 19, 1966. The latest hurricane to  strike
the United States was late on Nov. 30, 1925, near Tampa.

The Sept. 16, 1928, hurricane, a category 4 storm, killed more than 2,000
people when it swept ashore in South Florida. Many of those who died were
killed when Lake Okeechobee levees broke. Faced with an overwhelming task in
the storm's aftermath, searchers resorted to burning many of the bodies.

The first named hurricane to strike Florida was Hurricane Easy, a category 3
storm that struck on Sept. 4, 1950.

Ginger, 1971, holds the record for being the longest-lived hurricane (20  days)
and the longest-lived tropical cyclone (28 days).

In an average year, more than 100 disturbances with hurricane potential are
seen in the Atlantic, Gulf and Caribbean. But, on an average, only 10 of these
reach the tropical storm stage and only six mature into hurricanes.

Against the norm, 11 hurricanes were observed in 1916 and 1950; no hurricanes
in 1907 and 1914.

The condensation heat energy released by a hurricane in one day can be the
equivalent of energy released by the fusion of 100 20-megaton hydrogen bombs.
Coverted to electricity, that energy could meet the United States' electrical
needs for about six months.

The most violent activity of the storm takes place in the area immediately
around the relatively calm eye and is known as the eyewall.

In general, hurricane strength is unrelated to overall size - but very strong
hurricanes usually have relatively small eyes, less than 10 miles in diameter.

The diameter of a hurricane ranges from 60 to 1,000 miles, with the typical
width about 300 miles.

Each year, about 100 tropical storms form in the world, about 12 percent in  the
Western Atlantic. Some two-thirds of the storms grow into 74 mph or  stronger
hurricanes, typhoons or cyclones.

William McKinley, 25th president of the United States (1897-1901), reportedly
said he was more afraid of a hurricane than of the Spanish Navy. In 1898, an
effort was made to establish a comprehensive hurricane warning system.

In 1943, Col. Joseph Duckworth made the first international plane
reconnaissance into the eye of a hurricane.

On April 1, 1960, the first weather satellite was placed in orbit, giving
hurricane forecasters the ability to detect storms before they hit land.

Hurricanes, which form over all tropical oceans except the South Atlantic and
the eastern South Pacific, are called willy-willy in Australia, cyclone in the
Indian Ocean region, typhoon in the western Pacific Ocean and baguio in the
Philippines, according to the Florida Almanac. The word "hurricane" is  derived
from the American Indian word "huracan," meaning the "evil  spirit."

The lowest sea-level pressure ever recorded in the Western Hemisphere, 26.35
inches, was recorded at Long Key on Sept. 2, 1935, during the "Labor Day
Hurricane." The maximum winds in that storm were not recorded because  equipment
was blown down before the peak of the storm was reached. However,  engineers
have calculated that winds of 200 to 250 mph would have been  required to cause
damage reported.

According to research by William M. Gray of Colorado State University, 10  major
hurricanes (one that measures a category 3 or better on the  Saffir/Simpson
scale and has sustained winds greater than 110 mph) hit the  continental United
Sates in the 1940s. Seven of those struck Florida.

In the 1950s, eight major hurricanes struck the United Sates, with seven  making
landfall on the East coast. For the next 30 years, the only major  hurricane to
hit the Florida peninsula was Hurricane Betsy in 1965. Hugo hit  in 1989;
Andrew, in 1992.

Seven named tropical storms were recorded in 1973, three of them hurricanes.
None touched Florida. The next year, seven storms formed, but none touched the
United States mainland. Half of the hurricanes experienced by Florida  residents
in the 20th century made landfall between Sept. 1 and Sept. 15.  Elena, which
stalled 80 miles off Tampa Bay but killed four and injured 471,  was a Labor Day
weekend visitor in 1985.

The longest period on record without a hurricane hitting the United States is
three years and seven days, from Aug. 10, 1980 (Hurricane Allen, Brownsville,
Texas) to Aug. 17, 1983 (Hurricane Alicia, Galveston, Texas).

The lowest sea level pressure ever recorded in an Atlantic storm was 26.13
inches, measured inside Hurricane Gilbert on Sept. 13, 1988. The most intense
storm ever measured in this part of the world, it had winds gusting to 218 mph
during its path across Jamaica, the Cayman Islands and the Yucatan Peninsula  to
the northern coast of Mexico.

After an average of eight to 10 days of blowing, the typical hurricane dies
when it travels too far from the tropical latitudes of its birth or hits land,
which hinders the free flow of winds and does not offer the supply of moisture
needed to keep the storm going.

Wire services report that Bangladesh in south Asia has had seven of this
century's deadliest storms. The worst one killed 500,000 people in 1970. The
deadliest U.S. storm this century hit Galveston, Texas, in 1900, killing  6,000.

Extremely low air pressure in a hurricane causes the ocean underneath to  rise.
The higher tide, pushed by fierce winds, forms a destructive dome of  water
called a storm surge.

The worst hurricane storm surge recorded in the United States came ashore  with
Hurricane Camille on Sept. 17, 1969, at Pass Christian, Miss. The water  rose 24
feet above normal, and the surge pushed the Gulf of Mexico at least 3  feet
higher than normal as far as 125 miles east of Pass Christian and 31  miles
west.

Thirty-seven percent of all U.S. hurricanes hit Florida.

Seventy-one percent of category 4 or higher hurricanes have hit either  Florida
or Texas.

Approximately half of the hurricanes to strike along the middle Gulf Coast,
southern Florida, New York and Southern New England are major ones.

1994's erratic hurricane Gordon killed eight people in Florida. As many as  500
deaths in Haiti were attributed to mudslides caused by the tropical storm.

More homes and businesses were damaged or destroyed by the storm surge from
Hurricane Opal than all other coastal storms in Florida since 1975 combined,
according to a study by the Department of Environmental Protection.

With 19 named storms forming in the Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea and Gulf of
Mexico, 1995 was the second-busiest hurricane season in recorded history.  There
were two more in 1933, which holds the record.

According to the National Hurricane Center, the storms of 1995 were directly
responsible for 122 deaths across the Caribbean, Mexico and the United States.
Several other deaths were an indirect result of the tropical activity.

The threat of Hurricane Felix in August 1995 postponed Bermuda's scheduled  vote
for independence. Ironically, the first inhabitants at Bermuda were  survivors
of a hurricane caused shipwreck on the island in 1609. Their stories  helped
inspire Shakespeare's writing of The Tempest.

Sources: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and National Weather
Service publications, the Florida Almanac, Times files, USA Today Weather  Book,
the National Hurricane Center.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

                    Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 122 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             April 26, 2010 Monday

NOAA aircraft in Brownsville today on Gulf Coast awareness tour

BYLINE: Laura B. Martinez, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 691 words


Apr. 26--What better way to learn about hurricanes than from the experts who
keep an eye on the sky.

One of the world's premier research aircrafts used to study hurricanes and its
crew -- often referred to as "hurricane hunters"-- make a one-day appearance in
Brownsville today. The aircraft will be parked at the Air Cargo Building,
Brownsville/South Padre Island International Airport, during NOAA's 2010 Gulf
Coast Hurricane Awareness Tour. Brownsville is the first stop in its one-week
tour.

The WP-3D Orion turboprop aircraft -- also known as NOAA's hurricane hunter
aircraft -- will be open for tours by the public to give the community the
chance to see just how it and its crew help monitor hurricanes.

"To bring an aircraft in with real live pilots -- and real live meteorologists
who take the data, and pilots that have to fly through the storms and take real
care to make sure that their crew is safe and their plane is safe -- is kind of
a wow factor for the public," said Barry Goldsmith, warning coordination
meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Brownsville.

"What we do is combine that wow factor with education on what they do and how
important it is to the mission of detecting the storms," he said.

Some experts have predicted the 2010 hurricane season could be a busy one, with
Colorado University forecasters calling for 15 named storms, eight hurricanes
and four major hurricanes.

There also is a 44 percent chance that a hurricane will strike somewhere along
the Gulf coast from Brownsville to Florida, experts say.

Hurricane season begins June 1 and runs through Nov. 30.

The aircraft's main mission is to provide data to the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA, Hurricane Division to help forecast
hurricanes. The hurricane hunters have been flying aircraft into storms since
the 1940s to study the various aspects of hurricanes, even flying into the eye
of the storm. The data gathered is then sent to the hurricane forecasters, who
analyze and predict changes in the hurricane's path and strength.

"Even with all the satellites we have, they are not as good as the dropsondes,"
the weather reconnaissance devices that the aircraft can drop into a hurricane
to measure winds and pressure in the center of the storm, Goldsmith said.

NOAA has conducted the hurricane awareness tour for more than 25 years,
alternating between the Gulf and Atlantic coasts. The last time the hurricane
hunter was in Brownsville was in 2006.

At today's event, the public will be able to ask hurricane hunters and experts
about their experiences in riding through the storms and how they go about
predicting storm strength and landfall.

"They can talk to the pilot and the crew about what it feels like" to ride
through a hurricane, Goldsmith said.

The event is big for the National Weather Service because it shows the public
how hurricane experts and NWS forecasters interact in getting the information
out to the public.

"It adds to the awareness factor" that the hurricane season will soon be here
and that it's not too early to begin preparations, Goldsmith said.

There also will be a hurricane expo on site, where residents can get more
information on preparing for a hurricane. Vendors will display wares for
protecting homes and property from hurricane damage, Goldsmith said.

"If people start getting prepared now, then they will have the ready-to-go kit
to get out and evacuate, if they have to," Goldsmith said.

2010 Gulf Coast Hurricane Awareness Tour

DATE: 3 -- 4:30 p.m. today

LOCATION: Air Cargo Building, northeast side, Brownsville/South Padre Island
International Airport

DIRECTIONS: From Boca Chica Boulevard, turn south on Vermillion Road and follow
the signs

FEE: Free to the public

To see more of The Brownsville Herald, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.brownsvilleherald.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Brownsville Herald,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20100426-BV-NOAA-aircraft-in-Brownsville-today-on-Gulf-Coast-awareness-tour-0426

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2010 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 123 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                           October 18, 2006 Wednesday

Hurricanes can't stand up to El Nino;
3 weather systems made conditions unfavorable.

BYLINE: CAREN BURMEISTER

SECTION: Pg. L-1

LENGTH: 560 words


The Beaches and other areas along the East Coast are expected to remain
hurricane-free this storm season thanks to three weather systems that took the
wind from their sails or steered them out to sea.

Not only have there been fewer hurricanes than predicted this year, not a single
one made landfall in the U.S.

Meteorologists attribute that to the unexpected arrival of El Nino, which occurs
when tropical trade winds die out and ocean temperatures become unusually warm,
and to the position of the Bermuda High, a high pressure system that settled to
the east of Bermuda this year and steered the storms out to sea.

Scientific research published this month also shows that a huge cloud of African
dust blowing off the Sahara has helped prevent hurricanes, or at least sap their
strength.

The weather phenomena have taken hurricane experts by surprise. In May, the
country's foremost experts, Philip Klotzbach and William Gray at Colorado State
University, predicted about nine hurricanes with five of them at Category 3 or
stronger. They also cited a 60 percent probability of a major hurricane making
landfall.

Last year was the busiest Atlantic season on record. This hurricane season was
slightly less than average, which is considered to be about 5.9 a year, said
Jason Hess, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Jacksonville.
The real news, he said, was that none of the hurricanes struck land. He said
that's because the Bermuda High positioned itself east of Bermuda in an
advantageous position to steer the storms away from the coast.

Meanwhile, a cold front that dumped a lot of snow in New York and Michigan moved
across the Jacksonville area through the weekend. That front and a previous cold
front have helped lower water temperatures about five degrees in the last week
or so at Mayport, down to 76 degrees, Hess said.

The cold front brought dry air and lowered daytime temperatures to the mid-70s
and night and morning temperatures to the low 50's. Dry air and cooler water
temperatures also create unfavorable conditions for hurricanes.

Only one hurricane formed in August and it disintegrated after a day, in part
due to the dust cloud across the tropical Atlantic, according to Colorado State
University's Oct. 3 hurricane update. The Saharan dust can affect hurricanes by
introducing dry air, mid-level winds and the radiative effects of the dust,
which all tend to destabilize a storm and hinder its organization.

Four hurricanes formed in September, fewer than expected due to the weak El Nino
conditions. The El Nino, which formed very rapidly between July and September,
will suppress storms and bring an early end to the Atlantic basin hurricane
season, the experts said.

El Nino conditions occur roughly every two to seven years and experts can't
predict them. They tend to diminish hurricane activity by increasing westward
winds at upper levels across the Atlantic, which increases vertical wind shear
where tropical cyclones develop.

Depending on its strength, an El Nino can last up to four years or it can fade
out after one season, Hess said. If the El Nino that formed this summer is
strong, it could help provide some hurricane relief for the next hurricane
season, he said.

The first hurricane forecast for the 2007 hurricane season will be issued in
early December.

caren.burmeister@jacksonville. com, 249-4947, ext. 6321.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: None

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 124 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                             May 30, 2009 Saturday

Get ready for clearer hurricane warnings;
Weather experts plan to be more specific about what they expect as storms
approach.

BYLINE: CAREN BURMEISTER

SECTION: Pg. L-1

LENGTH: 671 words


Hurricane experts plan to provide more advanced warnings for storms and be
clearer with the public about the actual threat as they prepare for the 2009
hurricane season, which starts Monday.

For example, weather experts will try to be specific about the height of
floodwater that's expected to be pushed ashore, said Jacksonville Beach Fire
Chief Gary Frazier, who handles hurricane preparations.

Frazier recommended that Beaches residents stay alert for public announcements.
He urged those facing evacuation to drive a shorter distance n 30 or 40 miles
rather than hundreds of miles n to get out of the path of the rising water and
avoid being trapped on the highway or by gas shortages.

"The problem won't be on the island, but when motorists get further into town,"
Frazier said.

The National Hurricane Center will also add 12 hours advance notice of hurricane
warnings and watches, he said.

"We want to give people information they can use to make good decisions,"
Frazier said.

In Jacksonville, better communication will also mean dispelling myths that the
area is at a lower risk for hurricanes because the coast curves inward or that
the Gulf Stream is farther offshore than in South Florida.

Some geographic conditions place the First Coast at greater risk. The
continental shelf's shallow slope in this area can dramatically heighten the
storm surge, Frazier said.

A recent Mason-Dixon poll shows that most residents in Atlantic and Gulf Coast
states still don't take hurricanes' catastrophic destruction and deadly force
seriously enough.

Of the 1,100 adults surveyed, 66 percent have no hurricane survival kit, 55
percent don't have a family disaster plan and 83 percent haven't taken steps in
the past year to make their homes stronger, the poll showed. The Mason-Dixon
poll is part of a 2009 National Hurricane Survival Initiative launched this week
at the International Hurricane Research Center in Miami to educate residents on
hurricane preparedness and how to stay safe.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicts a "near-normal
Atlantic hurricane season," meaning there is a 70 percent chance of having nine
to 14 named storms. Four to seven of the storms could become hurricanes, and of
those, NOAA predicts that one to three of them will be major hurricanes of
category 3 or stronger.

However, the forecast is fairly uncertain this year because of global weather
patterns.

A multi-decade period of high hurricane activity makes conditions more favorable
for a busy hurricane season. But conditions such as cooler water in the Atlantic
Ocean where hurricanes breed off West Africa and the possibility of an El Nino,
a warm current in the Pacific Ocean near Central and South America, could
suppress hurricanes.

Caren Burmeister can also be reached at (904) 249n4947, ext. 6321.

HURRICANE TIPS

-Develop and practice a family emergency plan. Determine ahead of time how and
where to evacuate.

- Create a disaster supply kit for the home including flashlights, batteries,
tarps, duct tape, a battery-operated radio, disposable camera, medicines,
critical paperwork and non-perishable foods and water for the entire family and
pets.

- Homeowners should make sure that their homeowner policy is updated and
includes flood insurance.

- Shore up the home with secure windows, roofing and entry doors that swing in
instead of out. When building or remodeling, make sure to use the latest
weathernresistant building materials available, such as hurricane strapping,
clips, corner bracing and tie-down systems.

Secure loose objects such as lawn furniture, garbage cans and planters that can
become flying missiles when hurricane winds intensify. Turn off gas, water and
electricity before evacuating. Unless you have impact-resistant glass in your
windows, shutter or board up windows and doors.

- When a storm is forecast for your area, fuel your car, fill bathtubs and sinks
with water, get cash in case you must evacuate, make sure all family members
wear closed-toe shoes or sneakers, arrange to board or evacuate pets.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 125 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                              May 29, 2011 Sunday

Will we get hit this year? History is not a big help;
KNOWN Conditions are favorable and we're overdue;
UNKNOWN Where and when a storm might head for us

BYLINE: Dana Treen

SECTION: Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 823 words


While government forecasters expect four to six major hurricanes in this year's
above-average Atlantic storm season, predicting where they might go is a far
murkier proposition.

Science has not yet developed ways to read atmospheric and other conditions far
enough in advance to pinpoint with certainty where - or even if - hurricane
season's storms will make landfall.

Even general predictions by the National Hurricane Center of how often a region
can expect a hurricane can be uncertain.

For Jacksonville, the closest thing to a direct strike was from Dora, the 1964
storm that came ashore at the Duval-St. Johns county line.

Yet looking at 100 years of historical data, experts say a hurricane of Dora's
strength can be expected within 86 miles of Jacksonville every nine years. On
average, a major hurricane - defined as Category 3 or higher - could be
anticipated every 28 years.

Hurricane strength and frequency can be forecast by studying cycles in the
weather and factors such as ocean conditions, said Steve Letro, meteorologist in
charge of the National Weather Service office at Jacksonville International
Airport.

Cycles of warmer ocean water mean more storms, while cooler water means fewer,
for example.

"What it doesn't relate to is where they go," Letro said.

That is not to say that there is not some telling weather cycle that is a clue
to predicting the direction a hurricane will take.

"We just have not been able to see it," he said. "It doesn't mean that it
doesn't exist."

Since Dora, four hurricanes have ventured into Northeast Florida, with only one,
Charley in 2004, a Category 4 storm, ever reaching the status of major
hurricane. All, including Alma in 1966, Gladys in 1968, and David in 1979 were
Category 2 when they made landfall.

Charley was a Category 1 when it passed through Northeast Florida after crossing
the state.

But it doesn't take a direct hit or a strong storm to cause damage.

In 1999 Hurricane Floyd passed nearly 200 miles offshore but pummeled Florida's
coast, ripping 150 feet off Jacksonville Beach's fishing pier, tearing docks
loose at St. Augustine's municipal marina and damaging homes.

The size and strength of a storm are not the only measures of its destructive
power, Letro said. Storm surge, the flooding that occurs when water is pushed
inland ahead of a hurricane then drains out as it passes, can be at its worst
with a slow-moving storm over a shallow-sloping ocean bottom.

"Hurricanes push water up slopes," he said.

Where shorelines drop off quickly or storms move faster, less water is piled up,
he said.

For those reasons, a link between the predicted depth of a storm surge with a
particular category of hurricane was removed from the scale that measures
hurricane strength.

When the government announced this month it expected 12 to 18 named storms, with
six to 10 becoming hurricanes and three to six becoming hurricanes of Category 3
or higher, it was also noted that winds steered most of last season's tropical
storms and all the hurricanes away from U.S. coastlines.

That is not cause for complacency, however, said Jane Lubchenco, the
administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

"We need to be prepared, especially in this above-normal outlook," she said.

Since 1995, conditions in the ocean and atmosphere have synchronized in favor of
hurricane development, leading to more active seasons. Additionally, warmer
water and the weakening of La Nina, in the Pacific Ocean that creates wind shear
conditions in the Atlantic that can cut the tops off developing hurricanes, make
it easier for storms to develop.

Of the five hurricanes to cross Northeast Florida since 1964, two occurred in
September and one each in June, August and October. That closely mirrors
patterns over the past 20 years, when September remained by far the busiest
month, with 11 of 29 hurricanes that struck the United States making landfall in
that month.

The two costliest hurricanes to hit the mainland since 1900 occurred in the past
20 years, Andrew in 1992 and Katrina in 2005. Hurricane Charley, a storm that
did devastating damage to Florida's Gulf coast, was the last to pass through
Northeast Florida. By the time it crossed the state from Port Charlotte it was a
Category 1.

A lesson to be learned from Charley is that hurricanes can be surprising.
Charley took an abrupt turn in the Gulf of Mexico and came ashore farther south
than initially expected.

It became one of the most devastating storms to hit Florida since Andrew in
1992, and the first in a string of hurricanes to hit the state in 2004.

Although Northeast Florida was spared the brunt of the following hurricanes, the
edges of Hurricanes Frances, Ivan and Jeanne knocked out power and caused other
damage across the region.

Dana Treen: (904) 359-4091

HURRICANE SEASON June 1 to Nov. 30

2011 NAMES

Arlene Harvey Ophelia

Bret Irene Philippe

Cindy Jose Rina

Don Katia Sean

Emily Lee Tammy

Franklin Maria Vince

Gert Nate Whitney

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
The Times-Union HURRICANE FLOYD The Jacksonville Beach Pier was destroyed by
monstrous waves churned up by Hurricane Floyd in 1999. Cycles of warm ocean
water tend to mean more storms, while cooler water means fewer.
Stephanie.Stamm@jacksonville.com Graphic: HURRICANE SEASON IS HERE, FLORIDA
HURRICANES OVER 20 YEARS Hurricane season: The city's hurricane guide will be
inserted in the Times-Union on Sunday, June 5. The Times-Union HURRICANE DORA
The giant storm made landfall just south of Jacksonville on Sept. 9, 1964,
causing $100 million in damage. It is still the most disastrous hurricane in
Jacksonville-area history.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 126 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                           August 16, 2006 Wednesday
                    Flagler/palm Coast News-tribune Edition

Preparing For The Big One While Flagler County may have been largely spared in
the past, hurricane experts urge residents to stay alert.

BYLINE: AARON LONDON - STAFF WRITER

SECTION: SECTION A; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 660  words


Despite a record number of hurricanes in 2005 - and the three storms that passed
through Flagler County in 2004 - residents here haven't really faced nature's
fury, according to Steve Letro, meteorologist in charge of the Jacksonville
office of the National Weather Service.

"We are not nearly as experienced with hurricanes as we think we are," Letro
said at a hurricane awareness seminar Monday. "All we have seen is really very
minor."

And that supposed familiarity that people in this area have with tropical
weather can make for complacency.

Letro said too often people get fixated on seasonal forecasts, focusing on the
number of storms predicted. But that isn't really what matters.

"All I care is where did (the storms) go and how strong they were when they got
there," he said. "Numbers are nice, but numbers don't tell the whole story when
it comes to hurricanes."

Letro said it's easy to get complacent about hurricanes, even though predictions
are for above-average seasons and more named storms. And comparing past years to
try and predict future events is a bad idea.

"Every hurricane is different (and) every hurricane season is different as
well," he said.

Letro began his presentation debunking some myths about hurricanes.

The first is the idea that hurricanes are steered by the Gulf Stream.

"That is simply not a valid argument," he said, showing several past hurricane
tracks that did not follow the path of the Gulf Stream up Florida's east coast.

Letro said the meteorological phenomenon known as the Atlantic or Bermuda high
has a far more important effect on hurricane tracks.

The high pressure system, which is constantly changing position and intensity,
tends to steer hurricanes across its southernand around its western side.

"Hurricanes are steered by the atmospheric currents in which they are embedded,"
Letro said.

Another myth, Letro said, is the idea that the curvature of the Florida
coastline protects the state from hurricanes.

That, he said is a "pseudo-myth."

While the shape of the peninsula "probably does help a little," it only does
because if the coastline was straight from south to north, more storms likely
would make landfall.

Letro said the fundamental reason for hurricanes - and for all other kinds of
climate and weather - is because the Earth is constantly maintaining the heat
balance.

Heat from the sun is absorbed and an equal amount of heat is radiated back out
from the planet, he said. That's why the western Pacific has seen a decrease in
tropical activityit's been more active in the Atlantic.

"It's all a question of balance," Letro said.

As for the possibility that a major storm will have a direct impact on this
area, Letro said the odds definitely favor a major hurricane strike somewhere
along the Atlantic or Gulf coasts this year.

Because of the hurricane threat, part of the seminar focused on preparation.

Flagler County emergency management chief Troy Harper updated residents on the
capabilities of the new Emergency Operations Center and offered tips for
emergency planning for tropical storms, wildfires and any other disasters.

The key, he said, is having a plan in place at home and for businesses.

"If you don't have an emergency plan for your family and your property, you're
missing the boat," he said.

For those who believe the area is protected from a devastating storm, Harper
offered his own take.

"There is one primary reason we haven't taken a direct hit," he said. "Pure
luck."

Harper said in addition to having an emergency plan - including alternate
evacuation routes - being aware of threatening conditions is key. The county
maintains a constantly updated information section at the Web site
flagleremergency.com.

"If we know what's going on, we put it on here," he said.

He also said residents can sign up for FlaglerAlert.com, a system that will
provide emergency information via a wide variety of methods, including pagers,
e-mail and fax.

"A little preparedness will go a long way," Harper said.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Caption: Photo 1: Cane Proof master glazier Bruce Lee installs high
impact glass in a pane at the Palm Coast manufacturing business last week. One
way people can prepare for hurricanes and other tropical storms is by
storm-proofing their homes as much as possible. Cane Proof makes wind-resistant
windows and doors. Photo 2: Glass panes sit to be installed in window frames at
Cane Proof Impact Resistant Windows and Doors. The 1/8-inch thick panes of glass
are separated by a layer of polyvinyl butylene, which is laminated and
strengthens the glass to withstand high winds from hurricanes and tropical
storms. News-Tribune photos/ DAVID MASSEY

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2006 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2006 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 127 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                           The Ledger (Lakeland, FL)

                            June 1, 2005, Wednesday

HURRICANE HASSLES HERE AGAIN; EXPERTS SAY SUMMER COULD OFFER DEJA VU OF LAST
YEAR'S NIGHTMARE; SEASON BEGINS TODAY

BYLINE: DIANE LACEY ALLEN The Ledger

SECTION: News; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1180 words


Here we go again.

As if five named storms in one year in Florida wasn't enough -- three hurricanes
in Polk, alone, that proved to be the county's costliest natural disaster --
this year's hurricane season is predicted to be busy.

Depending on which forecast team you prefer, the 2005 season that begins today
could see as many as 15 tropical storms, including seven to nine hurricanes. And
three to five of those hurricanes are expected to be major storms with winds of
at least 115 mph.

The meteorological factors that foster a storm or string of storms are also
sounding a lot like Weather Channel reruns from the 2004 season:

Warm Atlantic waters to provide fuel.

A neutral El Nino in the eastern Pacific that won't hamper the formation of
hurricanes. An active El Nino provides upper-level winds, which tend to sheer
the tops off storms.

The weak North Atlantic Oscillation could set up again to steer hurricanes
westward toward the United States. The oscillation is a high pressure system
that positions itself over Bermuda and is also known as the Bermuda High.

None of this, of course, guarantees that Florida will be hit again during the
five-month hurricane season, which ends Nov. 30.

Experts will quickly remind you that we have had busy seasons before 2004 that
only posed maritime risks or hit other areas of the nation's coast, such as the
Carolinas, Georgia and Texas.

But no amount of positive thinking will change what happened last year -- or
could happen this year.

The 2004 season was unprecedented. Hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne plowed
through Polk County. Ivan slammed into the Panhandle Sept. 17, 2004.

And then there was Tropical Storm Bonnie, which got lost in the approaching
furor of Charley in August. Charley hit the coast as a category 4 hurricane Aug.
13, 2004.

"Modern records don't show another year with four hurricanes hitting Florida,"
said Richard Pasch, a hurricane specialist with the National Hurricane Center.
"You don't predict events like that."

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration does issue an annual
forecast. This year's outlook calls for 12 to 15 tropical storms, seven to nine
hurricanes and three to five major hurricanes. Major hurricanes are storms that
reach Category 3 or higher.

William Gray, the most famous storm soothsayer, and his team issued a similarly
windy prediction with their forecast Tuesday. Gray's group estimates there will
be 15 named storms, including eight hurricanes -- four of them intense.

Gray's forecast also says there is a 77 percent chance a Category 3 or higher
hurricane will make make landfall on a U.S. coast -- with a 59 percent chance
that will be the East Coast, which includes both coasts of the Florida
peninsula.

Gray is not alone in his quest to determine exactly where a storm might strike.

A British forecaster has been working with wind fields and just how they
correlate with El Nino, Atlantic temperatures and the North Atlantic
Oscillation. But that update won't arrive until August.

Until then, weather experts continue to look to the past -- historical data and
computer models -- to determine what might happen once activity begins.

Meteorologists began noticing an upswing in activity in 1995.

Now, with four hurricanes smacking Florida in one year, there are indications
there could be a return to the kind of patterns that formed from 1867 to 1951.

"One or two storms a year was the average prior to 1952," said Jim Elsner, a
climatologist with Florida State University.

"But after that, the average went down considerably -- 2004 may be the start of
a more active period for coastal hurricanes," he said. "In particular, Florida."

Of course, Polk County already has a glimpse of what a stream of storms feels
like. The trio of hurricanes that crossed the county last year did about $ 1.2
billion in damage to homes and businesses, left about 75 percent of the county's
electric customers without power and created more than 2 million cubic yards of
debris.

All three storms passed within 14 miles of each other.

Charley was the first, arriving in Polk as a Category 3 hurricane on the
Saffir-Simpson scale with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph. It entered
southwestern Polk at 7 p.m. on Aug. 13.

Frances took a more southeasterly route -- east of the Avon Park Bombing Range
-- at 11 a.m. on Sept. 5. It was a Category 1 hurricane with 90 mph maximum
sustained winds when it arrived in Polk County.

Jeanne got to Polk on Sept. 26 at 7 a.m. It came in as a Category 2 storm,
making an entrance similar to Frances' in southeastern Polk, with 100 mph
maximum sustained winds.

But for all of their fury, emergency management officials and hurricane experts
like Elsner warn we have still not seen the "big one."

"You guys were on the threshold of some catastrophic-type damage, but never
really got there," Elsner said.

What's more, Polk County is entering this hurricane season vulnerable to heavy
rains that could be dumped by tropical depressions, storms or hurricanes.

"Several of our lakes are very high from what we've seen over the last 20 or 30
years for this time of year," said Jeff Spence, natural resources director for
Polk County. "Actually, (I'd) probably say over the last 40 years..."

"Some of it's the hurricanes," he said. "We've been consistently having rainier
years over the last 10 years."

But going into hurricane season "wet," could mean more problems than fallen
trees and power outages.

Polk County received 66.13 inches of rain in 2004 compared with the average of
49.13 inches.

The September combination of Frances and Jeanne accounted for 14.47 inches.

And while the county has been busy clearing ditches, creeks and canal systems in
anticipation of another rainy season, Spence said people need to prepare for
what might happen if we get another banner crop of storms.

"People don't like to hear this," Spence said, "but we say this over and over:
If they have homes in floodplains, they should clearly try to get flood
insurance. But that is not always the case.

"It does cost money and that is the best option for people to protect
themselves," he said. "We're doing whatever we can do right now."

None of these active season predictions, however, are etched in stone. And, like
other busy years, Polk and Florida could be spared again.

"Things change from day to day and month to month," explains Elsner.

But if hurricanes do form -- and the indicators are there that they will -- the
wise plan is to prepare for the worst and hope for the best.

"It's true that if the season is very active, it's almost common sense that
there's a greater opportunity for storms to reach the coast because there are
more out there," Pasch said.

Diane Lacey Allen can be reached at diane.allen@theledger.com or 863-802-7514.

INSIDE TODAY:

The Ledger's special section Hurricane '05 provides comprehensive coverage to
help Polk residents prepare for the hurricane season, which starts today and
promises to be an active five months.


LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PIERRE DuCHARME/The Ledger: Cattle move to another part of pasture
through a flooded area on the west side of Crooked Lake near Frostproof on
Tuesday. Polk County is especially vulnerable this hurricane season because many
of its lakes are already high from heavy rains; C. KAESER/The Associated Press:
Graph; ERNST PETERS/The Ledger: Brenda Heart, left, and Julie Stone, right, walk
with Stone's daughters, Rebecca, second from right, and Jacqueline, as they
cross Main Street under the safety of umbrellas while shopping in downtown
Lakeland during morning rainshowers Tuesday. The beginning of the hurricane
season also heralds the beginning of the rainy season.

             Copyright 2005 Lakeland Ledger Publishing Corporation


                          FOCUS - 128 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                  September 02, 1995, Saturday, Final Edition

Tracking a Tempestuous Season; New Head of Hurricane Center Contends With Record
Number of Storms

William Booth, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg.  A03

LENGTH: 1205 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 1


Into this meteorologically obsessed city, where TV weathermen are regarded like
rock stars and conversations at cocktail parties are likely to focus on ominous
new low-pressure systems off Africa, comes Bob Burpee, the bespectacled,
wonkish, camera-shy new director of the new National Hurricane Center.

Burpee is the man of the moment. Since taking control of the refurbished federal
center on July 5, Burpee has watched the 1995 hurricane season unfold as the
most active in recorded history. With 12 "named storms" so far, this year is now
officially tied with 1933 as the busiest since record-keeping began in the last
century.

The hurricanes and their less-powerful but still-named precursors, tropical
storms, have been crowded around the mid-Atlantic like lobbyists at a buffet
table. There have been days when the center was tracking three hurricanes at one
time -- an event that has occurred only 10 times in modern history.

The scientific news groups have been buzzing on the Internet. Why now? Why so
many? Weather scientists are not sure. The El Nino off Peru? Rainfall over
Africa? Some researchers say Africa's above normal, others below. The waters off
the eastern Atlantic are warmer. Maybe it's the quasi-biannual oscillation, a
global wind pattern that switches from east to west every 26 months, and when
aligned with the trade winds might encourage hurricane formation.

"One can never tell," Burpee cautions, "with hurricanes."

Today, forecasters were watching two hurricanes and two tropical storms, as well
as the last gasps of the disintegrated Jerry and Felix. There's Tropical Storm
Humberto, seemingly senile and wandering, lost and alone, in the north Atlantic;
Tropical Storm Karen, depressed and weakening; Hurricane Iris, just sitting
there, glum but mean, off the Windward Islands; and finally Hurricane Luis, a
comer, an overachieving storm with a well-defined, tight eye and winds of 130
mph. Luis is a bad boy, classified a "major hurricane." But it might swing
safely north.

A hurricane is, for meteorologists like Burpee, the ultimate fatal attraction,
the love-hate relationship, like Sharon Stone in a film noir, seductive but
deadly.

Hurricane specialists live for the storms. But when landfall is imminent, all
hell breaks loose at the hurricane center -- a new concrete bunker at Florida
International University, its roof bristling with satellite dishes and antennas,
its interior warm with earth tones and blond wood, the walls covered with color
satellite images of storms past -- Gilbert, Hugo, Andrew. Hurricane porn.

One might think the hurricane center would be pandemonium now. But until a major
storm approaches landfall in the United States, as did the wet but mild Erin and
the finicky Felix, it is mostly calm, if intense, here. Of course, when Erin
approached South Florida, the place was packed with reporters in the media room,
a fish bowl surrounded by glass. But it was placid a few feet away from the
nerve center where the forecasters worked, surrounded by radar and satellite
images, in a neat and orderly room lined with computer screens.

"You could say that the forecasters find it distracting when there's a camera
flashing away about three inches from his nose," Burpee said. "But we understand
it is part of the job. If the media [don't] tell people about the hurricane,
then what we do doesn't matter so much."'

There are normally five "hurricane specialists" at the center. They are the
gods. They make the tough calls, the 72-hour forecasts that go out to emergency
managers around the country. Millions of citizens begin to pack their bags or
board up their houses based on their predictions. Because this season is so
busy, two more forecasters have been added. They work eight-hour shifts, 24
hours a day, seven days a week.

Hurricanes begin off the west coast of Africa, as loose and unorganized systems,
or "waves," moving over the Sahel deserts and hitting the warm waters of the
mid-Atlantic. Warm water is the match that fuels hurricanes.

Satellites are the first line of understanding. The Earth now is ringed with
weather and military satellites, many in stationary orbit, that keep watch as
the waves organize and begin to revolve clockwise, turning tighter and tighter
into cyclones. But satellite images are relatively crude, because they're only
snapshots from space without key information such as wind speed.

Miles Lawrence is a hurricane specialist. He'll talk to a reporter, but he wants
to make it fast. He is tracking four storms today. One would think, with all the
computers, that Lawrence does his work on a blipping screen. He does not. He
works most intently, as do all his specialist colleagues, on a chart spread out
on a table, with a pencil and an eraser. Maybe the most important device here is
the eraser. Hurricanes remain, in a world of increasing certainties, the most
vexing unknowns.

Lawrence takes the satellite observations, then looks at what a dozen computer
predictions from Washington tell him, and then makes an extremely informed
guess.

After all, the models are made by computers, Lawrence said. They are good,
especially a new model out of the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) lab at Princeton University. But computer hurricanes don't
behave exactly like those in the wild. If forecasters based their predictions on
the track shown in the models, the storms would swing back and forth every six
hours in the so-called "windshield wiper effect."

"Hurricanes don't act that way," Lawrence said. They do change course and
double-back and stop and accelerate, but not as the computer simulations
predict. That's where the forecasters come in.

For example, today the models say that Iris is about to veer directly north. But
Lawrence knows -- based on years of experience -- that Iris will probably make a
slower, wider swing north, and so that is the the forecast that he will issue.

When the storms get closer and threaten the United States, Burpee and his crew
call in the hurricane hunters, the NOAA and Air Force planes that fly into the
eyes and take measurements.

That is, in fact, Burpee's greatest contribution to hurricane forecasting. Years
ago he developed a program in which probes were dropped from planes. The probes
would float down on parachutes, taking measurements of wind, barometric pressure
and humidity, until they hit the ocean.

Once the forecasters get the planes and probes into the air, things start to get
more serious. The satellites are good only for estimating storm strength, but
the planes take real measurements that give the hurricane center a reality
check.

Burpee, who is worried that citizens do not take hurricane warnings as seriously
as they should, says his most tense moments on the job came when Hurricane Erin
crossed Florida last month and weakened over the Gulf of Mexico. As the storm
gathered strength again, he and his staff assisted emergency managers in issuing
storm watches and warnings along the Gulf of Mexico.

"I'd have to say that people here like weather, they like storms," said
hurricane center forecaster Steve Lyons. "But when they get close to us,
everything changes."


LOAD-DATE: September 02, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration, The Washington Post, STORMY WEATHER (This chart was not
available)

                       Copyright 1995 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 129 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                    December 1, 1987, Tuesday, City Edition

Storm warning // More, stronger hurricanes may blow in, researcher says

BYLINE: DAVID K. ROGERS

SECTION: METRO AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 689 words



A steady rise in both the number and the destructive potential of    North
Atlantic and Caribbean hurricanes looks likely.

     That was the prediction Monday, the end of the official 1987    hurricane
season, from the nation's best known hurricane researcher.

 His findings come in a just-released report that tries to explain why    the
two most recent hurricane seasons produced so few storms.

     "The odds are high that next season should be significantly more    active
than this season or 1986's hurricane activity has been,"    according to William
M. Gray, professor of atmospheric science at    Colorado State University in
Fort Collins, Colo.        Six months ago, for the fourth hurricane season in a
row, Gray    forecast how many hurricanes would swirl to life in the Atlantic
and    Caribbean.

     And, for the fourth hurricane season in a row, Gray was pretty    close. He
predicted in May that five hurricanes would be found in the    eight tropical
storms that should be created from the season's weather    patterns.

     In July, he revised his prediction downward a bit, saying that four
hurricanes should come from just seven tropical storms by the end of
November.

     By November's end, three hurricanes - named Arlene, Emily and Floyd    -
grew from the seven tropical storms found this year in the North    Atlantic and
Caribbean. Only one of this year's hurricanes, Floyd, ever    touched the U.S.
Floyd shambled weakly up the Florida Keys for a couple    of days in October,
causing little damage.

    A year earlier, when Gray predicted just four hurricanes during the    1986
storm season, only four ever sprang to life.

     A handful of environmental factors have come together to keep    hurricane
production low over the last few years, Gray said Monday. And    those factors
appear to be changing. "The odds are that it will change    and we'll be getting
more hurricane activity and more intense storms."

     Perhaps the most widely discussed environmental factor Gray tracks    for
his predictions is the El Nino, a slight warming of a portion of    the Pacific
Ocean just south of the equator off the Peruvian coast of    South America.

     Though just a few degrees warmer than the surrounding Pacific, an    El
Nino is still warm enough to influence the high-altitude winds over    the
equator. Those westerly winds, in turn, can blow strong enough to    hinder the
formation of tropical storms and hurricanes in the Atlantic    by lopping off
the tops of emerging storm systems, Gray has said.

     While a typical El Nino event lasts for about a year, the current
warming trend off Peru has persisted much longer, creating the relative
dearth of hurricanes and storms in 1986 and 1987.

     Both Gray and officials at the National Hurricane Center in Miami    seem
to agree that the weak hurricane output during the last two years    has been
consistent with weather trends since 1970.

     Since then, not only have hurricanes and tropical storms been    fewer,
they have also been weaker. Gray noted in his report that    hurricanes between
1947 and 1969 were almost four times more likely to    be packing winds in
excess 138 miles per hour. "These are striking    differences," Gray wrote.

     Bob Case, a forecaster at the hurricane center, said Monday that
Hurricane Floyd, though a weak storm, may herald some big changes in
long-term storm patterns. It was the first hurricane to come out of the
northwest Caribbean in 19 years, the longest spell of inactivity in    that
portion of the Caribbean on record.

     "Is this a trend? We just don't know," Case said. "But we're in    a
drought and here's the scary part: Millions and millions of people    have come
to Florida and built their beautiful homes along the coast    and have never
experienced a hurricane."



LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; COLOR MAP, Frank Peters; BLACK AND WHITE GRAPH,
David Williams; William M. Gray; Map of the world showing the paths of
hurricanes for 1987; graph showing the number of hurricanes each year since 1969

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 130 of 881 DOCUMENTS


               September 21, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Winds Likely to Slam Coast At Georgia or the Carolinas

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 20


The hurricane bearing down on the East Coast, much weakened but still dangerous,
is most likely to come ashore in the Carolinas or Georgia late Thursday or early
Friday, meteorologists at the National Hurricane Center and elsewhere said
today.

Some said atmospheric forces guiding Hurricane Hugo would probably cause it to
turn north just in time to make a landfall where the Carolinas jut into the
Atlantic.

A smaller storm, after helping to prevent the hurricane from regaining the
strength it lost while ravaging Puerto Rico and other Caribbean islands this
week, was itself weakening and losing coherence. Weather experts said they
expected the smaller storm to turn north and remain at sea, possibly
disintegrating as it goes.

But they also said that even the remains of the tropical storm, Iris, could
contribute moisture to Hurricane Hugo after it hits the United States coastline.
They said the hurricane would probably bring substantial rains to the
northeastern United States this weekend that could eventually extend into New
England. But where the heaviest rains will fall is unknown.

A Category 2 Hurricane

More certain, in the view of officials at the Hurricane Center, was the prospect
that Hurricane Hugo would be far less destructive than it was when it struck
Guadeloupe, the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico with winds up to 140 miles per
hour last weekend and early this week. With central winds around 105 m.p.h., the
storm today was a category 2 hurricane, the second-weakest category, since its
winds were in the range of 96 to 110 m.p.h.

''I don't expect to see it change in a dramatic way before landfall,'' Bob
Sheets, the director of the Hurricane Center, said in an interview this
afternoon. The peak winds should range from 95 m.p.h. to 115 m.p.h. between now
and then, he said.

At 6 this evening, weather officials issued a hurricane watch for the East Coast
from St. Augustine, Fla., to Cape Hatteras, N.C. That was a signal to people in
the designated region that a hurricane could occur in the next 36 hours, and
that residents should begin taking precautions. The residents were advised to be
ready to take quick action if and when they are included in a hurricane warning,
meaning that landfall for the hurricane may be imminent.

At 10:30 tonight, the hurricane was 525 miles southeast of Savannah, Ga., moving
northwest at about 17 m.p.h. Weather officials expected this movement to
continue for the next 20 to 21 hours, after which some increase in the forward
speed was expected, bringing the hurricane to the coast somewhere in the watch
area late Thursday or early Friday.

Not to Be Underestimated

At its strongest, Hurricane Hugo was a category 4 storm, one with winds nearest
the center of 131 to 155 m.p.h. A category 5 hurricane, the most powerful, has
winds greater than 155 m.p.h.

Only two category 5 hurricanes have struck the United States mainland this
century: the 1935 storm that killed more than 400 people in Florida and
Hurricane Camille, whose 200 m.p.h. winds devastated the Mississippi Coast and
killed 256 people in 1969.

A category 2 storm is nevertheless considered dangerous, hurricane experts say.
It can blow down trees and cause major damage to piers, exposed mobile homes and
poorly constructed signs. It can also damage roofs, windows and doors, produce a
tidal surge 6 to 8 feet above normal, cut off escape routes, flood marinas and
tear unprotected small craft from their moorings.

Along the Atlantic Coast from North Carolina to Florida, residents stocked up on
groceries, flashlights and tape to reinforce windows. Shopkeepers began to move
valuable merchandise, boaters battened down hatches and communities set up
emergency headquarters.

In Charleston, S.C., 20 Navy ships and submarines left port Tuesday and today to
ride out the storm at sea. An additional 17 Navy ships are preparing to sail
from Mayport, Fla., if the storm appears likely to threaten the area.

'Old-Timers' Remember

A Mount Pleasant, S.C., hardware store manager, Louis Middleton, said residents
grabbed supplies like batteries, masking tape, flashlights and lamp oil. ''I
think people are taking it seriously,'' he said. ''There are some old-timers who
have memories of Hazel and Gracie,'' hurricanes that hit the Carolinas in the
1950's.

On Hilton Head Island, S.C., many residents began moving to the mainland and
others prepared to evacuate. Plywood sold out, forcing residents to do the best
they could to protect their windows with tape. The authorities said it would
take hours to evacuate the island resort, which has grown rapidly in recent
years and is now home for as many as 20,000 people at the peak season.

Once Hurricane Hugo comes ashore, meteorologists say, strong air currents
blowing from the south are expected to push it toward the north. Its impact from
that point, they say, depends largely on how far inland it penetrates before
starting what is expected to be a northerly journey along the coast.

''Whether it is 100 or 150 miles inland when it does that, or whether it skirts
the coastline, will say a lot about the kind of weather folks will experience
farther north,'' said Frederick J. Gadomski, a meteorologist at the Weather
Communications Group at Pennsylvania State University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



                          FOCUS - 131 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   September 14, 1990, Friday, Final Edition

Theory Ties Hurricanes, African Rain;
Researcher Says Wet Weather in Sahel Bodes Big Storms for U.S.

BYLINE: William Booth, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A10

LENGTH: 620 words


The more it rains in West Africa, the more often intense hurricanes strike the
United States, according to a new theory published today that links weather
patterns across the Atlantic.

Moreover, after nearly two decades of drought in West Africa, it appears the
rains are returning, increasing the likelihood that more destructive hurricanes
will strike the United States and the Carribean in coming years.

According to studies done by William Gray of Colorado State University and
published in today's issue of the journal Science, the frequency of killer
hurricanes was high during the period from 1947 until 1969, when plentiful rains
fell on the Sahel region of West Africa, which lies on the southern and western
fringe of the Sahara Desert. The same area suffered a severe drought from 1970
until 1987 and the number of intense hurricanes dropped significantly.

Gray asserts that the connection between African rain and Western Atlantic
hurricanes is strongest when one looks at the most destructive storms -- those
in which winds exceeded 110 mph. Hurricane Hugo, which last year killed 68
people in the U.S. and Carribean and caused an estimated $ 7 billion in damage,
was one of these.

Moreover, Gray has also found a link between African rain and the number of
destructive storms that make landfall in the United States. When it's wet in
West Africa, Gray says the potential damage from severe storms in the United
States is two to four times higher than during dry periods. Gray adds that the
association is even more striking for hurricanes that strike Florida.

If Gray is correct in his analysis, the United States and the Carribean may be
in for intense hurricane activity in the decade ahead. The Sahel is now in a wet
period and the number of hurricanes this year has been higher than average.

During this century, the alternating wet and dry periods in West Africa appear
to last 10 to 20 years. Since 1947, there have been 23 wet years followed,
beginning in 1970, by 18 dry years. The drought appears to have ended in 1987,
and hurricane activity increased in 1988 and 1989.

Gray postulates that increased rain over the Sahel region releases heat into the
atmosphere, thus driving more intense wind and weather patterns that give rise
to more hurricanes. It is well known that heat is released when water vapor
condenses and forms clouds.

Hurricane forecasters say they are intensly interested in Gray's work, but some
remain skeptical about a direct relationship between African rain and hurricane
predictibility.

"He is a master at bringing out relationships, but he needs to conduct strict
statistical tests to make sure his associations hold," said Miles Lawrence,
meterologist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
National Hurricane Center in Miami.

Other researchers who have examined the same data agreed there appears to be a
connection between rain in the Sahel and hurricanes. But the scientists believe
the connection holds for all types of hurricanes: big ones and small ones,
regardless of whether they make landfall in the United States or disappear
harmlessly over the Atlantic Ocean.

"If you look at all hurricanes in the Atlantic basin, it does appear that
hurricanes are related to Sahel rainfall. But if you look at storms that hit the
United States, it's less clear. Even less so for Florida," said Stanley
Rosenthal, director of the hurricane research division at NOAA Atlantic
Oceanographic and Meterological Laboratory in Miami.

Rosenthal said that many climatic events have been associated with hurricane
formation over the years, including the warming of the Pacific Ocean off the
coast of South America, known as El Nin

o.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, WHEN THE ILL WINDS BLOW (DATA FROM INFOGRAPHIC WAS
UNAVAILABLE.), TWP

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1990 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 132 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                    September 2, 2004 Thursday Metro Edition

Florida again braces for massive hurricane

BYLINE: CHARLES SEABROOK

SOURCE: AJC

SECTION: News; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1014 words


Hundreds of thousands of people in Florida are bracing to spend the Labor Day
weekend dodging ferocious Hurricane Frances, whose 140-mph winds, heavy rains
and storm surge as high as 15 feet threaten widespread destruction.

Swirling in the Atlantic Ocean, the huge, powerful Category 4 storm appeared
late Wednesday to be closing in on Florida's eastern coast, menacing coastal
residents as far north as South Carolina.

Florida, ravaged three weeks ago by Hurricane Charley, began preparing for what
would be the worst double hurricane strike on one state in at least half a
century. Frances is as strong as Charley, and forecasters said it could become a
Category 5 with winds of 156 mph or higher.

Georgia hasn't taken a direct hit from a major hurricane since 1900.

Forecasters at the National Hurricane Center said they expected Frances to make
landfall somewhere between Vero Beach and Daytona Beach by late Friday or early
Saturday.

As the storm bore down on the Bahamas on Wednesday afternoon, Gov. Jeb Bush in
Florida and Gov. Sonny Perdue in Georgia declared a state of emergency because
of the threat from the giant hurricane.

In Florida, schools were ordered closed in Volusia County, and half a million
residents of low-lying areas and mobile homes in Brevard, Martin, Volusia, St.
Lucie, Palm Beach, Orange and Indian River counties were facing evacuation
today.

NASA shut down operations at Kennedy Space Center in Brevard County so that
employees could board up their homes and prepare to leave. Military helicopters
and planes were flown out of the area.

"I can't emphasize enough how powerful this storm is. If there's something out
there that's going to weaken it, we haven't seen it," said Max Mayfield, the
hurricane center's director.

Florida calls out Guard

Bush's order activated the National Guard in Florida. Perdue's action was a
precautionary measure to "prepare for possible damage and localized flooding,
and to prevent price-gouging" of Georgians and evacuated Floridians.

About 300,000 residents in coastal areas of Palm Beach County were told they
would have to leave their homes, starting at 2 p.m. today. To the north, Brevard
County officials told at least 50,000 residents to start evacuating mobile homes
and barrier islands this afternoon.

Also in Brevard, officials ordered a dusk-to-dawn curfew for evacuation areas,
starting at sunset Friday.

Authorities all along Florida's east coast were urging residents in low-lying
areas to leave and said mandatory evacuations probably would be in place Friday
morning.

State officials discussed the possibility of reversing the flow of traffic on
major highways such as I-10 in North Florida and I-4 in Central Florida. Florida
developed a plan to reverse some lanes after Hurricane Floyd threatened the East
Coast in 1999, and more than 2 million evacuees clogged crucial highways.

As Frances neared the Bahamas, it was a 370-mile-wide behemoth moving slowly
toward the northwest at about 15 mph. The hurricane's forward speed was forecast
to decrease over the next 24 hours, meaning its powerful winds and drenching
rains could linger over wherever it hits.

Because of its size --- hurricane-force winds stretch 80 miles in every
direction from its eye --- and slow movement, it would likely slam a devasting
storm surge ashore, depending on tide level at landfall.

The National Hurricane Center's Mayfield said a ridge of high pressure in the
atmosphere off the U.S. coast would determine Frances' path. If the ridge stays
strong, it would push Frances south toward Florida. If it weakens, it would
steer the hurricane north to Georgia or South Carolina.

The imminent storm forced Bush, the president's brother, to cancel plans to
attend the Republican National Convention in New York. Frances "in combination
with the destruction by Hurricane Charley, threatens the state of Florida with a
catastrophic disaster," the governor said.

Lt. Gov. Toni Jennings, already at the convention, said some delegates from
Florida might have to leave.

Hurricane Charley, which ravaged the peninsula Aug. 13 after racing in from the
Gulf of Mexico, left 27 people dead and an estimated $7.4 billion in insured
damage, and it destroyed or heavily damaged 30,000 homes.

"I'd like to get through with this one first before we start the next one," said
C.W. Blosser, 37, a paramedic who stayed at a shelter in Arcadia during
Hurricane Charley. "If it comes here, I'm going to fly my family to North Dakota
or something like that."

For hundreds of thousands of residents and beachgoers, Frances already has
wrecked plans for the Labor Day holiday weekend, traditionally the last fling of
summer.

Bush on Wednesday asked tourists planning to be in the state over the weekend to
reconsider their plans.

"By Friday morning, there won't be anybody that hasn't, hopefully, made the
right decision to cancel or to rearrange their travel plans or to delay it so
they can come back in October, when it will be beautiful," the governor said.

Instead of filling coolers and packing towels for the beach, many people were
pulling generators from store shelves and stocking up with water and canned
goods to hunker down in homes and shelters over the weekend.

"Normally, this is one of our busiest weekends of the year," said Laurie
Campbell Baker of the Daytona Beach Convention and Visitors Bureau. "Now, we're
expecting a lot of wind and rain."

Volusia County, where Daytona Beach is located, closed schools Wednesday for the
rest of the week. Some high school football games scheduled for Friday were
played Wednesday night.

Fifty miles west of Daytona Beach, Orlando's three major park resorts --- Walt
Disney World, Universal Orlando and Sea World Orlando --- had no plans to close
as of Wednesday.

--- Staff writer Dan Chapman, The Palm Beach Post, The Miami Herald and The
Associated Press contributed to this article.

ON AJC.COM

* Track the path of Frances on our weather site.

* Get the latest on cancellations and evacuations.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphic: TRACKING HURRICANE FRANCES
Map shows projected path of hurricane into Florida, Alabama, Georgia and South
Carolina.
Note: The Weather Channel's projection as of 10 p.m. Wednesday
How Frances sizes up
Here's how Frances compares in size with four major hurricanes:
Hurricane-force winds: 74-155 mph
Tropical storm winds: 39-73 mph
Graph compares size of Frances, Charley (2004), Floyd (1999), Hugo (1989) and
Andrew (1992).
Note: All hurricanes are Category 4 except Andrew, a Category 5. Frances'
category as of 10 p.m. Wednesday.
Atlantic season
Ninety-seven percent of all hurricanes occur between June 1 and Nov. 30.
FLORIDA, TEXAS HIT THE MOST
A resurgence of hurricanes since 1995 has delivered some of the most active
hurricane seasons on record.
Hurricane landfalls 1899-2000
Map shows U.S. coastline from Corpus Christi, Texas, to Maine.
Coastline is color-coded to indicate number of landfalls:
0 --- 10
11 --- 30
31 --- 72
Sources: AccuWeather; IRIS Consortium
HURRICANE EFFECTS
As more people are living in hurricane-prone areas, extreme tropical weather has
caused an increasing amount of property damage over the years, but has killed
fewer people.
Property damage, by decade
Graph shows period from 1900s to 2000s.
1990s: $56.6 bil.
2000s*: $8.2 bil.
* From 2000 to 2003
Hurricane-related deaths by decade
Graph shows period from 1900s to 2000s*.
* From 2000 to 2003
89 deaths since 2000
Since 1995
Number of hurricanes and tropical storms in the Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea
and Gulf of Mexico since 1997.
Dark line on graph tracks Hurricanes
Pale line on graph tracks Tropical storms
Note: 2004 as of 10 p.m. Wednesday.
Sources: Associated Press, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration;
research by WAYNE SNOW / Staff
/ Staff; Photo: A customer leaves the Florida City, Fla., Home Depot with
supplies to secure his home against Hurricane Frances. / J. PAT CARTER /
Associated Press

                Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 133 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     April 8, 1989, Saturday, City Edition

Hurricanes to be tamer in 1989

BYLINE: DAVID K. ROGERS

SECTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 750 words

DATELINE: MIAMI



MIAMI - The 1989 hurricane season should be tamer and lack the    really big
storms that dominated 1988, the nation's hurricane    forecaster said Friday.

     But while this year may not bring a bumper crop of hurricanes,    global
weather conditions strongly suggest meaner storms in the next    few decades.

     Those were the twin messages delivered Friday by weather researcher
William M. Gray during the waning moments of the 1989 National    Hurricane
Conference in Miami.

     Gray's prediction of the total number of hurricanes for 1989 will    not be
ready until June 1, the start of the six-month hurricane season.

 But his preliminary observations have become something of a tradition    at the
end of each conference.

     His final talk has become well-attended largely because his    predictions
for the total number of hurricanes and named storms each    season have been
accurate through much of the 1980s. That includes    1988, when no named storms
appeared until September, quite late in the    season.

     "I was a little lucky last year because the season was so inactive
(during) the first half and it looked like I was busting bad," Gray    told the
meeting.

     Actually, he said, conditions were too ripe for hurricane formation    last
summer. Instead of tapering off enough to allow storms to form,    easterly
high-speed winds miles above the earth actually reversed    direction and
continued to knock off the tops of the African storms,      just as the east
winds did.

     Once the strong summer winds relaxed in September, three of the    largest
storms in years - Gilbert, Joan and Helene - formed.

     For 1989, he said, expect fewer hurricanes and named tropical    storms.
In effect, 1989 will probably be more in keeping with recent    history,
producing no more than a handful of hurricanes.

     Gray primarily uses four climatological measurements in making his
predictions. While not all of his information has been gathered yet,    what he
does have indicates fewer storms, he said.

     Equatorial winds as high as 10 miles above the earth's surface    should be
strongly from the east, he said, blowing off the tops of the    big Atlantic
storms that eventually produce hurricanes.

     The so-called El Nino warming in the equatorial Pacific Ocean    should not
play a factor in this year's storm season, he said. The warm    water helps give
rise to winds that also knock down the big ocean    thunderstorms.

     Although it's still a bit early to tell, it appears as if West    Africa
will not receive increased amounts of rain this year,    suppressing hurricane
activity. It's also too early to tell if    barometric pressures over the
Caribbean Sea this summer will be low    enough to attract storms to that
region.

     "But I have a much more important message that I believe in, and    I'll
make a long-term, multi-decadal forecast," Gray said. "There    will be more
hurricane activity in the coming two or three decades than    we've had in the
last two decades."

     Except for last year, he said, annual hurricane and storm totals    have
been decidedly off. Bigger storms, in fact, were more than twice    as prevalent
between 1950 and 1970 as they have been since.



 Hurricane predictions    Weather researcher William M. Gray won't have his
predictions for 1989    ready until June, but his past predictions have usually
been close to    the actual number of storms. The tropical-storm count includes
storms    that grew into hurricanes.

 YEAR                PREDICTIONS                    ACTUAL    1988
                7 hurricanes                5 hurricanes                      11
tropical storms          11 tropical storms    1987                5 hurricanes
                3 hurricanes                       8 tropical storms
7 tropical storms    1986                4 hurricanes                4
hurricanes                       8 tropical storms            6 tropical storms
    1985                8 hurricanes                6 hurricanes
                      11 tropical storms          11 tropical storms

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; BLACK AND WHITE CHART; WILLIAM GRAY; chart lists
number of hurricanes predicted by William Gray, number that actually occurred
for years 1985-88

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 134 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  June 3, 1997, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Storm Warning: Bigger Hurricanes and More of Them

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1473 words


THE East and Gulf Coasts of the United States may be entering a
long-anticipated, prolonged siege of more frequent and more destructive
hurricanes, forecasters say.

They predict that this summer, more hurricanes than normal will develop in the
tropical North Atlantic for the third straight year. This would make 1995-97 the
most active three-year period on record for the pinwheeling oceanic cyclones,
and the experts say that could be only the beginning.

The 1970's, 1980's and early 1990's were a time of relatively infrequent
hurricanes. Those years did have their big storms: 7 of the 10 most costly
hurricanes ever to strike the United States mainland did so over that stretch,
including Hurricane Andrew in 1992, the costliest ever.  But a new Federal study
attributes the trend of escalating damage over that period to expanding
population and exploding development rather than more frequent or powerful
storms.

Now the atmosphere and ocean appear to have entered a new and more ominous
hurricane phase. Some experts believe the turbulent stretch beginning two years
ago signifies a return to the 1940's, 1950's and 1960's, a period of high
hurricane activity in the United States. If that is so, according to the new
Federal study, the cost of damage wrought by hurricanes -- already the most
expensive natural disasters in America -- could soar to new heights.

Scientists offer varying explanations of what is responsible for the increase in
hurricane frequency. One new study has found that sea-surface temperatures in
1995 were the highest on record in the tropical North Atlantic. That year, 19
tropical storms and hurricanes, double the 1946-1995 average, formed in the
Atlantic. The authors of the study concluded that warmer seas encouraged
incipient hurricanes to develop by infusing them with more energy. Temperatures
in the region of hurricane births, between 10 degrees and 20 degrees north
latitude, have remained above average since 1995.

Coincidentally or not, 1995 also saw the highest average global surface
temperatures on record, and some scientists say this raises the possibility that
global warming is contributing to the increased frequency of hurricanes. The
coincidence "is suggestive of some link to global warming, but that needs to be
proved," said Dr. Mark A. Saunders, chief author of the study. It is "just one
of the possibilities," he said.

Other say that global warming is almost certainly not the cause. One is Dr.
William M. Gray, an atmospheric scientist and hurricane expert at Colorado State
University in Fort Collins. The rise in sea temperature "is not related to the
warming of the planet," he said, noting that global warming has been slow, while
the Atlantic sea-surface temperature jumped in a matter of months.

It was Dr. Gray and his group of researchers who correctly predicted that 1995
would be one of the most active seasons on record, although they underestimated
1996. In April, the group forecast that 1997 would also bring more hurricanes
than average, including the more intense ones. These major storms are defined as
those with peak sustained winds of more than 110 miles an hour, and they account
for 75 percent of all hurricane damage. Lesser hurricanes have peak winds of at
least 74 miles an hour.

The forecasters predicted that the 1997 hurricane season, which officially began
on Sunday and lasts through November, would produce 7 hurricanes, 3 of which
would be in the intense category, and 4 lesser tropical storms strong enough to
be named. By comparison, 11 of the 19 named storms in 1995 were hurricanes, 5 of
them severe; last year, 9 of the 13 named storms were hurricanes and 6 were
severe.

The Colorado group's forecast applies to an area encompassing the Atlantic
Ocean, the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico. It is to be updated on Friday,
but Dr. Gray said the update was not expected to depart substantially from the
April prediction. The forecasters do not attempt to predict whether or where any
of the hurricanes will strike land.

The forecasts are based on an array of predictive signs and atmospheric
phenomena that Dr. Gray has identified as determining hurricane activity. One is
the amount of rainfall in the Sahel region of western Africa, where the small
areas of low pressure that are the embryos of hurricanes first form. When the
Sahel is wetter, Dr. Gray found, more embryos form. This year, the Sahel is wet.

Another factor is the phenomenon known as El Nino, the huge pool of warm water
that develops every two to seven years in the eastern tropical Pacific, changing
weather patterns around the world. When it is in place, high-level winds blowing
from the west tend to shear off the tops of developing hurricanes in the
adjacent Atlantic, causing them to abort.  El Nino may make an appearance later
this year, forecasters say, but the Colorado group predicts that it will not do
so in time to affect the hurricane picture.

Other elements include the behavior of stratospheric winds that circle the globe
high above the equator and weather features far remote from the Atlantic
hurricane belt -- things, for example, like the temperature high above
Singapore. On balance, the forecasters say, the indicators point to
higher-than-average activity this year.

One of the most powerful indicators, according to the new study by Dr. Saunders
and Andrew R. Harris, climate scientists at University College London in
Britain, is the Atlantic sea-surface temperature. Their statistical analysis
found that while most of the relevant factors were indeed favorable for
hurricane development in the banner year of 1995, the dominating influence was
the unusually warm ocean. The temperature in the region where hurricanes develop
was 1.2 degrees Fahrenheit above the 1946-1995 average, a record. The
development region was 0.36 of a degree warmer than average last year and is
about 0.9 of a degree warmer now. This, said Dr. Saunders, presages another
active season. His study appeared in the May 15 issue of the journal Geophysical
Research Letters.

The researchers suggest that warmer seas cause more water to evaporate from the
surface. With evaporation, latent heat is released in the atmosphere, and the
researchers believe that this is what imparts more energy to the embryonic
storms coming out of Africa, making it more likely that they will develop into
hurricanes. "It seems that this is a stronger effect that any other mechanism,
like El Nino or the monsoon in the western Sahel," Dr. Saunders said.

The question, he said, is whether the rising sea temperature is a natural
expression of the climate system's variability, independent of any influence
from a warming atmosphere. Dr. Gray, for his part, says he believes the warmer
ocean temperature is "a manifestation of a major change in North Atlantic ocean
circulation." Stately currents in the North Atlantic undergo periodic shifts on
decadal time scales. Dr. Gray said he believed that a new pattern was in place,
and that it was likely to presage a decade or two of above-average hurricane
activity.

"This is the greatest fear we have," he said, "that we're entering a new era. I
believe we are."

If so, the new Federal study on hurricane damage may offer a preview of what
lies ahead. In the study, Dr. Roger Pielke Jr. of the National Center for
Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., and Dr. Christopher Landsea of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's hurricane research division in
Miami calculated how much damage would result from past hurricanes if they had
occurred in 1995, when the coasts held many more people and much more wealth
than earlier.

The calculation, which also accounts for inflation, shows that if the more
numerous storms of the very active quarter-century prior to 1970 were to hit the
mainland now, each of the storms would cause far more damage than it did back
then.

It has been suggested in the past that escalating hurricane damage in more
recent decades has resulted from an increase in the number and severity of
storms. The Pielke-Landsea analysis found this is not so. In fact, when all
hurricane damage was assessed as if it had occurred in 1995, the four biggest
hurricanes of the last eight years were no longer the most damaging in history.
Andrew, which exacted an all-time record $26.5 billion in actual damages, was
downgraded to second place by a monster that struck Florida and Alabama in 1926.
Hugo (1989), Opal (1995) and Fran (1996) slip far down the list.

The analysis, its authors wrote, indicates clearly "that the United States has
been fortunate in recent decades with regard to storm losses." Now, they wrote,
multibillion-dollar losses may become increasingly frequent, and it may be "only
a matter of time" before a single storm exacts $50 billion in damages.


LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Stormy Weather: Aug. 29, 1995 -- Storms were so prevalent in the
1995 hurricane season that on one day two tropical storms and two hurricanes
were moving toward North America. A study says sea-surface temperatures hit a
record high that year in the tropical North Atlantic. (National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration)(pg. C1)

Diagram: "A Deadly Threat Intensifies"
Citing a variety of climatic indicators, scientists fear an increase in Atlantic
hurricanes over the next decade or two. An increase, if it occurs, could cause
severe problems along the East Coast of the United States, much of which has
been intensely developed during years of
relative calm.

Three key climate factors that cause . . .

. . . Fewer hurricanes

El Nino present

Cooler sea surface

Drier monsoon season

. . . More hurricanes

El Nino absent

Warmer sea surface

Wetter monsoon season

Researchers have long known that wet weather in the Sahel, a region south of the
Sahara Desert, is associated with Atlantic hurricanes. Researchers say that even
a small rise in ocean temperature also fuels them, especially if warm El Nino
currents are missing in the Pacific. El Nino winds shear off the tops of
developing hurricanes.

Diagram shows how Atlantic hurricanes develop. (Source: Dr. Mark A.
Saunders/University College London)(pg. C1)

Table: "Big Storms: Weighing the Damage" lists the 30 most damaging United
States hurricanes. Estimates of damage are in 1995 dollars, based on inflation,
personal property increases and changes in population of coastal counties from
1925. (Sources: Dr. Roger A. Pielke Jr.; Dr. Christopher W. Landsea)(pg. C10)



                          FOCUS - 135 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                      June 16, 1991, Sunday, Final Edition

American Journal;
Hurricane Forecasters Are Braced for 'Big One,' but Populace Isn't

Laura Parker, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A3

LENGTH: 1007 words

DATELINE: CORAL GABLES, Fla.


Hurricanes are part of the romance of the tropics. The great storms have made
fictional plots of B movies and unmade real dreams of people who would implant
civilization in an environment that could be swallowed up by Mother Nature in a
moment.

A hurricane ended the dream of a railroad down the Florida Keys in 1935 and
virtually isolated Key West for two years. Nine years earlier, a "Big One" had
stopped Miami's first real estate boom in its tracks, pushing flood waters
inland to the new jai alai fronton near where Miami International Airport sits
today.

Newspaper headlines have documented Miami's subsequent hurricanes. The city was
"Lashed" in '47, "Slammed" in '49 and "Pounded" in '50. The last to hit Miami
was Cleo, a small one, in 1964, and the intervening period of calm defies all
odds.

Many folks here worry about the "Big One" just as Californians worry about the
Big Quake. What would one of those legendary storms of the past with 200 mph
winds pushing huge tidal surges do to this low-lying metropolis on the Atlantic?
No one is sure.

Hurricane season officially extends from June 1 through Nov. 30, and scientists
at the National Hurricane Center, tucked away on the sixth floor of a
nondescript office building in this Miami suburb, are perking up after another
winter lull.

From now until the end of the season, the six hurricane specialists will monitor
weather computers 24 hours a day. In this part of the world, technology has made
obsolete such disasters as the unnamed hurricane that surprised Galveston, Tex.,
in 1900, killing 6,000 people.

The hurricane specialists use the nation's only working geostationary weather
satellite to follow developing storms. When a disturbance becomes threatening, a
specially equipped plane is sent into the storm's heart to measure barometric
pressure, wind speed and temperature.

One of the specialists, Lixion Avila, has begun counting tropical waves that
form off the coast of Africa every few days during hurricane season. About 60 of
these waves of air, not water, form every year. About 20 of them intensify into
stronger disturbances, ranging from tropical depressions, with wind speeds to 38
mph; to tropical storms, with winds from 39 to 73 mph; to hurricanes, with winds
exceeding 74 mph.

Last year, 16 tropical depressions developed in the Atlantic. Fourteen became
tropical storms, seven of which became hurricanes, fewer than usual.

People who venture into such dubious endeavors as long-term hurricane
forecasting said this could be another light year. But such weather predictions
rank slightly up the reliability scale from the Farmer's Almanac. Besides, the
hurricane specialists said, a relatively quiet year does not guarantee a thing.

1935 was such a year -- only six hurricanes formed -- but one was the strongest
to hit the continent. More than 800 workers, brought down to build the Overseas
Highway through the Florida Keys, were killed when 200 mph winds knocked their
evacuation train off the tracks.

No matter what long-range forecasters say, scientists at the Hurricane Center
know that the laws of probability are closing in on Miami. They are a
conservative bunch, not given to Sunday-supplement scare stories. Miami has
grown immensely since the last major storm and is greatly overdue, they said.

"Historically, south Florida has had more hurricanes than any other site," said
Jerry Jarrell, a hurricane specialist eyeing Miami's 27-year hiatus nervously.
"We would expect a major hurricane to hit within 75 miles of Miami every eight
years."

At the center, scientists built a computer model to calculate what would happen
if the 1926 hurricane were to hit Miami today. That storm was almost exactly the
strength of Hurricane Hugo, which hit in South Carolina with 135 mph winds in
September 1989. The scientists took data from Hugo and applied it to the path
taken by the 1926 hurricane into Miami.

"It would be a totally different story here," said Max Mayfield, who collected
photos from the 1926 storm to illustrate the model. "How many high-rises did
they have on those barrier islands up in South Carolina? None. I think all these
folks in their Miami Beach condos are going to be in for a rude awakening."

Hugo's storm surge would have left two feet of water standing on Collins Avenue,
the main drag through Miami Beach. But the scientists have taken their modeling
beyond Hugo. A worst-case storm, with winds topping 150 mph, would put five feet
of water in Joe's Stone Crabs restaurant, a Miami Beach landmark, and nine feet
of water on Biscayne Boulevard in downtown Miami. Surging water could reach
levels of 13 1/2 feet in low-lying areas south of Miami.

Despite modern technology, the specialists cannot forecast precisely where a
hurricane will hit. Hurricanes change direction and intensify in a matter of
hours and, in 24 hours, the specialists said, they could miscalculate one's
track by 100 miles. This, and the number of years since the last major one hit,
has spawned a certain complacency among residents that the specialists find
disturbing.

Mayfield went to Miami Beach recently to share his model with officials there,
and what he heard worried him. "The fire department did a survey, and 90 percent
of the people they talked to said they wouldn't evacuate for a hurricane,"
Mayfield said. "That makes my hair stand straight up."

Evacuation is the key to saving lives. When mighty Hugo roared ashore,
Charleston and its outlying barrier islands had been evacuated. Only 26 people
died, most from injuries received after Hugo swept inland with enough force to
cause serious damage in Charlotte, N.C.

"That's the kind of number we like, a small one," Jarrell said. He just shakes
his head when asked about hurricanes elsewhere. In the Far East, they are known
as cyclones or typhoons, one of which hit Bangladesh this year with the same
size and force as Hugo. In that sad country, which lacks an adequate warning
system and high ground, the government said more than 138,000 people died.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, SPECIALISTS JERRY JARRELL, LEFT, AND EDWARD RAPPAPORT ARE PART
OF A ROUND-THE-CLOCK WEATHER MONITORING OPERATION. BILL COOKE FOR TWP

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1991 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 136 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        The Patriot Ledger (Quincy, MA)

                            September 3, 2007 Monday
                                  City Edition

READINESS FORECAST;
Some doubt South Shore is prepared for a major hurricane;
STORM WARNINGS

BYLINE: RICK COLLINS, The Patriot Ledger.

Rick Collins may be reached at rcollins@ledger.com

SECTION: News; pg. ONE1

LENGTH: 843 words


New Englanders like to consider themselves hardy folk - the kind who can handle
three days of coastal pounding from a swirling nor'easter and shrug it off as a
"pretty good storm."

In the past three years alone, the South Shore has handled paralyzing blizzards,
coastal storms during lunar high tides and historic periods of rainfall and
flooding. Yet life has plugged along pretty smoothly.

So, as Felix, the second Atlantic hurricane of the season, churns through the
Caribbean as a Category 4 storm, it might be a good time to ask: If those same
hardy New Englanders can handle a blizzard, are they ready for a hurricane?

"Most people have never experienced a major hurricane and have no idea how fast
a 100 mph sustained wind is and the damage it can do," said David Ball,
president of the Scituate Historical Society and a longtime oceanfront resident
of Lighthouse Point.

"There's a vast difference when the wind is 100 miles per hour and 70 miles per
hour (as in a severe coastal storm). The effect and the energy is almost
double."

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration last month updated its
hurricane forecast and projected an 85 percent chance of an above-normal season,
up from 75 percent in its May forecast. The agency is projecting 13 to 16 named
tropical storms, seven to nine hurricanes and three to five major hurricanes.

It's been 53 years since the last significant hurricane, Carol, struck the South
Shore.

Hurricanes Gloria and Bob hit in 1985 and 1991, respectively, but both had
weakened rapidly by the time they reached the region.

The dearth of major hurricanes, while great news for property owners and
insurance companies, worries emergency planners. Without a recent memory of the
havoc and carnage a hurricane can cause, they fear local residents will
underestimate the potential damage when one does threaten the South Shore, and
find themselves unprepared.

"I just don't think people are ready to deal losing power over large parts of
Southern New England for weeks. It hasn't happened in so long," said David
Vallee of the National Weather Service in Taunton. "We get angry over two or
three days of power failure."

Marshfield police Lt. Paul Taber, who oversees the town's emergency preparedness
efforts, said residents in his coastal town generally known how to prepare for
storms and are even much more aware of the potential for damage in the wake of
Hurricane Katrina. But he still isn't sure they'd be ready for a major hurricane
like Dean, the Category 5 hurricane that tore across Mexico the week before
last.

"Something of the magnitude that they're getting hit with down there, people
around here have never seen before," Lt. Taber said. "And that makes me
nervous."

Storm may be overdue

Meteorologists say the frequency and strength of hurricanes have been trending
upward, as has the number of storms that make landfall.

But while the Gulf Coast has been particularly hard hit in recent years, only a
couple of storms have made that northward turn out of their warm Caribbean
spawning grounds and drawn a bead on New England.

Tropical Storm Beryl grazed Nantucket in 2006, and in 2005, Hurricane Ophelia
stalled off North Carolina before eventually passing well to the east of Cape
Cod.

But to say that New England is "overdue" for a major storm on the level of the
devastating 1938 hurricane is wrong, according to weather experts.

"For earthquakes, that term works because the strain builds up. But you cannot
be overdue for a hurricane," said professor Kerry Emanuel, a hurricane expert at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

He said the region gets socked by a major hurricane on average about every 150
years and that it's not unusual to go decades without one.

"It's tempting to say there's been a change in the pattern, but there isn't," he
said.

Any hurricane that hits New England is a "dying hurricane," Emanuel said. The
storms feed off warm water and weaken rapidly when they hit cold water or move
over land.

One of the reasons the 1938 hurricane caused so much damage was that it raced up
the coastline at 70 mph and didn't have time to weaken. The storm raged for just
a few hours as it blew through New England on Sept, 21, 1938, but it caused
flooding and structural damage as far inland as Amherst.

The two most recent storms, Gloria and Bob, reached land over the South as
Category 2 hurricanes, but weakened quickly when they hit land.

For example, the highest recorded wind gusts at the Blue Hills Weather
Observatory during Hurricane Bob were 55 mph. But the South had sustained winds
of 115 mph, a 17-foot tidal surge and hundreds of millions of dollars in damage.

And although it had been downgraded to a Category 1 storm by the time it blew
through the South Shore, Gloria blew thousands of trees over, wreaking havoc
with the region's power lines. Many people spent more than a week without
electricity.

ON THE WEB

.

To see a looped image of Hurricane Felix, go to Patriot Ledger.com and click on
this story.

Meteorologists say the frequency and strength of hurricanes have been trending
upward.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Many in New Orleans were stranded in the low-lying city during Katrina.
Some experts worry that people here will suffer because it's been so long since
a major hurricane hit the region., Associated Press
Independence Avenue in South Quincy is flooded after Hurricane Belle on Aug. 10,
1976. Storms that pass through the area can cause some damage, but the
devastation could be much worse., Associated Press

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 The Patriot Ledger


                          FOCUS - 137 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Sunday Telegraph (LONDON)

                            October 21, 2007 Sunday

Scientists a step closer to steering hurricanes

BYLINE: TIM SHIPMAN in Washington

SECTION: NEWS; International; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 559 words


SCIENTISTS HAVE made a breakthrough in man's desire to control the forces of
nature - unveiling plans to weaken hurricanes and steer them off course, to
prevent tragedies such as Hurricane Katrina.

The damage done to New Orleans in 2005 has spurred two rival teams of climate
experts, in America and Israel, to redouble their efforts to enable people to
play God with the weather.

Under one scheme, aircraft would drop soot into the near-freezing cloud at the
top of a hurricane, causing it to warm up and so reduce wind speeds. Computer
simulations of the forces at work in the most violent storms have shown that
even small changes can affect their paths - enabling them to be diverted from
major cities.

But the hurricane modifiers are fighting more than the weather. Lawyers warn
that diverting a hurricane from one city to save life and property could result
in multi-billion dollar lawsuits from towns that bear the brunt instead.
Hurricane Katrina caused about $41 billion in damage to New Orleans.

Hurricanes form when air warmed over the ocean rises to meet the cool upper
atmosphere. The heat turns to kinetic energy, producing a spiral of wind and
rain. The greater the temperature differences between top and bottom, and the
narrower the eye of the hurricane, the faster it blows.

Moshe Alamaro, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), told The
Sunday Telegraph of his plans to "paint'' the tops of hurricanes black by
scattering carbon particles - either soot or black particles from the
manufacture of tyres - from aircraft flying above the storms. The particles
would absorb heat from the sun, leading to changes in the airflows within the
storm. Satellites could also heat the cloud tops by beaming microwaves from
space.

"If they're done in the right place at the right time they can affect the
strength of the hurricane,'' Mr Alamaro said.

The theory has so far been tested only in computer simulation by Mr Alamaro's
colleague, Ross Hoffman. Mr Alamaro said: "With small changes to this side or
that side of the hurricane we can nudge it and change its track. We're starting
with computer simulations, then will hopefully experiment on a small weather
system.''

Last month scientists at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem announced that they
had simulated the effect of sowing clouds with microscopic dust to cool the
hurricane's base, also weakening it. The dust would attract water but would form
droplets too small to fall as rain. Instead, they would rise and evaporate,
cooling hot air at the hurricane base.

In findings presented at a conference in Trieste, Italy, the team led by Daniel
Rosenfeld demonstrated that dust dropped into the lower part of Hurricane
Katrina would have reduced wind speeds and diverted its course.

The MIT team has now hired a professor of risk management to advise on steps
necessary to protect themselves from legal action by communities affected if a
hurricane is diverted. It is pressing for changes to US law and for an
international treaty to settle possible disputes between neighbouring countries.

Mr Alamaro said: "The social and legal issues are daunting. If a hurricane were
coming towards Miami with the potential to cause damage and kill people, and we
diverted it, another town or village hit by it would sue us. They'll say the
hurricane is no longer an act of God, but that we caused it.''

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 138 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                             August 25, 2017 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Under a Hurricane Warning, Coastal Texas Braces for Heavy Flooding

BYLINE: By CHRISTINE HAUSER; Matt Stevens contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 866 words


Tropical Storm Harvey strengthened into a hurricane on Thursday as it headed to
coastal Texas, where it was expected to bring life-threatening flooding,
meteorologists said.

The National Hurricane Center said Air Force Hurricane Hunter planes had spotted
Tropical Storm Harvey strengthening in the Gulf of Mexico, with about
60-mile-per-hour winds more than 300 miles off the southern coast of Texas early
on Thursday. A hurricane warning, meaning hurricane conditions are expected, had
been in effect from Port Mansfield in far southern Texas to Matagorda, about 100
miles southwest of Houston.

But later in the day, the planes spotted the system strengthening until it
became a hurricane, with 80 m.p.h. winds, the hurricane center said.

In an update on Thursday evening, the center said that Hurricane Harvey would
make landfall Friday night or early Saturday.

Parts of Louisiana and the lower Mississippi Valley were also in the path of
hurricane conditions from the storm system, the hurricane center said. Gov. John
Bel Edwards of Louisiana said on Thursday that Hurricane Harvey was expected to
hit Corpus Christi early on Saturday as a Category 3 hurricane, but its outer
bands of rain could be felt earlier. The impact on Louisiana was expected early
next week, he said.

''It is getting more and more serious as time goes by,'' Mr. Edwards said in a
news conference. He said the weather service has told him there was some
possibility that the hurricane could make landfall in Texas, and then re-enter
the Gulf before moving eastward to Louisiana, he said.

Hurricane watches were also in place on Thursday, as were tropical storm
warnings, in other parts of the state, mostly along the coast, the National
Hurricane Center said.

The movement of the hurricane was expected to slow down while over land, meaning
it could drop more rain. ''This is going to play out over the next week or so,''
Mr. Edwards said. ''This is a very serious storm.''

In some areas, the storm could unleash heavy rain of at least two feet of
accumulation that could cause ''flooding catastrophe'' through the weekend, a
meteorologist said.

Texas and Louisiana have been bracing for the storm to affect populated areas
for several days after the National Hurricane Center predicted this week that it
could make landfall, affecting Corpus Christi, Tex., Houston and New Orleans,
among other cities.

When the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration issues a hurricane
warning through its hurricane center, it means conditions including sustained
winds of 74 m.p.h. or higher are expected in the next 36 hours, allowing for
preparations by state authorities and residents.

On Thursday, Texas escalated its readiness to prepare for the storm, saying that
even as a tropical depression, Harvey poses a threat of imminent disaster,
including severe flooding, storm surge and damaging winds, in at least 30
counties.

Gov. Greg Abbott announced he was pre-emptively declaring a state of disaster
for those counties, a formal declaration that allows Texas to quickly deploy
resources for any emergency. He encouraged Texans to get ready.

''As the State Operations Center increases its readiness levels, I also
encourage Texans in the storm's path to make their own emergency preparations,
heed warnings from local officials, and avoid high water areas,'' he said on
Wednesday.

Some organizations voluntarily ordered evacuations. At Texas A&M University in
Corpus Christi, students were told to evacuate by Thursday and avoid parts of
Southeast Texas, including the Victoria, Houston and Galveston areas.

The police in Aransas Pass, Tex., about 20 miles northeast of Corpus Christi,
ordered a mandatory evacuation and said city crews would shut off city water on
Friday. Officials in Calhoun County and San Patricio County also issued
mandatory evacuation orders.

The Houston Independent School District -- the largest school district in Texas
-- said it was canceling classes on Monday because of the threat of inclement
weather.

And late Thursday afternoon, President Trump weighed in on Twitter, urging
people to plan ahead Hurricane Harvey intensifies.

If the storm were to reach New Orleans, the impact could be particularly
troubling. The city is still recovering from flooding this month after a severe
thunderstorm made much of the city impassable when a turbine that powered
pumping systems failed. In its latest update, the city said it expected up to 10
inches of rain and potential flooding starting late Sunday and potentially
lasting through midweek.

When NOAA announced the start of hurricane season in June, there were
predictions of as many as five major hurricanes. A hurricane this weekend would
be the first test of its kind for the leadership of Brock Long, the new head of
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which is responsible for coordinating
the government's relief efforts after natural disasters.

The federal agency has yet to face a major disaster under Mr. Long's direction,
an initiation that has come amid concerns over some of the budget cuts proposed
by Mr. Trump.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.




URL: https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/24/us/harvey-storm-hurricane-texas.html

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Preparing for the worst in Corpus Christi, Tex., where
Hurricane Harvey was expected to make landfall as a Category 3 storm.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY GABE HERNANDEZ/CORPUS CHRISTI CALLER-TIMES, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS

 RACHEL DENNY CLOW/CORPUS CHRISTI CALLER-TIMES, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper




                          FOCUS - 139 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                          September 13, 2017 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chasing Hurricanes, Then and Now

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 984 words


MIAMI -- Every hurricane tells a story.

Hurricane Andrew in 1992, with a 17-foot storm surge and winds so intense that
they destroyed the gauges meant to measure them, was the disaster that changed
construction standards in Miami and much of the southeastern United States.

Katrina in New Orleans and Rita in Houston, both in 2005, taught terrifying
lessons about evacuations.

For millions of people drawn to Florida for its sunshine and its reputation for
easy living, Hurricane Irma, whose story is still playing out, was their first
major hurricane. It was not mine.

I covered more than a dozen hurricanes over more than three decades as a New
York Times reporter before I left in 2008 to teach journalism and work on
environmental issues at the University of Miami.

Over those years, many things changed. Sporadic radio and television advisories
have morphed into round-the-clock coverage on local television, CNN and the
Weather Channel. Forecasts have become far more accurate. Preparedness is
infinitely more advanced. And with climate change, storms are viewed not just as
acts of nature but perhaps of unwitting human intervention as well.

Years ago, banks and other businesses gave customers paper hurricane maps so
that they could plot the latitude and longitude of developing storms. Now nearly
everyone is glued to their phones and computers, watching projected storm tracks
play out in real time.

Still, many things have remained the same: Hurricanes often confound the
forecasters. They don't totally surprise anymore, but they drift past expected
targets and, worst of all, they sometimes quickly become much stronger than
expected. Harvey dropped much more rain than anticipated and Irma broke records
for velocity as it clobbered islands in the Caribbean and in the Bahamas. And
hurricanes still kill people.

Grocery store shelves still get cleaned out quickly. Gas stations run out of
fuel and then close rather than figure out a way to resupply. People in
evacuation zones refuse to leave their homes. They don't know what to do with
their pets. They have to stay close to aging parents. They say that driving a
car on crowded roads is more dangerous than a hurricane. They can't stand the
turmoil at the airports. And, finally, they just don't want to go anywhere.

Irma reflected all of that.

Hurricanes have their own style, too. Hurricane Katrina was so weak when it hit
the coast of Florida that I almost didn't fly down to Miami from New York to
cover it. Hurricane Wilma in 2005 was supposed to savage Naples, on the west
coast of Florida. But it struck a glancing blow there, strengthened as it
charged across the watery Everglades, and hit Miami hard. Hurricane Charley, in
2004, began as a small storm, zigged and zagged around Florida and ended as what
was then the second-costliest hurricane in United States history.

There may be many ways to report on a hurricane, but after I found myself caught
by surprise in Hurricane Gilbert in Jamaica in 1988, I settled on mine. Don't
follow a hurricane; get ahead of it. When nearly everyone else has been running
from a storm, or waiting for it to land, I've tried to run in, often on nearly
empty airplanes.

It is always an uncertain process of best guesses and unexpected results.
Katrina, one of the epic disasters of our time, seemed to be heading toward
Mobile, Ala. But I ended up driving to New Orleans, getting there just as the
wind was picking up and in time to start interviewing people as they stood in
line with bundles of clothes and suitcases to take shelter in the Superdome.

I ended up spending a week at the city's emergency operations center, getting
the ultimate lesson in how quickly and frighteningly things can spin out of
control. That didn't happen this weekend at the City of Miami's emergency
operations center, a squat, thick-walled building at Police Headquarters in
downtown Miami.

But it told another story. It was near Biscayne Bay and sits on the edge of
hundreds of millions of dollars -- maybe even billions of dollars -- worth of
condominiums and office towers. The glamorous buildings, with grand views of the
bay and, in some cases, rooftop pools, had not existed when I covered Hurricane
Andrew.

On Sunday, I drove around in the storm with officials in a heavy Miami police
sport utility vehicle. Two construction cranes had already buckled. Strong gusts
began to hammer us after almost an hour in the streets. The gusts might have
been as strong as 80 to 100 miles an hour. We could barely shove open the doors
on the S.U.V. We had to crouch to stand up on the sidewalk. I thought of New
Orleans, where the first flooding I saw was in the Lower Ninth Ward. People were
swimming and paddling boats to safety. But the disaster seemed contained. And
then it wasn't, and New Orleans filled with water. We were luckier in Miami. The
worst disaster never came.

Hurricane Irma was one of the strongest hurricanes ever, with one of the biggest
spans. Its cost is going to be staggering. No one knows for sure how to explain
it, or whether to expect similar monsters. Mayor Tomás Regalado was born in Cuba
and moved to Miami in 1962 when he was 14 years old. He has been through lots of
hurricanes, but he sees Irma as more than a weather event. ''We need to
seriously look at climate change,'' Mr. Regalado said. ''Hurricanes like Irma
don't come out of nowhere.''

Irma's story may be one of a monster storm that could have been even worse and
the maddening vagaries of storm forecasting. But it's also a reminder of
something that will live with us far into the future: With climate change
providing fuel for ever-more-powerful storms, and more and costlier coastal
development -- like that real estate wonderland near Biscayne Bay -- the stakes
are rising exponentially. And if Irma was not the catastrophe it could have
been, another storm with another name almost certainly will be.




URL: https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/12/us/hurricana-irma-katrina-.html

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Top, a man in front of his home in North Miami, Fla., after
Hurricane Irma. Above, a man near the Convention Center in New Orleans, six days
after Hurricane Katrina in 2005. While overall forecasts have improved, storm
damage remains difficult to predict. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KEVIN HAGEN FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES
 VINCENT LAFORET/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper




                          FOCUS - 140 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                           October 12, 2017 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Out at Sea, the 10th Atlantic Storm in a Row to Become a Hurricane This Year

BYLINE: By MAGGIE ASTOR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 881 words


With Tropical Storm Ophelia's transition to Hurricane Ophelia on Wednesday, 2017
became the first year in more than a century -- and only the fourth on record --
in which 10 Atlantic storms in a row reached hurricane strength.

Franklin. Gert. Harvey. Irma. Jose. Katia. Lee. Maria. Nate. Ophelia.

Ophelia, far out in the Atlantic, does not pose a threat to the United States,
though it may affect Ireland. But it puts this year in the history books by at
least one measure. The last time 10 consecutive Atlantic storms became
hurricanes was in 1893 -- and because tracking technology was far more primitive
then, meteorologists say, some weak tropical storms or tropical depressions may
have gone undetected within that streak.

There were also 10-hurricane runs in 1878 and 1886, said Bob Henson, a
meteorologist for Weather Underground. But since modern records began in 1851,
there has never been an 11-hurricane stretch.

Since Hurricane Franklin formed on Aug. 7, Mr. Henson said, there has been
''maybe a week total without a named storm roaming the Atlantic somewhere.'' Two
of the 10 hurricanes in that period, Irma and Maria, reached the highest level,
Category 5. Two others, Harvey and Jose, reached Category 4. Within a single
month from mid-August to mid-September, six hurricanes developed.

The number of named storms -- 10 hurricanes and five tropical storms, for a
total of 15 -- has already made the 2017 Atlantic hurricane season one of the
busiest on record, and there is still more than a month and a half to go before
it officially ends.

But what really stands out is the intensity and duration of the storms,
reflected in a measure known as accumulated cyclone energy, or A.C.E. By that
index, 2017 ranks eighth since modern hurricane records began in 1851, and its
position is likely to rise before the season is over. The A.C.E. measurement for
the incomplete season is already more than twice the average for a full season,
Mr. Henson said.

This year, he added, the Atlantic has experienced 18.75 major hurricane days:
the total number of days logged by Category 3, 4 and 5 storms. While there is
significant variation from year to year, this is nearly five times the
full-season average of 3.9 days.

All of this leads to one question: Why?

The link between climate change and hurricanes is not as simple as the link
between climate change and other extreme weather events, like heat waves and
droughts, scientists say -- in part because, compared with those other events,
the sample size of hurricanes is small. But climate change is one factor.

Katharine Hayhoe, a climate scientist at Texas Tech University, told The New
York Times in August that climate change might not increase the number of
hurricanes, but that higher ocean temperatures could ''have a role in
intensifying a storm that already exists,'' because warmer waters provide more
fuel for hurricanes to grow.

That fits with what we have seen this year: a remarkable number of the strongest
storms.

''Any given season could have waters that are warmer or cooler than average,''
Mr. Henson said, but these ordinary seasonal variations are occurring on top of
a long-term warming trend. These two elements can combine to produce monstrous
storms like Hurricane Irma -- which was one of only five known to have reached
wind speeds of 185 miles per hour, and which sustained those winds for a record
37 hours.

Generally, hurricanes can develop when the water beneath them is about 79
degrees Fahrenheit or higher, Mr. Henson said, and climate change is increasing
both the number of days that present those water temperatures and the size of
the areas that have them.

Joel Myers, the founder and president of AccuWeather, emphasized that ''we don't
have enough data'' to attribute the intensity of this year's hurricane season
specifically to climate change as opposed to ordinary variables, like water
temperature cycles that occur over 20 to 40 years. And he noted that in the
northwestern Pacific Ocean (where hurricanes are known as typhoons), activity
has been below average.

What is clear is that this year, warm waters have combined with atmospheric
conditions to produce an exceptionally destructive Atlantic hurricane season.
Wind shear has been very low, Mr. Henson said, which has allowed tropical
systems to intensify ''without being tilted, sheared, torn apart by stronger
winds.'' And steering currents have tended to drive storms over land rather than
pushing them out to sea, creating an enormous human toll.

Mr. Myers pointed to the same factors, plus two more. A high-pressure area in
the Atlantic has been farther north than usual, he said, essentially expanding
the tropics and creating a larger space in which conditions are favorable for
hurricanes. And above-average rainfall in parts of Africa resulted in less dust
in the air over the Atlantic, which allowed for larger rain droplets.

Simply put, virtually every factor that fuels hurricanes has been in place. But
Mr. Myers cautioned against taking that as evidence that future seasons will be
similar.

''Just because we had these statistics this year when everything was lined up,''
he said, ''doesn't say anything about next year, or the next five or 10 years.''

Follow Maggie Astor on Twitter: @MaggieAstor.




URL: https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/11/climate/hurricane-ophelia.html

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper




                          FOCUS - 141 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        Western Morning News (Plymouth)

                              July 30, 2007 Monday

Climate change link to hurricane threat

BYLINE:  John Kirk

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 583 words


Global warming has made the Westcountry more likely to be hit by fierce storms
caused by the tail end of hurricanes, experts say.

Parts of Devon and Cornwall normally experience heavy storms caused by the
latter stages of hurricanes about once a year.

The Met Office said this might increase if hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean
become more prevalent because of climate change.

A new report released today suggests this is the case.

Scientists in the US warn there has been a dramatic increase in the frequency of
Atlantic hurricanes and tropical storms, which they say can be fully explained
only by global warming.

Met Office spokesman Dave Britton said: "We probably see the remnants of North
Atlantic hurricanes affecting the weather in the Westcountry once or twice a
year during the hurricane season.

"With the likelihood of more hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean, this would
suggest that we might start to see the tail end of more hurricanes in the
Westcountry."

According to the new scientific research, the average number of tropical
cyclones forming in the Atlantic each year has doubled in the past century.

Of these, about 55 per cent have been powerful enough to be categorised as
hurricanes, when the maximum sustained wind speeds reach 74mph.

Scientists say the increases correlate closely with sea surface temperatures,
which have risen by about 1.3F (0.7C) in the past 100 years.

Study author Dr Greg Holland, from the National Centre for Atmospheric Research
in Boulder, Colorado, said: "These numbers are a strong indication that climate
change is a major factor in the increasing number of Atlantic hurricanes."

The Met Office stressed that the likelihood of the region seeing the tail end of
a hurricane  more frequently was just one possible outcome of climate change.

Mr Britton said: "There still needs to be substantial research in this area.
Although we might see more tropical storms in the Atlantic due to climate
change, the weather patterns in the UK could change in another way and the paths
of hurricanes may change.

"For instance, evidence suggests that climate change will lead to drier summers
and wetter winters, but this summer has been very wet."

The new evidence, published in the online journal Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London, suggests that rising sea surface temperatures,
largely attributed to global warming, are almost certainly spawning greater
numbers of cyclones.

Scientists in the US identified three distinct periods since 1900 during which
the frequency of hurricanes and tropical storms increased dramatically and then
remained at a higher level.

The first, between 1900 and 1930, saw an average of six major Atlantic cyclones
per year, of which four were hurricanes and two were tropical storms.

From 1930 to 1940, the annual average rose to ten, consisting of five hurricanes
and five tropical storms.

In the final study period, from 1995 to 2005, the average was 15 storms, eight
of which were hurricanes.

This last period has not yet stabilised, which means hurricane seasons may
continue to become more active.

Hurricanes are categorised one to five, according to their ferocity, with the
latter having wind speeds exceeding 155mph and causing surges in coastal sea
level of 18ft or more.

In recent years, there has been a significant increase in the number of major
hurricanes with maximum sustained wind speed of at least 110mph.

Experts are divided over whether or not this trend is linked to global warming.

jkirk@westernmorningnews.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2007 Western Morning News (Plymouth)
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 142 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           The Ledger (Lakeland, FL)

                             August 10, 2007 Friday

FORECASTERS TRIM STORM PREDICTIONS FOR SEASON;
EXPERTS SAY THE NUMBER OF STORMS THIS YEAR WILL STILL BE ABOVE NORMAL.

BYLINE: DIANE LACEY ALLEN The Ledger

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 550 words


LAKELAND -- The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Climate
Prediction Center tweaked its forecast Thursday, predicting slightly fewer
hurricanes than it had earlier but still warning that the number of storms this
year will be above normal. NOAA forecast 13 to 17 named storms before the start
of this season, which runs through November. It also predicted seven to 10
hurricanes, with three to five turning into storms with winds of more than 111
mph.

The updated forecast is 13 to 16 and seven to nine hurricanes. The Atlantic
basin should still expect three to five hurricanes that could grow to Category 3
strength or greater.

"The real key issue is that very little has changed from this forecast,'' said
Gerry Bell, lead seasonal forecaster for NOAA's Climate Prediction Center
headquartered in Camp Springs, Md. "So the real forecast is an even higher
probability of an above normal season. And that's what people need to be aware
of - for conditions such as this.''

Thursday's update increased the likelihood of an above-normal season from 75
percent to 85 percent.

Three storms - Andrea, Barry and Chantal - have already formed, which NOAA
reported is above the norm. August and September are typically hurricane-prone
months, with the peak of the season around Labor Day.

Bell said scientists are seeing weather conditions that tend to produce two to
four landfalling hurricanes, which could target the East Coast or Gulf Coast.

On Aug. 1, storm soothsayer Bill Gray's camp also downgraded its forecast, while
still predicting four intense hurricanes. Gray's group went from 17 named storms
to 13; nine hurricanes to eight and from five major storms to four.

NOAA's Bell said forecasters were tightening the storm range since the
storm-nurturing La Nina was no longer expected to develop to moderate or strong
strength. Bell said La Nina-like conditions have appeared, but the phenomenon
was not yet a textbook La Nina.

The La Nina-like convection patterns, combined with warm ocean water and an
ongoing active hurricane era, contributed to NOAA's forecast for a busy season.

"We've seen these patterns before and we know that they produce active seasons
...,'' said Bell.

Last season, however, forecasters overpredicted storm numbers. Bell blamed the
discrepancy on El Nino, which tends to weaken storms and quickly set up after
predictions went out. It thwarted hurricanes in October and November in the
Atlantic.

Bell said those conditions are not present this year and "there's no reason to
think the season won't be anything but above normal.''

Diane Lacey Allen can be reached at diane.allen@theledger.com or 863-802-7514.

HURRICANE FORECASTS

Varying weather patterns influence forecast outcomes. These are predictions by
Dr. Bill Gary's camp and the NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration) compared to recent hurricane seasons.

2005 FORECAST
         NAMED
         STORMS HURRICANES HURRICANES
Gray     15     8          4
NOAA     12-15  7-9        3-5
Actual   28     15         7

2006 FORECAST
         NAMED
         STORMS HURRICANES HURRICANES
Gray     17     9          5
NOAA     13-16  8-10       4-6
Actual   9      5          2

2007 FORECAST
         NAMED
         STORMS HURRICANES HURRICANES
Gray     17     9          5
NOAA     13-17  7-10       3-5
Actual

REVISED 2007 FORECAST
         NAMED
         STORMS HURRICANES HURRICANES
Gray     13     8          4
NOAA     13-16  7-9        3-5
Actual

NOTE: The NOAA hurricane forecast was revised Thursday. The Gra forecast was
revised Aug. 1.

SOURCE: Ledger research, Aug. 9, 2007

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Ledger: Chart

PUBLICATION-TYPE: WEB PUBLICATION


             Copyright 2007 Lakeland Ledger Publishing Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 143 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       TELEGRAM & GAZETTE (Massachusetts)

                              June 2, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Whither hurricanes blow, preparations needed

BYLINE: Milton J. Valencia, Telegram & Gazette Staff

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 624 words

DATELINE: WORCESTER


It's not a matter of if, but when, Massachusetts is due for a disastrous
hurricane such as the area hasn't seen since the 1950s, weather experts
predicted at a forum yesterday.

It was part of a summit sponsored by National Grid at which utility workers met
with public safety officials to coordinate plans and build relationships before
the area suffers a perfect storm that downs utility poles, causes power outages
and flooding and leaves residents stranded in their homes.

"We have to make partners with those in utilities because they're going to rely
on us and we're going to rely on them," said District Fire Chief Frank D.
DiLiddo III, one of several public safety officials representing Worcester at
yesterday's event at the College of the Holy Cross.

"Preparing gives us a better understanding of where we should be and where we
stand," he said.

Hurricane season has started, but New England doesn't see such tropical storms
until August or September, said Glenn A. Field, the guest speaker at National
Grid's annual Municipal Emergency/Storm meeting.

Still, the area has grown complacent, he said, because there have been no
serious hurricanes since the 1950s era. There was Hurricane Bob in 1991, and
Hurricane Gloria in 1985, but - "Those weren't real hurricanes."

With that said, however, New Englanders must prepare for a different type of
hurricane than the textbook, circular storm with an eye that typically hammers
the Florida coast, Mr. Field said. When a storm reaches this area, it's a
front-ender that leads with strong winds and rain. By the time the eye of the
storm reaches a target, the storm has already done its damage.

So, any storm that comes will hit quick, said Mr. Field, a warning coordination
meteorologist with the National Weather Service forecasting office in Taunton.

"Hurricane Bob was nothing but a cluster of thunderstorms on Friday afternoon,"
he said, but by Sunday it had reached a Category 3 hurricane. The hurricane that
struck in 1938 came from North Carolina in only eight hours, faster than some
modern day public transportation.

The last Category 4 hurricanes to hit the area came in clusters, in 1938, 1944
and 1954. In 1955, there were severe tropical storms.

The area has been spared since, with the worst hurricanes in the 1990s hitting
the Florida area, and hurricanes Katrina and Rita striking the Gulf of Mexico
last year.

But New England is due, Mr. Field predicted, as such storms supposedly come in
clusters every 30 or so years.

"It doesn't matter how many," Mr. Field said, "because it only takes one."

Yesterday's event allowed National Grid workers to meet public safety officials,
discuss plans and open lines of communication.

National Grid has its own emergency plans for any disaster, which include
dispatching work crews to the most affected areas, and reaching out to
businesses, said Aleta Fazzone, company vice president of business services.

Specifically, the company goal is to keep utilities running, which would be
instrumental in any public safety role, she said.

"We do just as much internal preparedness for our storms as do municipalities,"
she said. "Our mission is to get that out to as many people."

Yesterday's meeting topics included mutual aid, downed wires and power
distribution.

Chief DeLiddo said safety officials rely on utilities for communication to other
agencies and to residents. But utilities are just as important for residents
during any storm, particularly if they are elderly and stranded, and
specifically if they rely on any life-saving machines. In some storms, there's
only so much fire and police can do, he said, and residents must learn to
prepare for their own safety.

"Without those utilities running, we would find ourselves in a world of hurt,"
he said.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2006 Worcester Telegram & Gazette, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 144 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            March 10, 2010 Wednesday

Hurricane season forecast: seven storms to reach land;
In the upcoming hurricane season, two or three storms will be major events along
the coastal US, according to AccuWeather.com.

BYLINE: Ron Scherer Staff writer

LENGTH: 531 words


America may have already had a "snowicane" this year, but now some weather
forecasters are focusing on the real thing - you know, those monster storms with
names like Donna or Andrew that pelt the coast with 100-mile-per-hour winds,
massive amounts of rain, and tidal surges. Joe Bastardi, the first private
weather forecaster to look this year at the 2010 hurricane season, thinks it
will be a rough one. "This year has the chance to be an extreme season," says
Mr. Bastardi, AccuWeather.com's chief long-range meteorologist in State College,
Pa.

"There will be a major bounce back of activity." IN PICTURES: Notable hurricanes
in the past two decades Last year was a light hurricane season, with the fewest
storms since 1997. Last March, Bastardi correctly predicted that it would be a
below-normal storm year. But this season, he says, seven storms will reach land,
and five of those will be hurricanes. Of those, two or three will be major
events along the coastal United States. "This hurricane season is going to be a
lot more like 2008 than 2009," he says. Two years ago was a very active
hurricane season, with five major storms that included hurricane Gustav, which
produced $6.6 billion in damage. In early December, William Gray and Philip
Klotzbach of Colorado State University issued an early assessment of the 2010
season that called for three to five major hurricanes. "We estimate that
activity will return to levels more typical of years during an active era, such
as what we have experienced since 1995," wrote the forecasters. They will issue
an updated forecast April 1. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) will issue its hurricane forecast in late May and will then update it in
early August. Bastardi says he would not be surprised if the first hurricane of
the season is spotted in June - something that could affect Florida or the
Southern coast. However, the bulk of hurricane activity is usually in August and
early September. The hurricane season officially runs from June 1 to Nov. 30.
Last year, the water temperatures in the South Atlantic were cooler than normal,
which inhibited hurricane development. But that has changed, he says, and water
temperatures in the storm breeding grounds of the Atlantic are already warm. "It
looks like a bathtub out there," he says. Unlike last year, when dry air off
Africa disrupted storm formation, humidity is returning to the Atlantic basin,
Bastardi says. Higher humidity levels provide additional upward motion in the
air and contribute to tropical storm development, he says. At the same time, the
El Niño event, a strong current that forms in the Pacific but affects weather in
North America, is rapidly dissipating. The years when an El Niño has reversed
have been strong hurricane seasons. Bastardi says that the atmospheric
conditions remind him of 1964, 1995, and 1998. All were active hurricane
seasons. In 1964, hurricane Cleo clobbered Florida, brushing Miami. In 1995,
hurricane Opal pounded Pensacola, Fla., resulting in $3 billion in damage. And
in 1998, hurricane Bonnie caused extensive damage around Wilmington, N.C. IN
PICTURES: Notable hurricanes in the past two decades

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2010 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 145 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             July 12, 2011 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Top risk in cyclone not wind, but water;
To educate public, storm surge warnings weighed

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 799 words


Storm surge  the massive  mound of water that builds up and comes ashore as a
hurricane moves over the ocean or Gulf of Mexico   is the most dangerous aspect
of hurricanes, but many public misconceptions persist about it, according to a
recent survey of U.S. coastal residents.

"The biggest single killer in hurricanes is storm surge," says Jamie Rhome,
storm surge specialist at the National Hurricane Center in Miami. He adds that
every coastal city along the Gulf or East Coast of the USA is at risk of storm
surge.

"Most U.S. tropical cyclone deaths occur from drowning," says hurricane center
deputy director Ed Rappaport. "Storm surge accounted for about half of the
losses since 1970. Nearly all of those occurred in Katrina (2005), which was the
latest example of an infrequent but catastrophic hurricane storm surge event
that kills hundreds or even thousands of people."

Floods from excessive rainfall rank second in causing loss of life in
hurricanes. "These floods occur much more often than the storm-surge events, but
in general take fewer lives per event," Rappaport says.

The heart of the Atlantic hurricane season is rapidly approaching: Most
hurricanes tend to form in August and September, and federal scientists are
predicting an above-average season, with as many as 10 hurricanes expected.

That means 30 million Americans living along the Gulf and Southeast coasts are
vulnerable to storm surge, says Jeff Lazo, the director of the societal impacts
program at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) in Boulder, Colo.

NCAR designed, implemented and paid for the survey for a project funded by a
grant from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, interviewing
more than 1,200 people in 155 coastal counties in eight states from Texas to
North Carolina last November. The counties selected had some degree of
storm-surge risk from hurricanes as strong as  Category 5 .

"A significant number of people don't know their own vulnerability in the event
of a major hurricane," says Lazo about the survey findings.

A "major" hurricane is one that is a Category 3, 4 or 5 on the Saffir-Simpson
Hurricane Scale, with wind speeds greater than 110 mph.

Specifically, he found that 40% of the respondents said they're not likely to
get storm surge damage from a major hurricane, when in fact they do live in a
storm-surge-prone area.

Also, 34% believed that wind was more likely to cause loss of life than storm
surge, and 31% thought that hurricane-spawned tornadoes were more of a threat to
life from hurricanes than storm surge.

The survey also found that about 17% of the respondents confuse storm surge with
tsunamis, which are large ocean waves generated by offshore earthquakes and are
not related to weather.  Additionally, 20% thought that storm surge is just
floodwater from heavy rain.

The ferocity of water is daunting: Storm surge water can be as high as 30 feet
in a huge hurricane.

But even a  foot or two of surge water can knock you right over, says Betty
Morrow, an independent consultant and sociologist, retired from Florida
International University in Miami.

"We had a huge storm surge with Hurricane Katrina in Mississippi, with 250
people killed," Morrow says, adding that the deaths there were overlooked
because of the disaster in New Orleans. "Most people to this day do not know
that all those people died in the surge. They just didn't believe it would
happen  they didn't leave."

Most of the 1,200 deaths in Hurricane Katrina were caused by storm surge,
according to the hurricane center.

The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale categories  which  measure only wind speed
are not a good indicator of storm-surge risk. People perceive  "a huge
difference between a 1 and 2 and 3 or above," Morrow reports. "They consider a 1
or 2 minor and stay home  but a 3 or higher, they'll leave."

With this in mind, the weather service is in the early stages of considering a
separate storm surge scale for alerting the public as a hurricane approaches,
which would be different from the hurricane watch and warning system it
currently employs.

"Storm-surge values used to be in the Saffir-Simpson scale, but they were
misleading," Rhome says.

A surge can be highly localized, he says, with the same storm producing more
than  20 feet of surge in Texas but only 6 or 7 feet in Florida.

For example, every Category 3 hurricane will produce a different storm surge, he
says.

"We're still evaluating the merits of this idea, working with social scientists
to see if such a warning would help communicate the threat," Rhome says.

He says such a scale and separate warning system would still be several years
away from implementation.

"We've still got a ways to go, simply because it's such an important change,"
Rhome says. "If we do go forward, we want to do it correctly."

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Alejandro Gonzalez, USA TODAY (Diagram)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 146 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             August 2, 2013 Friday
                                 First EDITION

2 hurricanes will hit U.S., forecast says;
New system predicts active storm season

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, @USATODAYWeather, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 425 words


The U.S. should be slammed by two hurricanes this season, according to a new
forecast released Thursday by scientists at Coastal Carolina University in
Conway, S.C.

This is the first forecast that predicts the specific number of hurricane
landfalls the nation should see. Up until now, preseason hurricane predictions
have traditionally been only for the number of hurricanes that are expected to
form.

One of the hurricanes should hit the East Coast, and another somewhere along the
Gulf Coast, reports atmospheric scientist Len Pietrafesa of CCU. The forecast
does not say specifically where the hurricanes will hit, nor when.

Based on past weather records dating to 1950, the East Coast gets hit roughly
once every other year by a hurricane, while the Gulf Coast sees one per year.

The forecasting team at Coastal Carolina says that 13 to 17 named tropical
storms will form, of which six to nine will be hurricanes. A tropical storm has
winds of 39 to 73 mph, while hurricanes have sustained wind speeds of at least
74 mph.

A typical season sees 12 named tropical storms, of which six are hurricanes.
Other top forecasting teams also have predicted an active season. So far this
year, four tropical storms have formed in the Atlantic, but no hurricanes have,
according to the National Hurricane Center.

The forecast comes from a new computer model, which is dubbed the "Hurricane
Genesis and Outlook" (HUGO) project. Pietrafesa says the model works by
incorporating several current atmospheric and oceanic conditions, and then looks
back throughout recorded hurricane history to find a year with similar weather
conditions. Once it finds a year that's similar, it determines how many
hurricanes made landfall that season and uses that to make the current forecast.

The HUGO model also works with other existing federal government models to come
up with the forecast.

Admittedly, "it is much more difficult to predict landfall counts than overall
hurricane activity," according to a Coastal Carolina release that accompanied
the forecast.

In addition to the seasonal outlook, the new model system will also predict the
track and intensity of any incoming hurricane five days away from landfall,
similar to what the hurricane center does now.

The HUGO model system will provide specific data on likely storm surge and
inundation as a hurricane approaches, including time, location and likely water
depth along the coastline. This should assist emergency management officials in
their logistical planning in the event of evacuations, according to Coastal
Carolina.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 147 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             August 2, 2013 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

2 hurricanes will hit U.S., forecast says;
New system predicts active storm season

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, @USATODAYWeather, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 429 words


The U.S. should be slammed by two hurricanes this season, according to a new
forecast released Thursday by scientists at Coastal Carolina University in
Conway, S.C.

This is the first forecast that predicts the specific number of hurricane
landfalls the nation should see. Up until now, preseason hurricane predictions
have traditionally been only for the number of hurricanes that are expected to
form.

One of the hurricanes should hit the East Coast, and another somewhere along the
Gulf Coast, reports atmospheric scientist Len Pietrafesa of CCU. The forecast
does not say specifically where the hurricanes will hit, nor when.

Based on past weather records dating to 1950, the East Coast gets hit
approximately once every other year by a hurricane, while the Gulf Coast is
struck about once per year.

The forecasting team at Coastal Carolina says that 13 to 17 named tropical
storms will form, of which six to nine will be hurricanes. A tropical storm has
winds of 39 to 73 mph, while hurricanes have sustained wind speeds of at least
74 mph.

A typical season sees 12 named tropical storms, of which six are hurricanes.
Other top forecasting teams also have predicted an active season. So far this
year, four tropical storms have formed in the Atlantic, but no hurricanes have,
according to the National Hurricane Center.

The forecast comes from a new computer model, which is dubbed the "Hurricane
Genesis and Outlook" (HUGO) project. Pietrafesa says the model works by
incorporating several current atmospheric and oceanic conditions, and then looks
back throughout recorded hurricane history to find a year with similar weather
conditions. Once it finds a year that's similar, it determines how many
hurricanes made landfall that season and uses that to make the current forecast.

The HUGO model also works with other existing federal government models to come
up with the forecast.

Admittedly, "it is much more difficult to predict landfall counts than overall
hurricane activity," according to a Coastal Carolina news release that
accompanied the forecast.

In addition to the seasonal outlook, the new model system will also predict the
track and intensity of any incoming hurricane five days away from landfall,
similar to what the hurricane center does now.

The HUGO model system will provide specific data on likely storm surge and
inundation as a hurricane approaches, including time, location and likely water
depth along the coastline. This should assist emergency management officials in
their logistical planning in the event of evacuations, according to Coastal
Carolina.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 148 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           September 29, 2017 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hellish September for hurricanes finally comes to a close;
Records fall, even with a quarter of storm season to come

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, @usatodayweather, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 464 words


Farewell, September. Don't let the door hit you on the way out.

By some measurements, September marked the single worst month for Atlantic
hurricanes ever recorded.

In a statistic known as Accumulated Cyclone Energy (ACE), Hurricanes Irma,
Katia, Jose, Lee and Maria generated the largest amount of energy for any month
on record, said Colorado State University meteorologist Phil Klotzbach.

ACE is calculated by adding each tropical storm or hurricane's wind speed
through its life cycle. Long-lived, intense hurricanes have a high count (Irma's
ACE measured 67.5), while short-lived, weak tropical storms have a lower values
(Katia came in at 6.1), according to Weather.com.

Irma and Maria soared to Category 5 strength, the top of the Saffir-Simpson
scale of hurricane intensity. Irma's landfall on Barbuda and Maria's landfall on
Dominica makes 2017 only the second season on record to feature two hurricanes
of Category 5 strength.

The Atlantic Basin, which includes the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea,
also generated 35 "hurricane days" in September, the most ever recorded in the
Atlantic,  Klotzbach said.

A "hurricane day" is tallied each time a hurricane spins for 24 hours somewhere
in the Atlantic, meaning there can be multiple "hurricane days" in a single
24-hour period.

These statistics don't necessarily gauge a hurricane season's impact on people
and property, however.

Irma killed 87 people in the U.S. and its territories; the U.S. death toll from
Maria now stands at 24, all in Puerto Rico.

September wrought catastrophic damage to the southeastern U.S. and Puerto Rico,
in addition to several other Caribbean islands, primarily because of Irma and
Maria. When the destruction from Harvey in August is lumped in, this year's crop
of devastating storms could make it the costliest hurricane season ever for the
USA.

"There is no question that this is already going to be one of the costliest
Atlantic hurricane seasons on record -- and we're only in September," said
meteorologist Steve Bowen of global reinsurance firm Aon Benfield.

Hurricane season isn't over, unfortunately. Based on historical averages, we
still have about 25% of the season left. On average, 1.5 hurricanes form each
year in the Atlantic in October and November, the NOAA said.

As Maria and Lee race out to sea away from the United States, the National
Hurricane Center is watching a small area of disturbed weather spinning near
Cuba. The disturbance has a 40% chance of becoming a named storm over the next
five days.

In October, forecasters usually look closer to home in the Caribbean, Gulf of
Mexico or Atlantic Ocean for developing storms and hurricanes. The long-lived
hurricanes that form near Africa and move slowly across the ocean, like Irma and
Maria, are not as common this time of year.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2017 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 149 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The Times (London)

                             June 7, 2007, Thursday

Big increase in hurricanes is not caused by global heating, say scientists

BYLINE: Lewis Smith, Environment Reporter

SECTION: HOME NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 638 words


Hurricanes in the Atlantic are increasing because of natural weather patterns
rather than global warming, a study has concluded.

Growing numbers of hurricanes battering the United States and the Caribbean have
made their presence felt in the past decade and are forecast to worsen. Global
warming has been cited as a possible cause but researchers looking at sediment
and coral deposits have now identified natural variations in their frequency.

Hurricane Katrina, which devastated New Orleans in 2005, was "unexceptional"
when historic patterns of such stormy weather are analysed, they suggested.

Global warming may even have been responsible for unusually low levels of
hurricanes in the 25 years before 1995 when the number began rising, according
to the scientists, led by the Geological Survey of Sweden.

Using deposits trapped in sediment to indicate when hurricanes had taken place,
the researchers built up a record detailing their number and frequency going
back 270 years.

They found that the decline in hurricanes during the 1970s and 1980s was matched
by similar declines in the past, indicating natural variations in the weather
patterns.

"The record indicates that the average frequency of major hurricanes decreased
gradually from the 1760s until the early 1960s, reaching anomalously low values
during the 1970s and 1980s," they reported in the journal Nature. "Furthermore,
the phase of enhanced hurricane activity since 1995 is not unusual compared to
other periods of high hurricane activity and appears to represent a recovery to
normal hurricane activity."

The findings are at variance with the conclusions in February of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the United Nations organisation
addressing global warming. The UN panel stopped short of blaming increased
frequency of hurricanes on man-made temperature rises, but said it was "more
likely than not" that greenhouse gas emissions had contributed to the greater
intensity of cyclonic storms.

The Swedish-led research team suggested that hurricane levels were normal,
though they accepted "a future possibility" of higher sea temperatures
contributing to more intense hurricanes.The researchers were unable to identify
any direct link between increased hurricanes and rising sea level temperatures,
beyond the requirement for a minimum temperature of 27C (81F) to be reached
before a hurricane developed.

From 1730-2005 there were on average 3-3.5 major hurricanes each year.

The researchers from Sweden, the US and Puerto Rico said that being able to
calculate vertical wind shear -the differences in wind speeds at different
heights -was crucial in determining the frequency of hurricanes.

Higher wind-shear levels disrupt developing hurricanes; low wind-shear levels
fail to batter the storms sufficiently to prevent them developing.

The researchers suggested that higher air temperatures caused by global warming
may have led to stronger vertical wind shear, which has destroyed developing
hurricanes in the Atlantic before 1995, explaining the dearth.

Deposits of sediments accumulated from increased run-off from rainfall and
plankton remains associated with increased levels of nutrients and provided
clues to the scientists to historic vertical wind shear and hurricanes.

They were able to check their readings of the data by comparing their findings
with documentation of hurricanes.

* IN THE WIND

* From 1995 to 2005 there was an average of 4.1 significant hurricanes
(categories 3-5) in the Atlantic compared with an average of 1.5 from 1971-94

* Five periods in the past 270 years had the same lack of hurricanes, plus high
wind shear, as 1971-94: 1730-36, 1793-99, 1827-30, 1852-66 and 1915-26

* Six periods had the same high levels witnessed since 1995: 1756-74, 1780-85,
1801-12, 1840-50, 1873-90 and 1928-33

* Source: Geological Survey of Sweden

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 150 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              May 23, 2010 Sunday
                             South Pinellas Edition

HURRICANE GLOSSARY

BYLINE: JOSH LINKER, Bay News 9 Meteorologist

SECTION: 2010 TAMPA BAY HURRICANE GUIDE; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 633 words


Cape Verde hurricane - A tropical cyclone that develops off the Cape Verde
(pronounced vurd) Islands just off the West Coast of Africa and becomes a
hurricane before reaching the Caribbean Sea. The Cape Verde season peaks in
August and September. A typical year would have between one and five, with an
average of two.

Cone of uncertainty - Sometimes called the "cone of error," this shows the
historical error at certain time periods in a tropical cyclone forecast. It is
important to realize that sometimes the actual forecast scenario might be more
or less accurate than the historical error cone.

Cyclone - A counter-clockwise rotating area of air that usually denotes
unsettled weather, such as a hurricane.

Extratropical cyclone - A storm that forms outside the tropics, sometimes as a
tropical storm or hurricane changes.

Eye - The low-pressure center of a tropical cyclone. Winds can be nearly calm,
and sometimes the sky clears.

Eye wall - The ring of thunderstorms surrounding a storm's eye. The heaviest
rain, strongest winds and worst turbulence are normally in the eye wall.

Hurricane - A tropical cyclone in which the maximum sustained surface wind speed
exceeds 74 mph.

Hurricane hunters - Planes that fly into hurricanes to take measurements. In the
Atlantic Hurricane Basin, hurricane reconnaissance is carried out by the U.S.
Air Force Reserve's 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron and NOAA's Aircraft
Operations Center. The Air Force uses WC-130 planes based at Keesler Air Force
Base in Mississippi, and NOAA uses P-3 planes based at MacDill Air Force Base in
Tampa.

Hurricane season - Six months of the year with a relatively high incidence of
hurricanes. The hurricane season in the Atlantic, Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico
runs June 1 through Nov. 30. The hurricane season in the Eastern Pacific basin
is May 15 to Nov. 30. The hurricane season in the Central Pacificbasin is June 1
to Nov. 30.

Saharan air layer - A large area of dust emerging off the African continent into
the Atlantic Ocean during the spring and summer. It usually extends 5,000 to
25,000 feet into the atmosphere and is associated with large amounts of dust,
dry air and strong wind aloft. It generally weakens hurricane intensity by
wrapping dry air into a storm, which tears it apart.

Spaghetti models - Describes the graphical output of several computer model
forecasts for a tropical system placed on one graphic. The solutions often
resemble a bowl of spaghetti.

Storm surge - An abnormal rise in sea level accompanying a hurricane or other
intense storm. The height is the difference between the observed level of the
sea surface and the level that would have occurred without a cyclone.

Storm tide - The actual level of sea water resulting from the astronomic tide
combined with the storm surge.

Tropical cyclone - The generic term given all tropical depressions, tropical
storms and hurricanes. A tropical cyclone has a warm core and must have a warm
ocean and humid environment to survive. Also, a tropical cyclone will have its
most intense winds concentrated close to the center.

Tropical depression - A closed low-pressure area with organized convection,
heavy rain, and winds up to 38 mph.

Tropical disturbance - A distinct tropical weather system of apparently
organized convection originating in the tropics or subtropics and maintaining
its identity for 24 hours or more.

Tropical storm - A tropical cyclone with maximum sustained surface winds of 39
mph to 73 mph.

Tropical wave - An area of converging air and relatively low air pressure
embedded within the deep easterlies. May lead to tropical cyclones.

Upwelling - The "bringing up of water" from deeper water toward the surface. A
hurricane can "upwell" colder water to the surface as it moves along, which can
weaken a hurricane if it becomes stationary.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The eye of Hurricane Ivan swirled with sustained winds of 160
mph when it entered the Gulf of Mexico in 2004.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 151 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            August 23, 2011 Tuesday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

IRENE'S SHIFT EAST EASES FLA. THREAT

BYLINE: KATIE SANDERS, EMILY NIPPS, Times Staff Writers

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 755 words



HIGHLIGHT: Florida's east coast could still feel the effects of the growing
hurricane.


A rapidly strengthening Hurricane Irene battered the Dominican Republic and
Puerto Rico on Monday and threatened to become the first major hurricane to
strike the United States since 2005.

Irene grew into a Category 2 hurricane late Monday, and the National Hurricane
Center in Miami said it could become a Category 3 storm today.

"We didn't anticipate it gaining this much strength this early," said center
meteorologist Chris Landsea.

Forecasters said it could still be that strong when it passes over the Bahamas
and slams into the United States.

Forecast models Monday night had the storm growing to Category 3, with winds of
111-130 mph, and coming ashore on the South Carolina-North Carolina border
Saturday evening.

The United States has never gone six years without a major strike. The last time
the United States was hit by a hurricane was September 2008, when Ike hit Texas
as a Category 2, with 110 mph winds.

That span of good fortune has emergency officials concerned about complacency
among U.S. residents, particularly Floridians.

"Sociologists tell us that the human brain tends to forget even major things in
five years," said National Hurricane Center spokesman Dennis Feltgen. "So
Floridians have likely forgotten the terrible storms of '04 and '05."

Early Monday, hurricane center tracking models showed Irene's path heading for
Florida. But by Monday night, the tracks had shifted to the east.

Forecasters warned the track is still uncertain. Depending on its strength, even
a hurricane 100 miles out in the ocean could have a major impact on homes along
Florida's east coast.

"We're still not out of the woods yet,'' state meteorologist Amy Godsey told
Gov. Rick Scott during a briefing in Tallahassee.

Bryan Koon, Florida emergency management director, told Scott he and other
emergency managers conferred with the hurricane center, Federal Emergency
Management Agency and the Red Cross throughout the day.

With the hurricane season nearing its peak, "this is the kind of thing we're
going to see more and more of over the next six or seven weeks,'' Koon told
Scott.

On Monday, more than a million people in Puerto Rico were without power as Irene
produced up to 10 inches of rain, according to the weather service.

Irene is the eighth named storm of the season, ending a record streak of seven
storms that failed to turn into hurricanes this season.

Irene's development into a hurricane marked a significant anniversary for
Florida: Hurricane Andrew became a hurricane on the same day in 1992, according
to the National Weather Service.

Andrew was one of the most devastating storms in history, causing about $30
billion in property damage. And it was the only hurricane to hit the United
States that year.

Times staff writers Marissa Lang and Danny Valentine contributed to this report,
which contains information from the Associated Press.

* * *

Irene scare a reminder: Be prepared

We coasted almost halfway through the 2011 hurricane season without much concern
- until Hurricane Irene gave us our first scare. With Irene apparently moving
away from Florida, emergency planners said it's not too late to pull together a
hurricane kit so you're ready for the next storm. "This is a tremendous
opportunity for Floridians to once again take a look at their plans, to make
sure that they have an idea of where they should go, should they need to
evacuate their communities,'' said Florida Emergency Management director Bryan
Koon. "They should be taking a look at their readiness kits." Some essentials to
start gathering now:

- WATER - Emergency officials suggest one gallon per person per day. The day
before a storm hits, stock up on ice and keep it in freezers and coolers.

- GAS - Make sure you have a full tank a day or two before a storm hits. It's
wise to also keep a full gas can, but leave it in the garage, not the car.

- CASH - Stock up: If the power goes out, ATMs will not work and credit card
networks will be down.

- CREATURE COMFORTS - Think of what it will feel like when it's a sticky 90
degrees and there are no lights, no TV and nowhere to go. A battery-powered fan
will get much use, as will a battery-operated radio and flashlights or lamps.
Remember: buy extra batteries.

- FOOD - Keep enough to feed yourself and your family for a few days without
electricity (canned tuna and meat, nuts, dried fruit, granola bars, etc.). A
severe storm can interrupt deliveries to stores, which may not be staffed or
powered, so don't count on buying food after the storm passes. Remember: You'll
need a manual can opener.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: MAP - Times: Hurricane Irene PHOTO (5)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2011 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 152 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                            October 25, 2015 Sunday

El Niño blamed for wild Pacific storms;
A record for the region: 8 powerful hurricanes - so far;
TROPICAL DEPRESSION PATRICIA

SECTION: ; Pg. Z2

LENGTH: 371 words


A satellite image shows Patricia's menacing eye on Thursday.

Hurricane Patricia's rampage into Mexico was part of the Pacific Ocean's
hyperactive hurricane season of 2015, one that's been supercharged by weather
troublemaker El Niño.

So far this season, eight hurricanes of Category 4 or 5 strength (at least 130
mph) have formed in the eastern Pacific Ocean, which is an all-time record,
according to hurricane researcher Phil Klotzbach of Colorado State University.

Patricia set several weather records, including strongest hurricane winds (200
mph), strongest Pacific hurricane at landfall (165 mph) and fastest to intensify
from a tropical storm to Category 4 hurricane.

In the central Pacific, a record 14 named tropical storms or hurricanes have
spun through the region this season. Fortunately, as is the case with most
Pacific hurricanes, few have hit land.

El Niño, a natural warming of tropical Pacific Ocean waters, has provided fuel
for the storms, which usually need warm water of at least 80 degrees to form.
Ocean temperatures near Hawaii are at record highs, Klotzbach said. El Niño also
reduces the winds that tend to tear hurricanes and typhoons apart.

Other than Hurricane Joaquin, the Atlantic hurricane season has been mostly a
dud, as predicted and as is typical during El Niño. Only three hurricanes have
formed, according to the National Hurricane Center.

As for global warming, would warmer oceans mean that stronger, more frequent
hurricanes like Patricia are possible? The jury is still out on that one:

"It is premature to conclude that human activities - and particularly the
greenhouse gas emissions that cause global warming - have already had a
detectable impact on Atlantic hurricane or global tropical cyclone activity,"
according to NOAA's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory. (Tropical cyclones
are all tropical storms, hurricanes and typhoons.)

However, looking ahead, the laboratory said that "warming by the end of the 21st
century will likely cause tropical cyclones globally to be more intense on
average."

Scientists are always clear to point out that no one storm can be blamed on or
caused by man-made climate change. Patricia, like all weather events, was due to
many causes, such as El Niño.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 153 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                           September 29, 2017 Friday

Hellish September for hurricanes finally comes to a close;
Records shattered, even with a quarter of storm season to come

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: ; Pg. Z3

LENGTH: 544 words


Farewell, September. Don't let the door hit you on the way out.

By some measurements, September marked the single worst month for Atlantic
hurricanes ever recorded.

In a statistic known as Accumulated Cyclone Energy (ACE), Hurricanes Irma,
Katia, Jose, Lee and Maria generated the largest amount of energy for any month
on record, according to Colorado State University meteorologist Phil Klotzbach.

ACE is calculated by adding each tropical storm or hurricane's wind speed
through its life cycle. Long-lived, intense hurricanes have a high count (Irma's
ACE measured 67.5), while short-lived, weak tropical storms have a lower values
(Katia came in at 6.1), according to Weather.com.

Irma and Maria soared to Category 5 strength, the top of the Saffir-Simpson
scale of hurricane intensity. Irma's landfall on Barbuda and Maria's landfall on
Dominica makes 2017 only the second season on record to feature two hurricanes
of Category 5 strength.

The Atlantic Basin, which includes the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea,
also generated 35 "hurricane days" in September, the most ever recorded in the
Atlantic, Klotzbach said.

A "hurricane day" is tallied each time a hurricane spins for 24 hours somewhere
in the Atlantic, meaning there can be multiple "hurricane days" in a single
24-hour period.

These statistics don't necessarily gauge a hurricane season's impact on people
and property, however.

Irma killed 87 people in the U.S. and its territories; the U.S. death toll from
Maria now stands at 24, all in Puerto Rico.

September wrought catastrophic damage to the southeastern U.S. and Puerto Rico,
in addition to several other Caribbean islands, primarily because of Irma and
Maria. When the destruction from Harvey in August is lumped in, this year's crop
of devastating storms could make it the costliest hurricane season ever for the
USA.

"There is no question that this is already going to be one of the costliest
Atlantic hurricane seasons on record - and we're only in September," said
meteorologist Steve Bowen of global reinsurance firm Aon Benfield. "Regardless
of where the final numbers settle, this season is one which will be remembered
for a very long time."

Hurricane season isn't over, unfortunately. Based on historical averages, we
still have about 25% of the season left. On average, 1.5 hurricanes form each
year in the Atlantic in October and November, the NOAA said.

As Maria and Lee race out to sea away from the U.S., the National Hurricane
Center is watching a small area of disturbed weather spinning near Cuba. This
area has a 40% chance of becoming a named storm over the next five days and is
likely to produce locally heavy rainfall over portions of Cuba, the Florida
Keys, South Florida and the Bahamas in the next several days.

AccuWeather meteorologist Ryan Adamson said the heaviest rain in the Keys up
through Miami and West Palm Beach could produce localized flooding.

If the storm reaches tropical storm strength, it would be dubbed Nate.

In October, forecasters usually look closer to home in the Caribbean or Gulf of
Mexico or nearby Atlantic Ocean for developing tropical storms and hurricanes.
The long-lived hurricanes that form near Africa and move slowly across the
ocean, like Irma and Maria, are not as common this time of year.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 154 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                              May 17, 2009 Sunday

RETHINKING STORMS

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: B; ARTICLE; Pg. BN01

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: FORT LAUDERDALE


FORT LAUDERDALE

Earth is warming, but not fueling the increase in Atlantic hurricanes this
decade, according to new research by a top federal scientist.

Hurricane specialist Chris Landsea, with the National Hurricane Center in Miami,
disputes theories that global warming has caused more hurricanes, in a study to
be published soon in The Journal of Climate.

Since the mid-1990s, the average number of hurricanes per year has been almost
double what it was during the few decades before, but about on par with
hurricane activity in the early 20th century, Landsea's research shows.

"It's busy, yes, but not anything we haven't seen before," Landsea said at last
week's Governor's Hurricane Conference.

Other scientists disagree, disputing his conclusions and finding more
significance in research that shows warming increases hurricane intensity.

Landsea scrutinized the hurricane center's storm data and corrected for
technological advances in hurricane detection and tracking. He concluded that
hurricane seasons of the past rivaled today's activity, suggesting the influence
of a periodic climate cycle in the Atlantic, not global warming, is behind the
current spike in storms.

A hot topic

Global warming and hurricanes became a hot topic of debate after the
record-setting 2004 and 2005 hurricane seasons. The number and ferocity of
storms, including Hurricane Katrina, which swiped Florida before devastating New
Orleans and the northern Gulf of Mexico coast in 2005, increased speculation
that global warming played a role.

Landsea's new study, currently under review by other scientists, stemmed from
his objection to studies in 2006 and 2007 linking the increased number of
recorded hurricanes with a rise in global temperatures.

"I did not agree with the studies because I thought their assumption that all
the storms were in the database was faulty," Landsea said.

Scientific debate over the cause of hurricane activity is more than academic.
Experts' ability to understand the forces behind storm formation affects
hurricane forecasts, which in turn affect public safety, disaster preparedness
and even insurance costs.

The criticism

Landsea's study garnered praise from meteorologists after he presented it at
last week's hurricane conference, but it is sparking controversy among hurricane
researchers.

One of his biggest critics is Michael Mann, professor of meteorology at
Pennsylvania State University and lead author of a 2007 study that linked
warming with an increase in hurricanes.

Mann disputed Landsea's research, saying that his technology argument ignores
the chance that a single storm could have been counted twice before satellite
records could show the exact track. He expressed doubt that the study would pass
muster to be published.

Kerry Emanuel, a leading hurricane researcher and professor of atmospheric
science at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said Landsea's work is
scientifically robust, but not as important as looking at whether warming causes
hurricanes to gain strength.

"I don't think the number of storms is a terribly interesting thing," Emanuel
said, emphasizing Atlantic storms now rarely exceed Category 2 strength, but
that the majority of damage-inflicting storms are Category 3 or higher. "We're
pretty confident that intensity increases with global temperature. There are
arguments about the amount."

Data, and lack thereof

The National Hurricane Center's database goes back to the 1880s. On its face,
the information appears to show an obvious upward trend in the number of
hurricanes. But with satellites, airplane reconnaissance, data-collecting buoys
and unprecedented teams of scientists, no tropical storm goes unnoticed today.

In the early 1900s, only storms that threatened land or ships at sea were
recorded.

In their publications, the scientists who demonstrated an increase in hurricane
activity maintained that the number of missed storms would be too insignificant
to alter the strong upward trend.

But Landsea's research showed that just taking out all the minor tropical storms
-- those that lasted less than 36 hours with no threat to land -- nearly erased
the upward trend.

Furthermore, he used research by scientists at Princeton to guess at how many
storms were missed in the past. Adding those storms weakened the trend to zero,
instead showing spikes in hurricane activity during periods when sea surface
temperatures in the Atlantic averaged about 1 degree above normal, a phenomenon
that is thought to shift every 30 to 50 years.

Several meteorologists and weather forecasters say the trend, called Atlantic
Multi-decadal Oscillation, explains why there are more hurricanes now and why
the nation saw many more devastating hurricanes in the mid-1920s through the
1950s, compared to the 1960s through the early 1990s.

But scientists also debate whether Atlantic Multi-decadal Oscillation even
exists.

No single weather trend influences hurricane activity. The interactions between
the sun, sea, atmosphere, moon and the rotation of the Earth creates uncountable
variables in the weather, making it difficult to predict and understand.

Landsea and most other hurricane scientists do not dispute climate change or
some human contributions to it. Landsea simply challenges the thinking that
warming substantially affects hurricane activity.

If warming does have an effect, it amounts to meaningless "noise," Landsea said
at the conference.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: To see a full-size version of graphic on pdf.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 155 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            September 9, 2012 Sunday

How luck (and the jet stream) have been protecting us, so far

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1175 words


As hurricane season peaks, the state's fate lies in ficklel patterns

Wind patterns in the atmosphere have shielded Florida from every hurricane that
has formed for nearly seven years. But meteorologists say this record run
without a storm strike is purely a matter of luck -- good fortune that is
certain to one day run out.

The end of the 2011 hurricane season marked the longest stretch in recorded
history that the Sunshine State has gone without a hurricane hit.

The previous record was the five-year lull from Hurricane David's Panhandle
landfall in early September 1979 to Hurricane Elena's strike along the state's
east coast in early September 1985.

Now, halfway through an incredibly busy hurricane season that has seen 13 named
storms, the streak continues. The last hurricane to hit Florida was Hurricane
Wilma in late October 2005.

So far this year, six hurricanes have formed; all have missed Florida. The
previous two years brought a total of 17. None struck Florida and only one --
Irene -- hit the U.S., far fewer than expected, given the number of storms, said
Chris Landsea, science and operations officer for the National Hurricane Center,
a division of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

It is tempting to see a trend pointing to more hurricane-free years to come. But
forecasters say Florida's fate lies in fickle weather patterns that are too
unpredictable to count on.

"For some of the years we have had a bit of a trough set up on the east coast
and that prevented hurricanes that were out there from making landfall," Landsea
said. "It's more luck than anything else. Whether that will continue, I will
have to guess, 'No.'"

This year has brought close calls.

Isaac was forecast to become a hurricane before reaching the Florida Keys and
later the Panhandle, but remained a tropical storm until veering west toward
Louisiana.

Beryl was just a few miles per hour below hurricane strength when it made
landfall in northeast Florida during May.

Batter up:

the jet stream

Every year the Atlantic pitches hurricanes at Florida. For nearly seven years,
the jet stream has stepped up to bat them away with impeccable timing.

The jet stream is one of the two main drivers that influence where hurricanes
go. The other is the Bermuda High.

The high -- a giant ridge of high pressure that moves clockwise off the U.S.
East Coast -- tends to push hurricanes west toward the Caribbean and the U.S.

Meanwhile, the jet stream -- a strong current of eastward-moving air -- pushes
low pressure areas, known as troughs, east across North America.

When a hurricane is barreling west beneath the Bermuda High it will continue on
that course until it either reaches the edge of the high or a trough steers it
north.

From 2006 to 2011, the Bermuda High wavered in size, sometimes stretching far
west into the Gulf of Mexico and sometimes retreating east away from the
coastline. On average, however, the high was more frequently in retreat.

The jet stream also persistently sent troughs over the northeast, helping to
deflect storms that threatened when the Bermuda High grew.

For most of this year, that pattern has continued, said Phil Klotzbach, an
atmospheric scientist at Colorado State University who investigated the pattern
at the end of last year.

"It tends to be a relatively persistent pattern, which basically just reduces
your odds of being hit," Klotzbach said.

Unfortunately, the pattern can shift -- sometimes so rapidly that it is
impossible to predict more than a week or two in advance.

The only storms that made it past the protective pattern to strike the U.S.
before 2011 were Hurricanes Dolly, Gustav and Ike in 2008 and Humberto in 2007.
Those storms all struck Texas or Louisiana.

In 2011, Irene grazed North Carolina. A trough was present, but arrived a little
too late to carry the storm out to sea. Instead it dragged the storm north into
New York and New England.

With Isaac, the opposite happened.

The Bermuda high extended far west, but a trough began to break up the ridge as
Isaac moved through the Caribbean. The trough steered the storm directly toward
Florida. Luckily for the Florida Keys, Isaac did not gain hurricane strength
until it reached the middle of the Gulf of Mexico, where the trough finally
dragged it north into Plaquemines Parish, just southeast of New Orleans.

Help from Africa

Dust from Africa's Sahara Desert also may have helped keep most storms from
becoming extraordinarily powerful -- especially this year and last.

By halfway through the 2012 hurricane season, 12 named storms had formed --
second only to 1995 for the arrival of so many named storms by Aug. 30. Since
then, a 13th storm, Michael formed, briefly becoming the year's first major
hurricane on Thursday with winds in excess of 110 mph.

Michael and the other active system Leslie, a tropical storm, remain in the
Atlantic and are not considered a threat to the U.S.

Repeatedly, the storms spun dry, dusty air into their cores, interrupting the
thunderstorms that help tropical systems tap heat energy from the ocean.

"I would say dry air has probably been one of the big reasons why these systems
haven't been getting their act together as much as the models have predicted,"
Klotzbach said.

It is hard to say just how much of a role the Saharan air has played in
suppressing storms or keeping them weak upon approaching Florida, said Jason
Dunion, a scientist who studies the Saharan Air Layer for NOAA's Hurricane
Research Division. The layer has only been actively studied since about 2005.

Dry air played a significant role in keeping Isaac weak. The air was swept along
in the main part of the storm, and impeded its ability to form a definitive eye.
That was one of the reasons forecasters had problems predicting its course.
Isaac overcame the dry air just before it made landfall on Louisiana.

Dry air tends to be more of a problem for hurricanes and tropical storms early
in the hurricane season. It is late June through early August when the dust
storms start to subside, Dunion said, indicating that at least one possible
source of protection is fading away this year.

"We're getting to that switching point," Dunion said. "Those dust storms are
beginning to be much less of a factor."

Will El Niño

save the day?

Heading into the last three months of hurricane season, El Niño may come to the
rescue.

The weather pattern is caused by warmer sea surface temperatures in the tropical
Pacific. El Niño, predicted to take hold this fall, alters global rainfall in a
way that suppresses Atlantic tropical storms and hurricanes.

But forecasters warn against complacency, no matter what the weather pattern.
Andrew, for example, struck Homestead as a devastating Category 5 hurricane
during an exceptionally quiet hurricane season 20 years ago.

Also, the peak of hurricane season is just beginning: most storms form between
late August and mid-October, with Monday the season's statistical peak. The
official hurricane season ends Nov. 30.

"I wish I could tell you this is the last threat for Florida this year," Landsea
said, referring to Isaac.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Flooded homes in the aftermath of Hurricane Isaac in Braithwaite, La.,
on Wednesday. Florida has not suffered a direct strike from a hurricane in
nearly seven years, the longest stretch since records have been kept. AP PHOTO /
GERALD HERBERT

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 156 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            November 30, 2012 Friday

Storm season kept forecasters on their toes

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 454 words


For the third year in a row, a near record-breaking number of hurricanes and
tropical storms formed during the six-month Atlantic hurricane season. And for
an unprecedented seventh straight year, no hurricanes hit Florida.

A total of 19 named storms formed this year, eight more than the historic
average. The year tied 2010 and 2011 for the third-busiest season on record,
exceeded by 28 storms in 2005 and 20 in 1933, according to information from
Weather Underground.

The official hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, but this year, the
season started early, with the first storm's arrival on May 19, signaling a year
that would defy forecasters.

Experts predicted that an El Niño would squash storms late in the season, but
the weather pattern never arrived. El Niño, triggered by warmer than normal sea
temperatures in the equatorial Pacific, sends strong winds over the Atlantic
that blow hurricanes apart or prevent them from forming.

Federal forecasters predicted up to 17 named storms would form by the end of the
hurricane season, with as many as 8 becoming hurricanes and three becoming major
hurricanes with winds above 110 mph.

Of the 19 storms that formed this year, 10 became hurricanes, but only one --
Michael -- was a major hurricane. Its maximum winds reached 115 mph far out at
sea. Hurricanes Gordon and Sandy came 1 mph shy of reaching major hurricane
strength. Gordon spun out to sea. Sandy brought its fiercest winds to the
Bahamas, but its most significant impacts were felt in the northeast U.S. as it
weakened, expanded in size and merged with a cold front before making landfall
on the New Jersey coast.

Sandy, which formed on Oct. 23, was the last active storm in the Atlantic this
year and by far the most dramatic. The last storm to form was Tropical Storm
Tony on Oct, 22, but it fizzled on Oct. 25.

Tropical Storm Alberto in May was followed shortly by Tropical Storm Beryl,
another early arriver. Beryl struck the Florida-Georgia border with near
hurricane force winds on May 27.

Although Florida received no hurricane damage, it did get pounded by heavy surf
as storms passed offshore of the Sunshine State. Tropical Storm Debby caused
major beach erosion along the Gulf Coast and widespread flooding in the northern
part of the state. Before becoming a hurricane, Isaac also caused a great deal
of flooding on the state's east coast.

2012 STORMS

Tropical Storm Alberto

Tropical Storm Beryl

Hurricane Chris

Tropical Storm Debby

Hurricane Ernesto

Tropical Storm Florence

Tropical Storm Helene

Hurricane Gordon

Hurricane Isaac

Tropical Storm Joyce

Hurricane Kirk

Hurricane Leslie

Major Hurricane Michael

Hurricane Nadine

Tropical Storm Oscar

Tropical Storm Patty

Hurricane Rafael

Hurricane Sandy

Tropical Storm Tony

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 157 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             May 14, 2016 Saturday

Fading El Niño key to 2016 season | Predictions call for average season

BYLINE: Harold Bubil

SECTION: B; FL News; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 761 words


HURRICANE PREDICTIONS

ORLANDO - Who remembers Hurricane Alex?

Nobody? Good. You have lives that are totally uncluttered by hurricane trivia.

Few storms have been more trivial than Alex, which started off the coast of
Africa and reached Category 1 hurricane strength for about a day before quickly
veering slightly to the left, like a right-handed golfer's hook shot, in the
general direction of Greenland.

Alex thus became a historical footnote as only the second recorded hurricane to
have formed in ... January.

Besides being a threat to ships at sea, Alex did little more than mess up the
hurricane outlooks for 2016. At least 20 entities issue seasonal forecasts each
year, and some of them include Alex in their seasonal forecasts, while others
don't.

"Alex was a leftover from 2015," said hurricane scientist Phil Klotzbach of
Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project, speaking at the
Governor's Hurricane Conference here. "The atmosphere does not reset on Jan. 1.
Everyone has pretty much forgotten about it."

Meanwhile, some forecasters even go so far as to predict the number of U.S.
landfalls, which Dr. Rick Knabb of the National Hurricane Center says is a
foolhardy exercise. "No one can tell you if there will not be a landfall this
year. Nonsense," he says.

Overall, though, the forecasts call for slightly below- to slightly
above-average seasons. An average season, from June 1 to Nov. 30, has 12 named
storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

Here is a rundown of some of the most prominent outlooks:

· Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project: 12 named storms, 5
hurricanes, 2 major hurricanes (categories 3, 4 or 5, with sustained winds of at
least 111 mph). This forecast excludes Alex, so it could be revised to 13/6/2.

· Accuweather: 14/8/4, with three U.S. landfalls.

· Weather Channel/Weather Co. - 14/8/3.

· Coastal Carolina University's Hurricane Genesis and Outlook (HUGO) Project:
13/7/3, with most likely no hurricanes striking the eastern U. S and one making
landfall along the Gulf of Mexico.

· Met Office, a European group: 14 named storms and 8 hurricanes, excluding
Alex.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, parent of the National
Weather Service and the National Hurricane Center, will issue its preseason
forecast on May 27.

The key factor in the predictions this year is El Niño, the massive pool of warm
water in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. El Niño creates westerly winds in
the upper atmosphere. The wind shear lops the tops of hurricanes in the tropical
Atlantic Ocean, leaving Floridians grateful and their storm shutters in storage
for another year.

El Niño is a storm killer. But this particular phenomenon, the third-strongest
since 1950, is fading, said Klotzbach.

Instead, NOAA's Climate Prediction Center says there is a 75 percent chance of
"La Niña" conditions in the Pacific by the peak of hurricane season in
September. La Niña, which is basically the opposite of El Niño, is marked by the
cooling of Pacific water. It does not feed hurricanes, but doesn't kill them
with shear, either. That increases the chance of hurricanes developing into
dangerous systems as they track westward.

Balancing the disappearance of El Niño, Klotzbach said, are rather tepid
conditions in the eastern tropical Atlantic. The water is not especially warm,
and the atmosphere has high pressure at this time. A stable atmosphere is bad
for hurricane formation.

The overall outlook, therefore, is for an average season, Klotzbach said.

What the hurricanes will do once they form is not part of these predictions, for
the most part. Some years, few hurricanes hit the coast. In 2010, for example,
the Atlantic spawned 12 hurricanes, and none of them struck the U.S. In 1885,
however, seven recorded hurricanes yielded six U.S. landfalls. Klotzbach said
the chance of a U.S. landfall is about average at 50 percent, based on long-term
models.

Recently, high pressure over the eastern U.S. has knocked surviving U.S. storms
out to sea, with the notable exception of Sandy in late 2012. It was very large,
pushed water into a highly populated and flood-prone area at the same time that
tides were high. The damage more from water than wind.

Another caveat: It is still springtime. A lot can change before the peak of
hurricane season around Sept. 1.

This is why Klotzbach, who is still mourning the recent passing of his mentor,
Dr. William Gray, the father of the seasonal hurricane outlook, will issue
forecasts again on June 1, July 1 and Aug. 3, "so we can take a mulligan if we
really messed up."

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: This photo taken from video provided by NASA on Friday, Jan. 15, 2016
shows Hurricane Alex seen from the International Space Station. PHOTO BY NASA
via AP Klotzbach

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 158 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             May 14, 2016 Saturday

Prediction pinned to fading El Niño | Meteorologists expect 12 named storms, six
hurricanes, two major

BYLINE: Harold Bubil

SECTION: B; FL News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 760 words


HURRICANE forecast

ORLANDO - Who remembers Hurricane Alex?

Nobody? Good. You have lives that are totally uncluttered by hurricane trivia.

Few storms have been more trivial than Alex, which started off the coast of
Africa and reached Category 1 hurricane strength for about a day before quickly
veering slightly to the left, like a right-handed golfer's hook shot, in the
general direction of Greenland.

Alex thus became a historical footnote as only the second recorded hurricane to
have formed in ... January.

Besides being a threat to ships at sea, Alex did little more than mess up the
hurricane outlooks for 2016.

At least 20 entities issue seasonal forecasts each year, and some of them
include Alex in their seasonal forecasts, while others don't.

"Alex was a leftover from 2015," said hurricane scientist Phil Klotzbach of
Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project, speaking at the
Governor's Hurricane Conference here. "The atmosphere does not reset on Jan. 1.
Everyone has pretty much forgotten about it."

Meanwhile, some forecasters even go so far as to predict the number of U.S.
landfalls, which Dr. Rick Knabb of the National Hurricane Center says is a
foolhardy exercise. "No one can tell you if there will not be a landfall this
year. Nonsense," he says.

Overall, though, the forecasts call for slightly below- to slightly
above-average seasons. An average season, from June 1 to Nov. 30, has 12 named
storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

Here is a rundown of some of the most prominent outlooks:

· Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project: 12 named storms, 5
hurricanes, 2 major hurricanes (categories 3, 4 or 5, with sustained winds of at
least 111 mph). This forecast excludes Alex, so it could be revised to 13/6/2.

· Accuweather: 14/8/4, with three U.S. landfalls.

· Weather Channel/Weather Co. - 14/8/3.

· Coastal Carolina University's Hurricane Genesis and Outlook (HUGO) Project:
13/7/3, with most likely no hurricanes striking the eastern U. S and one making
landfall along the Gulf of Mexico.

· Met Office, a European group: 14 named storms and 8 hurricanes, excluding
Alex.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, parent of the National
Weather Service and the National Hurricane Center, will issue its preseason
forecast on May 27.

The key factor in the predictions this year is El Niño, the massive pool of warm
water in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. El Niño creates westerly winds in
the upper atmosphere. The wind shear lops the tops of hurricanes in the tropical
Atlantic Ocean, leaving Floridians grateful and their storm shutters in storage
for another year.

El Niño is a storm killer. But this particular phenomenon, the third-strongest
since 1950, is fading, said Klotzbach.

Instead, NOAA's Climate Prediction Center says there is a 75 percent chance of
"La Niña" conditions in the Pacific by the peak of hurricane season in
September. La Niña, which is basically the opposite of El Niño, is marked by the
cooling of Pacific water. It does not feed hurricanes, but doesn't kill them
with shear, either. That increases the chance of hurricanes developing into
dangerous systems as they track westward.

Balancing the disappearance of El Niño, Klotzbach said, are rather tepid
conditions in the eastern tropical Atlantic. The water is not especially warm,
and the atmosphere has high pressure at this time. A stable atmosphere is bad
for hurricane formation.

The overall outlook, therefore, is for an average season, Klotzbach said.

What the hurricanes will do once they form is not part of these predictions, for
the most part. Some years, few hurricanes hit the coast. In 2010, for example,
the Atlantic spawned 12 hurricanes, and none of them struck the U.S. In 1885,
however, seven recorded hurricanes yielded six U.S. landfalls. Klotzbach said
the chance of a U.S. landfall is about average at 50 percent, based on long-term
models.

Recently, high pressure over the eastern U.S. has knocked surviving U.S. storms
out to sea, with the notable exception of Sandy in late 2012. It was very large,
pushed water into a highly populated and flood-prone area at the same time that
tides were high. The damage more from water than wind.

Another caveat: It is still springtime. A lot can change before the peak of
hurricane season around Sept. 1.

This is why Klotzbach, who is still mourning the recent passing of his mentor,
Dr. William Gray, the father of the seasonal hurricane outlook, will issue
forecasts again on June 1, July 1 and Aug. 3, "so we can take a mulligan if we
really messed up."

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: This photo taken from video provided by NASA on Friday, Jan. 15, 2016
shows Hurricane Alex seen from the International Space Station. PHOTO BY NASA
via AP Dr. Phil Klotzbach H-T ARCHIVE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 159 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                          September 10, 2005 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricane-season holiday need not be a disaster: How to avoid being blown away
on vacation

BYLINE: CAMILLA CORNELL, CanWest News Service

SECTION: WEEKEND: TRAVEL; Pg. I2

LENGTH: 729  words


Vacation packages to Mexico and the Caribbean are cheap right now, mainly
because the peak travel season to the tropics is still a few months away.

But there's another reason for the bargain-basement beach vacations: Hurricane
season runs from June to November in the tropics. And, after seeing the images
of the devastation wreaked on the southern United States by hurricane Katrina,
getting hit by a hurricane while on vacation is an experience most would rather
avoid.

"They're looking for sun, sand and relaxing," says Gary Sadler, director of
sales and marketing for Beaches/Sandals, "not hurricane winds, rain and
devastation."

The good news is your chances of going head-to-head with one of nature's
monsters are actually pretty slim. The bad news? A hurricane can affect weather
patterns for hundreds of kilometres around. Here are some tips to avoid being
blown away on vacation.

Choose the right time to go. Although August has a reputation as a bad month for
hurricanes, the peak of the hurricane season falls from the beginning of
September to mid-October.

Pick a low-risk paradise. According to the Caribbean Hurricane Network website,
www.stormcarib.com, the islands least likely to be battered by hurricanes are
Aruba and Bonaire, which have only experienced one serious hurricane since 1851.
The next safest are Trinidad and Curacao. Topping the list of the islands most
often in a hurricane's path are Abaco (in the Bahamas, with 18 hurricanes) and
Grand Bahama with 15. In fact, the Bahamas is a far more active region for
hurricanes than either the eastern or western Caribbean. To find out how a
potential vacation location ranks, check out StormCarib's climatology chart.

Cruise around it. With sophisticated tracking systems, cruise ships are able to
avoid hurricanes by rerouting. As Carnival Cruises president Bob Dickinson told
industry newsletter Cruise Week: "Cruise ships manoeuvre, so we're in front of
(a hurricane) or behind it, but nowhere near it." And since hurricanes pull so
much moisture and wave energy into themselves, it's actually possible for areas
not in their path to have better weather than usual.

Check whether your resort offers hurricane protection. Beaches/Sandals is one of
the major resort chains offering hurricane protection. Under the chain's Blue
Chip Hurricane Guarantee, if a hurricane (as defined by the U.S. National
Weather Service) hits while you are a guest at any Sandals or Beaches resort,
you will receive a free replacement vacation (excluding air) to the resort of
your choice for the same duration as your original booking. The replacement trip
is valid for one year.

"I had a call from a guy a couple of weeks ago who had been to the Bahamas a few
years back," says Sadler. "He wanted to know when I thought another hurricane
might hit in the Caribbean." Sadler replied that he really didn't know, and
asked why the man was interested. "On my last vacation, I was there for 14
nights," the gentleman told him. "And the hurricane hit on the 13th night. You
gave me back 14 days of vacation." Says Sadler: "He was ready to do that again."
Other chains that offer hurricane protection include SuperClubs (which even
guarantees sunshine for its Jamaican resorts), Club Med and Wyndham Resorts.

Consider travel insurance. Trip-cancellation insurance may reimburse you should
you lose your vacation to a hurricane. The trick is to buy it before the
hurricane is named or it could be considered null and void.

Choose your travel agency wisely. On Aug. 4, online travel agency Expedia.ca
launched its Hassle-Free Hurricane Promise. Basically, the policy states that
any time the Canadian Hurricane Centre or the U.S. National Hurricane Center
issues a hurricane watch or warning, Expedia will allow its customers to rebook
for another date or destination, waiving any change or cancellation fees. The
policy applies for travel anywhere in North America, including Mexico and the
Caribbean.

The company will also act as an advocate with airlines to ensure they help
customers out and waive any fees.

"People look forward to planning trips and we want them to have a feeling of
confidence throughout the process," says Stuart Morris, Expedia's director of
marketing. "If they choose to go to Florida or the Caribbean, they shouldn't be
lying in bed worrying that a hurricane is somehow going to ruin their vacation."

National Post

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 160 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                            August 9, 2006 Wednesday
                                  Main Edition

Hurricane forecast veers;
Meteorologists now predict fewer, less severe storms

BYLINE: BOB DART; Cox Washington Bureau

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 517 words


Washington --- As the peak of the hurricane season approaches, the coastal South
still faces an "above-normal number of storms" despite an early lull, top
federal weather forecasters warned Tuesday.

"We are not off the hook by any means," said retired Navy Vice Adm. Conrad C.
Lautenbacher, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA).

However, the "relatively quiet start" means that last year's "extremely active"
hurricane season is unlikely to be repeated, the scientists said.

Meteorologists have adjusted the May hurricane forecast to predict fewer storms:
They now predict a total of 12 to 15 named storms in the Atlantic, of which
seven to nine will become hurricanes, including three or four major hurricanes
with winds of 111 mph or stronger. Judging from historical patterns, that would
mean two to three making landfall in the U.S., they said.

In May, the government predicted the season would produce 13 to 16 named storms,
eight to 10 of them hurricanes and four to six of those major.

The hurricane season began June 1 and ends Nov. 30. The peak period is from
mid-August through October, said Lautenbacher.

Because of warm ocean waters and prevailing wind patterns, there is a 75 percent
chance that the coming weeks will still bring more than the normal number of
tropical storms, said Gerry Bell, NOAA's lead seasonal hurricane forecaster.

"This year's three named storms may pale in comparison to the record nine storms
that formed through early August 2005, but conditions will be favorable for
above-normal activity for the rest of this season," said Lautenbacher.

"One hurricane hitting your neighborhood is enough to make it a bad season,"
said Max Mayfield, director of NOAA's National Hurricane Center in Miami.

Tuesday's scaled-back hurricane prediction by the federal forecasters came five
days after Colorado State University meteorologists also reduced their estimates
of the severity of this storm season.

Last summer set records for frequency and severity of storms, capped by
Hurricane Katrina, which killed 1,300 people and left New Orleans and the
Mississippi Gulf Coast in ruins. In all, there were 28 named tropical storms in
2005. Fifteen became hurricanes, and four major hurricanes hit the United
States.

Bell said it is impossible to scientifically predict this far in advance if or
where the expected hurricanes would come ashore and even whether this year's
storms are more likely to hit the Gulf Coast or Atlantic shoreline.

"Exactly when and where landfall occurs is strongly controlled by the weather
patterns in place as the storms approach land," he explained. "These weather
patterns generally cannot be predicted more than several days in advance."

Because of geography, however, hurricanes are less likely to make landfall along
the Georgia coast than in other Southern states that face the Atlantic, Bell
said.

The westward curve of the coastline between St. Mary's and Savannah helps spare
Georgia's barrier islands the brunt of the storms that brush Florida's east
coast, he explained. These storms often hit the Outer Banks of North Carolina.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: DAVID ADAME / Associated PressMax Mayfield of the National
Hurricane Center in Miami notes that despite the possibility of a less active
season, "One hurricane hitting your neighborhood is enough to make it a bad
season."

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 161 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                          September 11, 2008 Thursday
                                  Main Edition

HOME DEPOT HURRICANE CENTER: Big-box storm chasers;
Company prides itself on having what people need when hurricanes strike.
Accomplishing that is a planning and logistics feat.

BYLINE: RACHEL TOBIN RAMOS; Staff

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1079 words


Gas cans, gas cans, gas cans. Generators, generators, generators.

Those were two of the 11 products that a team of Home Depot merchants was buying
up like crazy this week in preparation for Hurricane Ike's predicted landfall in
the United States.

The merchants were not only buying them up, but arranging for them to be put on
trucks that would deposit them in warehouses within a several-hour drive of
Hurricane Ike's predicted strike zone in Texas.

Parked in a renovated meeting room at company headquarters in Atlanta is Home
Depot's "command center" for natural disasters.

The $77.3 billion company takes disruptions from hurricanes seriously.

"Hurricanes are major events for the Home Depot," said company CEO Frank Blake
on Monday at a Cobb Chamber of Commerce breakfast. "We're tracking the
hurricanes to see where they are going to determine the supply chain. It's a
very strong company value that we will be the last out and the first in."

The company's goal: for the stores to never run out of disaster supplies before
or after a hurricane.

He called the command center "a frenzy."

Organized chaos may be more like it.

The room is set up like a lecture hall facing two giant television screens
flashing the Weather Channel, MSNBC and CNBC, with four smaller screens on
either side.

The storm command center was built in 2005, before the hurricane season that
coincidentally brought Hurricane Katrina.

On Tuesday, more than 30 people led by "disaster captain" Corky Martin and Bob
Puzon, vice president of merchandising for the southern region, were busy taking
orders from stores from Louisiana to Texas.

Hurricane Ike at the time was expected to make landfall somewhere between
Louisiana and Mexico on Friday night or Saturday morning.

The third hurricane in as many weeks meant that many of these people had been
working for three weeks straight, from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m., taking orders from
stores in the paths of hurricanes and making sure they never ran out of tarps,
flashlights, batteries, gas cans, generators, plywood, bottled water and other
essentials.

Puzon said many of the employees have worked in Home Depot stores and can
empathize with how it feels to be out of stock during an emergency. He said he
tells them to go home, but they won't.

On the flip side, he said, there are no replacements for the 11 key product
merchants so those folks, like Shaun Martin who buys generators, are there seven
days a week. "Martin is the most popular guy," said Puzon.

In fact, Blake said generators caused him a bit of consternation last week as
Hurricane Hanna threatened the East coast.

"I lived this very intensely," said Blake. "My son is a [Home Depot] store
manager in Wilmington, N.C., which was in the path of the hurricane. I was
getting e-mails from him every other minute, 'Where's the generator truck?
Where's the generator truck?' "

For Hurricane Ike, added Blake, "it's a marathon."

He said as the hurricane has changed paths, Home Depot has been "racing
generators from Wilmington to Miami. Then the storm moves again so it's nope,
move them to Louisiana."

And that moving around is the job of the command center.

Seven giant maps plastered on the walls show the locations of stores and the
major highways to them.

Four banks of desks are filled with laptops and merchants, while nine "purchase
order" terminals process the orders.

Up front, a large screen displays Home Depot's proprietary software called
"Pulse." It shows real-time information about what was ringing through stores at
that moment in the predicted hurricane strike zone.

Puzon said the software can tell Home Depot within minutes if a store's
check-out systems are down because of a power loss.

But this was just one of four rooms set aside at headquarters to deal with
disasters.

Next door was Chris Canoles, "operational captain" (official title: senior
director of environmental health and safety).

Canoles is responsible for closing down and reopening stores, as well as making
sure repairs are made quickly if stores are damaged. He also makes sure his
staff is fed and taken care of.

For Hurricane Gustav, he had 12,000 "ready-to-eat" meals and 72 pallets of
sports drinks and snacks (bought at Costco) trucked overnight to seven stores in
Baton Rouge because the area had lost power. The meals fed Home Depot staffers
so that they could work and keep the stores open.

His other duties include pulling strings with government agencies to let Home
Depot sell, for example, unapproved gas cans in Texas.

Home Depot's supply of approved gas cans has run out, but gas cans are one of
the most popular items purchased during hurricanes.

Canoles' team got Texas Gov. Rick Perry to sign an order temporarily allowing a
different kind. The team also donated 25 generators to the state of Louisiana
during Hurricane Gustav. Canoles also must monitor when a state of emergency is
called for counties that could get hit by hurricanes. As soon as that happens,
Home Depot must freeze prices. The merchants have to negotiate that with
suppliers.

In another room, Jeff Wagner, a former Navy captain, handled logistics, how to
get the goods to the stores.

Puzon said Wagner, five years retired from the 7th U.S. Naval Fleet in Singapore
and four years with the Home Depot, has dramatically improved logistics by
finding empty big-box stores in which to "stage" goods during hurricanes to be
closer to the affected areas. The saving could be as much as 11 hours on transit
time, Puzon said.

That has made a big difference, he said, because in some locations a whole
truckload of generators, or 250 units, and a few thousand gas cans could sell
out in as little as 25 minutes.

Wagner said he learned in the Navy to think about "time and distance" goods have
to travel to get to their destination. With hurricanes, Wagner is often working
against a moving target.

That's why Home Depot has hired a weather consulting agency, Early Alert, that
gives the company at least three updates a day on where the hurricanes are
heading.

A fourth room houses a human resources team that will deal with staff who have
to be evacuated, or get staff from other regions to work at stores after a
hurricane.

On Tuesday, that room was empty. But come Friday, when the hurricane is expected
to hit, the team will be in full swing.

HURRICANE HELP

Trucks deployed by Home Depot to restock stores:

* Gustav: 500 pre-storm, 300 post-storm

* Hanna: 200 pre-storm

* Ike: 500 to South Florida pre-storm followed by 500 to the U.S. Gulf Coast

Source: Home Depot

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: JESSICA MCGOWAN / jmcgowan@ajc.comEmployees work in front of
Home Depot regional maps inside the Hurricane Command Center at the chain's
headquarters in Atlanta. They coordinate moving supplies such as plywood,
generators and tarps into areas that could be hit by storms./ImageData*
ImageData*
Photo: JESSICA MCGOWAN / jmcgowan@ajc.comA hurricane track chart rests on Shaun
Martin's desk as he works on generator purchases inside the Hurricane Command
Center at Home Depot headquarters./ImageData* ImageData*
Photo: JESSICA MCGOWAN / jmcgowan@ajc.comAs hurricane weather reports air on TV
in the background, Narissa Smith, an inventory planner, talks with
co-workers./ImageData*

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2008 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 162 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                          September 10, 2005 Saturday

Hurricanes? We've had a few

BYLINE: Peter Calamai, Toronto Star

SECTION: NATIONAL REPORT; Pg. F02

LENGTH: 1171 words


As program manager of the Canadian Hurricane Centre in Dartmouth, N.S., Peter
Bowyer always dreaded one question: How many people have died from hurricanes in
Canada?

Now, three years of dogged digging by a team of centre researchers have produced
the astonishing answer that hurricanes and related tropical storms here have
claimed at least 629 lives since 1900 - and probably closer to 895.

And that's only one of a handful of surprises to emerge from the investigation
that fills more than 1,100 pages with the scientific and human dimensions of 173
hurricane-strength storms that affected Canada during the 20th century, mostly
in the Atlantic provinces.

In addition, the past 10 years have seen more hurricanes in the North Atlantic
than any other decade and the proportion of major hurricanes (categories 3, 4
and 5) is also likely to soon break the record set in the 1950s.

Yet, hurricanes barely rated a mention last year in another report to the
federal government about natural hazards and disasters, even though one of the
report's sponsoring agencies was Environment Canada, which operates the
hurricane centre.

And a high proportion of Halifax and area residents told a researcher they
didn't ever expect to personally suffer hurricane damage, only months before
Hurricane Juan pounded Nova Scotia in September 2003.

"It was obvious that the issue of hurricanes was not on anyone's radar screen.
We wanted people to be concerned about hurricanes, but not freaked out about
them," Bowyer says.

Concern is likely to be the mildest response of anyone who even skims the
hurricane centre's study, issued on CD this summer and which is now receiving
its first wide exposure with this article. Other surprise findings include:

Hurricane Hazel isn't the deadliest tropical storm in Canada's history, not by a
long shot. The 81 deaths Hazel caused in the Toronto area in 1954 are definitely
eclipsed by the 173 now-confirmed dead in a category 2 hurricane in 1927 that
made landfall near Yarmouth, N.S., crossed the province and went on to strike
P.E.I. and the east coast of Newfoundland.

That too is likely overshadowed by a 1900 storm - remnants of the "Galveston
Hurricane" - that hit Canada east of Port Albert, Ont., and then tracked across
southern Ontario, the Gaspe, New Brunswick and Newfoundland. That storm left 53
confirmed dead and another 180 presumed dead, most of them officially listed as
missing at sea off the French island of St. Pierre.

From 1950 to 2000, as many hurricanes were recorded off the Cape Breton coast as
off the coasts of many southern states along what's called Hurricane Alley. Once
in cooler Canadian waters, however, these storms posed much less threat of
hitting land as major hurricanes.

Cars are proving to be death traps in hurricanes. Not counting Hazel's deaths,
which were mostly people drowned in the open or inside houses, more than half
the other 48 hurricane victims in Canada since 1950 drowned inside cars.

By dividing the Atlantic into a grid with squares 100 kilometres on each side,
the researchers discovered an unexpected hurricane hot spot about 1,000
kilometres due south of Shelburne, N.S. During the second half of the 20th
century, 17 hurricanes passed through that patch of ocean, more than anywhere
else, including the Gulf of Mexico east of New Orleans, which experienced only
seven in the same period.

Bowyer says these findings were a surprise largely because the Halifax centre
must focus on forecasting and has never had the time and resources for an
analytical inventory of hurricane activity, known as a "climatology" among
meteorologists.

As well, compiling the death tolls from earlier storms required painstaking
searches through newspaper clippings and ship logs.

"No one ever counted the deaths ship by ship and linked them to weather events.
It took one researcher more than a year," Bowyer says.

The stunning new historical figures for deaths from storm-stricken fishing boats
also highlights a shift in how hurricanes kill people in Atlantic Canada.
Between 1905 and 1954, four out of five of the hurricane fatalities took place
on water. But from 1995 to 2004, three out of four occurred on land.

Experts say this shift demonstrates how fishing captains have become weather
-savvy, using modern technology and communications to move their boats out of
harm's way.

Rebecca Hanson, a graduate student in the University of Toronto's geography
department, found during a survey that people in the fishing industry were the
only segment of the Nova Scotia public aware of potential economic loss from
hurricanes.

Hanson is currently at the hurricane centre completing a master's thesis that
examines what factors made Halifax and area residents most vulnerable to
Hurricane Juan, such as being old or poor.

Simply being warned about an approaching hurricane may not cause some people to
seek safety, she says.

"They may not have the resources to afford a hotel or know someplace else they
can go. And most people have more pressing problems in their lives than
something which might happen," Hanson says.

Yet, the three independent 2005 hurricane forecasts used by Canada's centre -
one by the U.S. government, one from an American university and one by a British
consortium - agree that "might" is becoming a much greater possibility for
Canadians.

Already this year, there have been eight tropical storms and three major
hurricanes in the Atlantic, and the forecasts all call for about 20 tropical
storms overall for the season ending in November, with as many as half becoming
hurricanes and five to seven of those developing into intense hurricanes.

"Lots of hurricanes are something this generation is going to have to contend
with. It will be at least another 10 years before we'll see any sort of downturn
in numbers," Bowyer says.

He fears, however, that too many Canadians are still in denial about the
resurgence of hurricanes in the Atlantic over the past decade. They're wasting
time asking why this has happened, something that's equally puzzling to
scientists.

"I want to shake them and shout: 'They're back, get over it,'" he says.

The new hurricane inventory also reveals another worrying statistic: Half the
tropical storms that reached Canada in the 20th century arrived in September,
with Sept. 8 alone recording eight storms.

Says Bowyer: "My really big concern is that we haven't even hit the high point
of the season and already we've had all this hurricane activity."

A Climatology of Hurricanes for Canada: Improving Our Awareness of the Threat is
available for $10 from the Canadian Hurricane Centre, 45 Alderney Dr.,
Dartmouth, N.S., B2Y 2N6. An interactive version should be posted to the
centre's website this fall.

Relevant websites:

U.S. hurricane predictions

hurricane.atmos.colostate.edu/Forecasts/2005/aug2005/

www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/outlooks/hurricane.html

U.K. hurricane predictions

forecast.mssl.ucl.ac.uk/shadow/about.html

Hurricane FAQ

www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd/tcfaq/tcfaqHED.html

Hurricane Juan in Canada

www.atl.ec.gc.ca/weather/hurricane/juan

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Toronto Star File Photo Hurricane Hazel smashed the main road bridge
over the Humber River when it stormed into Toronto on Oct. 14, 1954. Hazel was
blamed for 81 deaths in the Toronto area but is not Canada's deadliest storm.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                  Copyright 2005 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                          FOCUS - 163 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                               May 8, 2015 Friday

Hurricane readiness tour lands in St. Augustine;
Experts talk about technology and preparedness

BYLINE: Jenna Carpenter

SECTION: Pg. B-5

LENGTH: 528 words


Hurricane season begins June 1, and NOAA officials want First Coast residents to
be prepared.

"Florida hasn't been hit by a hurricane since Hurricane Wilma in 2005, but it'll
happen again. Everyone from Texas to Maine is vulnerable to hurricanes," said
Rick Knabb , director of NOAA National Hurricane Center. "The more you prepare,
the quicker the recovery process will be if you do get hit with a hurricane."

Knabb, other hurricane experts, and hurricane hunter planes are part of the East
Coast Awareness Tour, which visits six Atlantic coastal cities from Nova Scotia
to the Florida Keys.

The tour stopped by St. Augustine's Northeast Florida Regional Airport Thursday.

"We've been doing the tour for about 30 years, but this is the first time both
the U.S. Air Force Reserve and NOAA aircrafts were present at the same time,"
Knabb said.

Knabb has four tips to prepare for hurricane season.

"It's never too soon to start getting prepared, and it's not as hard or complex
as people think," he said. "And the sooner you get it done, you won't have to
rush to get prepared if a hurricane does threaten to hit you."

His tips are:

- Find out if you live in an evacuation zone.

- Get supplies like water, batteries, cash, first-aid kit and non-perishable
foods.

- Meet with your insurance agent to see if you have flood insurance or anything
else you might need.

- Make sure you take proper steps to secure your home.

Daniel Brown , senior hurricane specialist for NHC said once a hurricane hits
land, storm surges are the most dangerous.

"If you don't evacuate and water rises, you have nowhere to go," he said.
"That's why it's important to trust your county emergency team and leave when
they decide you need to."

FORECASTING HURRICANES

In order to research weather conditions, data from what is happening in the
ocean are sent to NHC in real time.

Lt. Dave Cowan is a pilot for the Gulfstream IV, an NOAA hurricane hunter plane
that flies around a hurricane to collect storm data like temperature, wind,
speed and pressure.

To do that, crew members release instruments called dropwindsondes from 45,000
feet in the air. As they fall, they gather the data, which Cowan said helps to
improve the accuracy of hurricane forecasting.

While the Gulfstream IV flies around and above the storm, the U.S. Air Force
Reserve WC-130J flies into the storm.

Crews release dropwindsondes from the aircraft to collect wind, pressure and
temperature data from the eye of the storm, said Lt. Col. Keith Gibson , the
plane's pilot.

"It's a combat aircraft, so it's well suited to combat weather," he said

Gibson and Cowan said they have to worry about the same weather conditions as
the people on the ground. They have to navigate through tornadoes, hail,
lightning and thunderstorms.

But once Gibson fights through the storm, the eye is peaceful.

"There's no wind in the center, so it's the calm in the middle of the storm, he
said. "It's beautiful."

For both men, the data they provide is personal.

"While I'm collecting information needed to track the storm, I'm also worried
about getting my family out," Gibson said. "As hurricane hunters, it adds
accountability because we rely on that information too."

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
Peter Willott St. Augustine Record A National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration hurricane forecasting Gulfstream G-IV airplane sits on the runway
of the Northeast Florida Regional Airport in St. Augustine on Thursday. Peter
Willott St. Augustine Record Crew members of a U.S. Air Force Reserve hurricane
hunter aircraft explain the plane's mission to visitors during a stop in St.
Augustine Thursday, part of a tour of six Atlantic coastal cities to raise
awareness.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 164 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                            March 7, 2007 Wednesday

Active hurricane season predicted; One forecasting agency sees signs but other
will wait for more evidence

BYLINE: Charles Perry Weather

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 464  words


Over the past two years, hurricane activity in the Atlantic went from boom to
bust, leaving weather watchers not knowing what to expect this year.

When the 2006 hurricane season, which runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, came to an
end, not one hurricane had made landfill in the continent. There were only nine
named storms during the year - five of which reached hurricane status, with the
other four staying as tropical storms.

Only two of them, Hurricane Gordon and Hurricane Helene, made it to Category 3
status, but both of them stayed out in the Atlantic Ocean.

This represented a significant decrease from the previous year in both the
volume and intensity of the tropical storms. In 2005, there were 27 tropical
storms, 17 of which became hurricanes and three of which were designated as
Category 5 disturbances.

So, which apparition is most likely to show up this year - the spirit of 2005
with its record-setting numbers of hurricanes or that of 2006 which produced a
barely minimal number of tropical storms, let alone hurricanes.

According to the Washington-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, it will be much closer to 2005, meaning a very active hurricane
season can be expected.

The major reason they give is the weakening of El Niño to be replaced by its
"nasty flip side" - La Niña. The former was given as a major reason for last
year's unusually low number of hurricanes.

NOAA administrator Conrad Lautenbacher said the shift to La Niña is already
under way and showing up in their ocean measurement data re a cooling of the
mid-Pacific equatorial region. He said La Niñas tend to develop from March to
June and reach peak activity by the end of the year.

"It certainly won't be welcome news for those living off the coast right now, "
said Lautenbacher. He said La Niñas typically mean more hurricanes in the
Atlantic and fewer in the Pacific.

However, Ken Reeves of State College, Pa., senior meteorologist and director of
forecast operations for the AccuWeather.com Hurricane Centre, said they will
wait another 2 1/2 to three weeks, before releasing their preliminary outlook
for the hurricane season this year.

Reeves said the weakening of the El Niño and the emergence of La Niña is, for
certain, an indicator of a busy hurricane season this year. "But it is only one
of several indicators," he said.

"We were surprised that they (NOAA) would hang their hat specifically on La Niña
in predicting a more active hurricane year for the Atlantic," he said.

It is safe to say, said Reeves, that a repeat of last year's miniscule hurricane
season is not likely. But the centre requires another two to three weeks to
gauge all the factors, he said, before predicting just how active they expect
the 2007 hurricane season to be.

-Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 165 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                            April 10, 2008 Thursday

Hurricane numbers on the rise this year; And experts say more of the storms will
be major ones

BYLINE: Charles Perry Weather

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 461  words


Although the hurricane season does not officially start until June 1,
researchers are predicting above-average hurricane activity for this year.

Citing rising water temperatures in the Atlantic along with it not being an El
Niño year, hurricane experts at Colorado State University forecast an increase
in both the number of hurricanes and the number of "major" hurricanes.

Last year, there were 15 named storms, six of which reached hurricane status.

This year, the Colorado State hurricane team is also calling for 15 tropical
storms, but with eight of them becoming hurricanes. And four of them are
predicted to be major hurricanes, with winds of at least 178 kilometres (111
miles) an hour.

To be designated a name, the disturbance has to make it to at least tropical
storm status. A tropical storm is the level of severity immediately below that
of a hurricane. So-called "major or intense hurricanes," which rank from
Category 3 to Category 5 on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale of hurricane
severity, are the most destructive.

In the wake of a record-setting hurricane year in 2005, the past two years have
been relatively tame in terms of named storms, Bob Robichaud of Halifax, a
specialist with the Canadian Hurricane Centre, said yesterday in a phone
interview.

In 2005, the previous records for tropical storms, hurricanes, severe hurricanes
and various other categories describing the disturbances were shattered. But the
past two years have seen normal to below-normal hurricane activity.

Last year was an El Niño year, said Robichaud. El Niño's effect is to shear off
the tops of hurricane systems before they can develop.

But this year is a La Niña year, he said. And even though La Niña affects a lot
of weather systems, it has no effect, whatsoever, regarding hurricane activity.

Robichaud said the average number of tropical storms per year is 10, about five
of which develop into hurricanes and two of which become major hurricanes.

He said this is below the prediction this year by Colorado State of 15 named
storms, eight of which will develop into hurricanes and four of which will be
intense hurricanes. But Robichaud emphasized the experts cannot be held firmly
to those numbers as it is impossible to predict tropical storms so exactly this
early in the year. He said the numbers are designed to give the public an idea
of the degree of hurricane activity they can expect this year.

The Canadian Hurricane Centre does not get involved in predicting numbers of
named storms ahead of time, but rather, interprets the forecast figures coming
from these other hurricane facilities, he said.

But for certain, an above normal year for hurricane activity is anticipated this
year, said Robichaud.

n Charles Perry's Weather appears daily in the Times & Transcript.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 166 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                             May 21, 2008 Wednesday

Report says more hurricanes not due to climate change; Everything today is
blamed on global warming, says meteorologist

BYLINE: Charles Perry Weather

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 469  words


Global warming is not responsible for increasing the number of hurricanes. If
anything, warmer temperatures would decrease hurricane activity.

That was the conclusion of a study by research meteorologist Tom Knutson of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which was released
Sunday. The report stated the big increase in hurricane numbers a few years ago
was due to the cyclical nature of these tropical storms, not climate change.

In the study, published online Sunday in the journal Nature Geoscience, Knutson
predicts that by the end of the century, the number of hurricanes in the
Atlantic will fall by 18 per cent.

The report forecasts the number of hurricanes making landfall in the United
States and its neighbours -- anywhere east of Puerto Rico -- will drop by 30 per
cent because of wind factors.

Furthermore, Knutson notes that the biggest hurricanes -- those with winds of
more than 177 kilometres (110 miles) an hour -- would decrease in frequency by
eight per cent. He said tropical storms with winds between 63 and 117 kilometres
(39 and 73 miles) an hour would decrease by 27 per cent.

NOAA hurricane meteorologist Chris Landsea, who was not part of the study,
applauded Knutson's work as "very consistent of what is being said all along.

"I think global warming is a big concern, but when it comes to hurricanes, the
evidence for changes (created by warming temperatures) is pretty darn tiny, "
Landsea said in an Associated Press article.

Ken Reeves of State College, Pa., senior meteorologist and director of forecast
operations for the AccuWeather.com Hurricane Centre, told the Times & Transcript
yesterday that Knutson and Landsea are "absolutely correct" in shooting down
claims that climate change would boost hurricane activity.

"Everything of a disastrous nature that happens in weather these days is being
blamed on either climate change, El Niño or La Niña," he laughed.

In terms of hurricanes, Reeves said experts are in agreement that global warming
cannot be blamed on increasing the numbers of tropical storms. It is cyclical
patterns over many decades that most affect hurricane production and intensity,
not higher temperatures, he said.

The record number of hurricanes in the Atlantic three years ago spurred a lot of
panic from people saying this is yet another negative effect of global warming,
said the AccuWeather.com Hurricane Centre spokesman. Yet, these same people, he
said, ignore the fact that this was followed by two years of less than average
numbers of hurricanes.

Reeves said hurricane activity in the Atlantic basin is more due to the
"cyclical nature of more small scale events than broader based climate change."
Looking over the past few decades, he said there has been no dramatic shift in
hurricane activity.

n Charles Perry's weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 167 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                             March 23, 2009 Monday

Fewer named storms expected in 2009 hurricane season; Warmer Atlantic waters
given as main reason

BYLINE: Charles Perry

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 453  words


Fewer named storms and hurricanes making landfall in the United States are
predicted for this year.

Joe Bastardi of State College, Pa., chief forecaster for the AccuWeather.com
Hurricane Centre, noted that in 2008, there were 16 named storms and eight
hurricanes, five of which were major ones -- that is, they were classified as
Category 3 or higher hurricanes on the Saffir-Simpson scale of storm intensity.

A Category 3 hurricane boasts winds of 179 kilometres (111 miles) an hour or
higher. The categories range between one and five on the Saffir-Simpson scale.

This year, Bastardi said the centre predicts there will be 13 named storms,
eight of which will become hurricanes. To be designated a name, a disturbance
has to reach tropical storm status, the next level below that of a hurricane.

His forecast for a little milder than normal hurricane season is based on the
expected continuation of warmer-than-normal Atlantic Ocean temperature anomalies
into next summer and fall, said Bastardi.

As well, there is likely to be a favourable or neutral wind sheer environment
due to the lack of an El Niño event this year.

Tom Kines of State College, Pa., a spokesman for the Accuweather.com Hurricane
Centre, said the water temperature in the Atlantic Ocean is cooler than what is
needed for a very active hurricane season. Being tropical in origin, he said
hurricanes thrive in warmer waters.

Kines said the centre concludes that three or four of the hurricanes will make
landfall. And typically, he said a few of them will be felt in the Maritimes and
other parts of Canada directly or, as is most often the case, via their
remnants.

In 2008, the Maritime provinces were hit with the remnants of various tropical
storms and hurricanes, even though there were fewer than normal named storms
moving up the Atlantic coast last year.

In some cases, the effect was no more than light rain but, in others, it was
heavy rainfall fanned by gale-force winds.

It was the remnants of hurricanes Hanna and Kyle, both of which occurred in
September, that brought the most damage. The hurricane season officially runs
between June 1 and Nov. 30, although the storms will occasionally occur before
or after those dates.

The AccuWeather.com Hurricane Centre becomes the fourth weather forecasting
group to predict expected hurricane activity for this year.

In the three previous forecasts, Colorado State University predicted there would
be 14 named storms this year, seven of which would reach hurricane status; WSI
Corp. is calling for 13 named storms for 2009, seven of which will be
hurricanes; and the Weather Research Centre is forecasting seven named storms,
four of which would become hurricanes.

* Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 168 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                              May 22, 2009 Friday

Hurricanes cannot be predicted with accuracy; But everyone should be prepared,
says expert

BYLINE: Charles Perry Weather

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 554  words


Hurricane activity, the same as with any other weather activity, cannot be
forecast with any accuracy one month in advance, let alone three, four or more
months, according to Peter Bowyer of Halifax, manager of the Canadian Hurricane
Centre.

With the predictions for hurricane activity for 2009 by the three major
forecasters complete as of yesterday. Bowyer told a news conference that all
three feel the number of named storms will be about normal this year --
"whatever normal means."

As to the Canadian Hurricane Centre's assessment of how many named storms there
will likely be, he replied -- "I have absolutely no idea."

All he can say with any accuracy, said Bowyer, is that every year in the past
decade, at least one to three of these storms have affected the Atlantic region.

So, instead of making predictions on the season ahead, the centre manager said
they are responding to the predictions by the other groups to remind people
hurricane season is close at hand and that everyone should have the necessary
preparations in order, including an evacuation plan and emergency kit.

Meanwhile, at noon, yesterday, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) predicted there would be nine to 14 named storms, four to
seven of which would reach hurricane status. They forecast that one to three of
them would be major hurricanes -- that is, Category 3, 4 or 5 on the Saffir-
Simpson hurricane scale.

Earlier this year, Colorado State University predicted there would be 12 named
storms in 2009, six of which would become hurricanes and two, major hurricanes.
And Tropical Storm Risk, based in the United Kingdom, forecast 11 to 19 named
storms for this year, seven to nine of which would become hurricanes and two to
five, major hurricanes.

To be designated a number, a disturbance has to at least reach tropical storm
status, the level immediately below that of a hurricane.

Picking hurricane numbers in general would be daunting, but to guess how many
named storms might affect Atlantic Canada is virtually impossible, said Bowyer.
It doesn't relate even to the total number of hurricanes in a year.

For instance, in 2005, there were 28 named storms in the Atlantic, setting an
all-time record, he said. "But there were fewer named storms hitting us that
year in Atlantic Canada than the following year (2006). And there were only 10
named storms that year."

In urging people to have an evacuation plan and emergency kit in their homes, he
emphasized that hurricanes can and frequently do hit the Maritimes.

Anyone who thinks differently need only look at the lives lost and massive
property destruction caused to Halifax in 2003 by Hurricane Juan or the massive
rainfall and flooding last year in Saint John as a result of Tropical Storm
Hanna, said Bowyer.

A major problem, he said, is that people do not respect these storms if they are
not directly affected by them. He has friends in Yarmouth, he added, who
wondered why there was all the fuss about Hurricane Juan.

"That is because Yarmouth was not affected by Juan," he said.

Bowyer urged Atlantic Canadians to prepare themselves and their property for
hurricane season by watching and listening for Environment Canada hurricane
bulletins on the Internet, Weatheradio or through the local media.

n Charles Perry's Weather appears daily in the Times & Transcript.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 169 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                              May 28, 2010 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Wild hurricane season predicted

BYLINE: Richard Foot, Canwest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 305  words

DATELINE: HALIFAX


Just when cleanup crews in the oil-slicked Gulf of Mexico are hoping for months
of undisturbed weather, hurricane forecasters in the United States and Canada
warned yesterday that the summer and fall could bring more than a dozen of the
storms hurtling into the Gulf, and up the East Coast of North America.

"We're definitely expecting an above-average hurricane season in the Atlantic
Ocean," said Chris Fogarty, a supervisor at the Canadian Hurricane Centre, at a
news conference in Halifax.

The U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -- the agency that
forecasts the annual number of expected hurricanes -- announced that it expects
14 to 23 named storms to develop in the equatorial waters of the mid-Atlantic
this year.

NOAA said eight to 14 of those could turn into hurricanes, with winds reaching
118 kilometres an hour. Three to seven could become major Category 3 or higher
hurricanes, with winds of at least 177 km/h.

That troubling forecast -- 14 to 23 storms and eight to 14 hurricanes -- far
exceeds the 10 named storms and six hurricanes that have occurred each year, on
average, between 1951 and 2009.

NOAA's prediction was also supported this week by non-government forecasters in
the U.S. Hurricane experts at Colorado State University and at the private firm
Weather Services International are also calling for a highly active hurricane
season, from June to November.

Weather Services International said the 2010 season could be the most active
since 2005, the busiest hurricane season in recorded history, and the year
hurricane Katrina devastated New Orleans.

In Halifax, Fogarty cautioned that it's difficult to accurately predict how many
storms the season will bring. And even if a large number of storms develop in
the Atlantic, he said, it's even harder to know how many might move into
Canadian waters.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2010 Times Colonist, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 170 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              May 15, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

THE SCIENCE OF STORMS

BYLINE: STEVE JERVE

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 546 words


By STEVE JERVE

Storm Team 8 Chief Meteorologist

I heard a lot about the Bermuda High last year. What is it?

The Bermuda High is an area of high pressure that forms over the Atlantic Ocean
during the hurricane season.

Storms move westward on the southern edge of the high-pressure area until
finding the western side of the high. The winds around the high turn the storm
and carry it to the northeast. The turn usually occurs before most storms hit
land. Last year, the high was farther south and west than normal, forcing storms
to travel west longer and hit land before turning northeast.

Do hurricanes spawn tornadoes?

Tornadoes form in the rain bands that rotate around the storm's eye. As
hurricanes move over land, the friction causes the wind at different altitudes
to move at different speeds, creating the rotation that forms tornadoes.

Is one side of a hurricane more powerful than another?

The right side is the most powerful side of a hurricane. As winds move
counterclockwise around the storm, the hurricane's forward speed is added to the
wind speed.

A hurricane moving at 12 mph adds that to the wind speed on the right side of
the eye.

How much rain does a hurricane produce?

A hurricane can drop 20 inches of rain or more. The storm's forward speed
largely determines the rainfall. Faster-moving storms usually produce less rain.

Why is it so difficult to forecast where a hurricane will go?

Hurricanes are hard to predict because there isn't much data about the upper
atmosphere far at sea. Conditions in the upper atmosphere determine a
hurricane's path. As areas of high and low pressure move, their influence on a
storm's track changes.

How fast do hurricanes move?

Most hurricanes travel around 10 to 13 mph, but speeds can vary. Last year
Hurricane Charley dashed across the state at nearly 25 mph; Hurricane Frances
lumbered along at about 8 mph.

Watches, Warnings And Other Terms

When a hurricane is approaching land, the National Hurricane Center will begin
issuing watches and warnings.

* A hurricane watch means hurricane-force winds of more than 73 mph are possible
within 36 hours.

* A hurricane warning is issued when those winds are possible within 24 hours.

* Watches and warnings also are issued for tropical-storm-strength winds of 39
to 73 mph.

Because of uncertainty in forecasting a storm's path and strength, watches and
warnings cover large areas of coastline.

Those alerts mean anyone in a watch or warning area could be hit by the storm.

* A tropical storm generates winds from 39 to 74 mph.

* Tropical storms become hurricanes when winds top 74 mph.

Measuring A Hurricane

Emergency officials decide which areas to evacuate using the Saffir-Simpson
Scale, which ranks hurricanes from Category 1 (minimal) to Category 5
(catastrophic), according to wind speed.

Category 1

Wind: 74 to 95 mph

Storm surge: 4 to 5 feet

Damage: Minimal

Category 2

Wind: 96 to 110 mph

Storm surge: 6 to 8 feet

Damage: Moderate

Category 3

Wind: 111 to 130 mph

Storm surge: 9 to 12 feet

Damage: Extensive

Category 4

Wind: 131 to 155 mph

Storm surge: 13 to 18 feet

Damage: Extreme

Category 5

Wind: 156 mph plus

Storm surge: Higher than 18 feet

Damage: Catastrophic

Source: National Weather Service

Copyright © 2005, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: HURRICANE GUIDE 2005

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
STEVE JERVE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 171 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              May 15, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

THE SCIENCE OF STORMS

BYLINE: STEVE JERVE, Storm Team 8 Chief Meteorologist

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 544 words


By STEVE JERVE

Storm Team 8 Chief Meteorologist

I heard a lot about the Bermuda High last year. What is it?

The Bermuda High is an area of high pressure that forms over the Atlantic Ocean
during the hurricane season.

Storms move westward on the southern edge of the high-pressure area until
finding the western side of the high. The winds around the high turn the storm
and carry it to the northeast. The turn usually occurs before most storms hit
land. Last year, the high was farther south and west than normal, forcing storms
to travel west longer and hit land before turning northeast.

Do hurricanes spawn tornadoes?

Tornadoes form in the rain bands that rotate around the storm's eye. As
hurricanes move over land, the friction causes the wind at different altitudes
to move at different speeds, creating the rotation that forms tornadoes.

Is one side of a hurricane more powerful than another?

The right side is the most powerful side of a hurricane. As winds move
counterclockwise around the storm, the hurricane's forward speed is added to the
wind speed.

A hurricane moving at 12 mph adds that to the wind speed on the right side of
the eye.

How much rain does a hurricane produce?

A hurricane can drop 20 inches of rain or more. The storm's forward speed
largely determines the rainfall. Faster-moving storms usually produce less rain.

Why is it so difficult to forecast where a hurricane will go?

Hurricanes are hard to predict because there isn't much data about the upper
atmosphere far at sea. Conditions in the upper atmosphere determine a
hurricane's path. As areas of high and low pressure move, their influence on a
storm's track changes.

How fast do hurricanes move?

Most hurricanes travel around 10 to 13 mph, but speeds can vary. Last year
Hurricane Charley dashed across the state at nearly 25 mph; Hurricane Frances
lumbered along at about 8 mph.

Watches, Warnings And Other Terms

When a hurricane is approaching land, the National Hurricane Center will begin
issuing watches and warnings.

A hurricane watch means hurricane-force winds of more than 73 mph are possible
within 36 hours.

A hurricane warning is issued when those winds are possible within 24 hours.

Watches and warnings also are issued for tropical-storm-strength winds of 39 to
73 mph.

Because of uncertainty in forecasting a storm's path and strength, watches and
warnings cover large areas of coastline.

Those alerts mean anyone in a watch or warning area could be hit by the storm.

A tropical storm generates winds from 39 to 74 mph. Tropical storms become
hurricanes when winds top 74 mph.

Measuring A Hurricane

Emergency officials decide which areas to evacuate using the Saffir-Simpson
Scale, which ranks hurricanes from Category 1 (minimal) to Category 5
(catastrophic), according to wind speed.

Category 1

Wind: 74 to 95 mph

Storm surge: 4 to 5 feet

Damage: Minimal

Category 2

Wind: 96 to 110 mph

Storm surge: 6 to 8 feet

Damage: Moderate

Category 3

Wind: 111 to 130 mph

Storm surge: 9 to 12 feet

Damage: Extensive

Category 4

Wind: 131 to 155 mph

Storm surge: 13 to 18 feet

Damage: Extreme

Category 5

Wind: 156 mph plus

Storm surge: Higher than 18 feet

Damage: Catastrophic

Source: National Weather Service

Copyright © 2005, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: HURRICANE GUIDE 2005

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 172 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              May 20, 2007 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

And Then On To Show Business

BYLINE: KEVIN WALKER, The Tampa Tribune

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 556 words


By KEVIN WALKER

The Tampa Tribune

After you make all the practical preparations for hurricane season, it's OK if
you don't want to think about them anymore.

It's not rational, of course, the idea that if you don't think about something,
it won't happen. But it's understandable and probably sane.

Still, with all the ink and airtime devoted to hurricanes, it's natural to be
curious about the subject.

Here are a few suggestions for viewing and reading.

Movies

"Key Largo": This classic, directed by John Huston, stars Humphrey Bogart,
Lauren Bacall and Edward G. Robinson. The hurricane is pivotal but only one
component of a great story about gangsters holed up in a Key Largo hotel.

"Invasion": In this television show from 2005, a hurricane hits a Florida town
and sets off a chain of events involving luminescent water creatures and
strangely altered humans. As if the hurricane wasn't bad enough.

"When the Levee Broke: A Requiem in Four Acts": Spike Lee's documentary about
the devastation in New Orleans from Hurricane Katrina - and the government's
handling of the rescue mission and the aftermath of the storm - uses the natural
disaster to provide an insightful, tragic and often infuriating look at the
social and economic divisions in the United States.

"The Day After Tomorrow": Not to be outdone by previous disaster films, this
2004 special effects-polooza features hurricanes, tornadoes, tidal waves and an
ice age.

"Hurricane on the Bayou": Currently at the Imax theater at the Museum of Science
& Industry, this documentary focuses on the wetlands surrounding New Orleans
before and after Katrina. The movie features four musicians, and the soundtrack
contains great Cajun music.

Books

"Condominium" by John D. MacDonald: MacDonald's Travis McGee series gets all the
ink, but this Florida author also wrote plenty of other interesting novels. This
one remains timely, as it goes into detail about the shoddy construction and
corrupt government that allow buildings on beaches that cannot withstand
hurricane-force winds.

"Hurricane Punch" by Tim Dorsey: Released this year, this book continues to
follow the escapades of killer/philosopher Serge A. Storms, but this time he is
chasing hurricanes across the state.

"Stormy Weather" by Carl Hiaasen: Hiaasen's usual collection of zany characters
- including a former governor turned hermit who licks toads - finds their lives
intertwining after a devastating hurricane hits the Sunshine State.

"Divine Wind: The History and Science of Hurricanes" by Kerry Emanuel: A
professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Emanuel explains the
science of hurricanes from how they develop to why it's so hard to predict them.

"Katrina: The Ruin and Recovery of New Orleans" by the staff of The
Times-Picayune: This powerful collection of photos and stories about Hurricane
Katrina is a moving depiction of the destructive force of nature.

"Hemingway's Hurricane" by Phil Scott: Hurricane Katrina was just the latest in
a series of natural disasters to raise questions about how the government aids
victims. One of the most infamous was the Labor Day Hurricane of 1935. Ernest
Hemingway wrote about it, after discovering many of the victims died when they
were not allowed to leave.

Copyright © 2007, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: HURRICANE GUIDE 2007

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 173 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            November 1, 2010 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricanes go steer crazy

BYLINE: ROB SHAW, rshaw@tampatrib.com

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 670 words


Low pressure directs most of the storms away from mainland

BY ROB SHAW

rshaw@tampatrib.com

One by one, they just keep coming.

It started with Alex. Along the way, there was Earl, Fiona, Igor and Otto, just
to name a few. The most recent one is Tomas.

And with just a couple of minor exceptions, they all avoided Florida and the
rest of the United States.

In a hurricane season so busy that we've almost run through the names on the
list, it's been an uneventful year for landfalls, unless you were in Bermuda,
Mexico or Central America.

"We have been lucky," said Paul Close, meteorologist with the National Weather
Service at Ruskin. "The majority of them stayed away."

Thankfully so.

After all, Hurricane Danielle packed a monstrous potential for calamity with her
135 mph winds. Hurricane Earl outdid her with a 145 mph punch. And then there
was Hurricane Igor, whose 155 mph winds have topped the chart so far.

"The number and intensity of major hurricanes is what stands out this year,"
said Steve Jerve, chief meteorologist at WFLA-TV, News Channel 8. "It could have
been bad if these storms had made landfall."

So far, with all of November still to come, there have been 19 named storms, 12
of which became hurricanes. Of those, five were major hurricanes -- with winds
of 130 mph or higher. There are only two names left on this season's list.

Only a minimal Tropical Storm Bonnie impacted Florida's coastline, slicing
across the southern tip of the peninsula in the middle of July before dying
harmlessly in the Gulf of Mexico.

Ten of them stayed far out in the Atlantic Ocean, well away from the East Coast
of the United States.

Many of those were forming as soon as they rolled off the coast of Africa as
classic Cape Verde storms, said Dennis Feltgen, a spokesman with the National
Hurricane Center in Miami.

With 3,000 miles of warm ocean waters that were well above normal in
temperature, Feltgen said, there was plenty of fuel for them to grow into major
hurricanes. That's exactly what hurricanes such as Danielle, Earl and Igor did.

The one that got the most attention was Earl, which stalked the East Coast of
the country and had residents from North Carolina to the Northeast and even
Canada on alert. "It got everybody's attention coming that close to the U.S.,"
Feltgen said.

With so many of the storms and hurricanes forming so far to the east, it also
gave them extra time to curve away from the United States in the warm waters of
the Atlantic.

A persistent trough of low pressure over the eastern quarter of the United
States helped to erode the western side of the high pressure over the Atlantic
that normally might keep pushing systems to the west.

"Out of troughs of low pressure, steering winds turn southwest," the hurricane
center spokesman said. "They have an alley now."

Or, as Close from the local weather service office said, the low pressure "acted
as a shield."

Either way, hurricane after hurricane got caught up in those steering currents
and ended up going north in the Atlantic. Bermuda, rather than the East Coast of
the United States, was often caught in the crosshairs.

Hurricane center officials caution there are more than four weeks left in the
season.

They point to examples such as this year's Hurricane Richard and Hurricane Tomas
or Hurricane Kate in mid-November 1985 to prove that late-season activity is
still a threat -- especially in Florida.

That's because many of the late-season storms that form do so in the still-warm
waters of the Caribbean. And once they are there, they can get sucked to the
north and northeast by troughs of low pressure descending across the U.S.

"Don't go raiding the hurricane supplies just yet," Feltgen said.

rshaw@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7999

Photo Credit: STAFF, SOURCE WEATHER UNDERGROUND

Photo Credit: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

Photo: Waves crashed onto the beach at John Smith's Bay in Bermuda when Hurrican
Igor struck the island nation in September.

Copyright © 2010, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2010 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 174 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                              May 23, 2014 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

NOAA sees;
moderate;
hurricane;
season;
Forecasters think El Niño's vertical wind shear will stifle storms.

BYLINE:  By Matt Morgan   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 510 words


South Florida residents can expect a near-average to below-average hurricane
season this year, but officials warn to take that information with caution.

This year's hurricane season, which begins June 1, is forecast to be about
average or slightly less active than is typical, NOAA Administrator Kathryn
Sullivan said Thursday.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicts eight to 13
tropical storms and three to six hurricanes, of which one or two will be major
hurricanes of Category 3 or higher.

The two main reasons for the lower predictions are an expected formation of the
weather phenomenon known as El Niño, which could stop hurricanes and prevent
them from forming, and average Atlantic Ocean temperatures that will not be as
conducive to major storms, Sullivan said. The probability numbers show a 50
percent chance for a below normal year, a 40 percent chance for a near-normal
year and a 10 percent chance for an above-normal year.

Historical averages for a normal year are 12 tropical storms, 6.5 hurricanes and
two major hurricanes.

But the lower prediction is not a call for Atlantic coast residents to relax,
she said. Even in a relatively inactive year, a single storm can change
everything.

"Whatever the probabilities are, one storm can wreak tremendous havoc," Sullivan
said.

In 1992, Hurricane Andrew -- which happened at the end of an El Niño -- caused
massive damage in South Florida.

El Niño has yet to form this year, but forecasters expect that it will during
the summer or early fall. Forecasters did not predict how strong or prevalent it
will be.

The weather patterns form in cycles and occur about every three to five years,
said Gerry Bell, NOAA's lead hurricane forecaster. The major factor that helps
the pattern to deter hurricanes is the increased vertical wind shear, he said.

Bell added that with the high level of recent hurricane activity -- 12
above-average years in the past two decades -- the El Niño and average ocean
temperature factors should work against the trend. He said the two fighting
forces are part of the reason for the milder outlook.

Last month, researchers at Colorado State University predicted an even lighter
hurricane season than NOAA, with nine named tropical storms, three becoming
hurricanes including one major hurricane.

When preparing for hurricane season, all residents of the Atlantic coast need a
firm plan, said Joseph Nimmich, Federal Emergency Management Agency associate
administrator for response and recovery.

Nimmich said everyone should research an evacuation plan, whether it be at a
shelter hotel or with family and keep a stash of food and water for 72 hours.
Most importantly, he said, everyone needs to heed evacuation warnings.

"It is extraordinary what the power of water can do," he said, adding that
people who don't evacuate could put first responders at risk.

Florida has gone eight years without a hurricane landfall since Wilma in 2005.
Last year's total included 14 tropical storms, two hurricanes and no major
hurricanes.

mmorgan@pbpost.com Twitter: @metromattmorgan

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2014 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 175 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            November 29, 2015 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

El Niño knocked storms down in their tracks;
El Niño's storm-killing impact was powerful;
Season ends; streak intact;
Season ends on 10-year streak;
Hurricane season's end cements 10-year streak;
strea a decade of no Florida landfalls;
It has been a decade since a hurricane made landfall in Florida.

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1059 words


In the spring of 2015, the global atmospheric force El Niño began mustering a
strength so formidable that one scientist likened it to Godzilla.

The meteorological event, one of the most potent on record, raged through
hurricane season to dissolve burgeoning storms with the efficiency of the campy
monster's atomic breath.

And with storm season whimpering to an end Monday, 2015 marks an unprecedented
10 years since a hurricane has hit the Sunshine State.

But the lack of landfalls this year doesn't mean there weren't surprises, and a
few tense moments.

Tropical Storm Ana popped up May 8 nearly a month before hurricane season's
official June 1 start date. August's Hurricane Fred was the first hurricane to
hit the Cape Verde Islands since 1892. Tropical Storm Erika drove some South
Florida residents to batten down the hatches and board up the windows when it
was forecast to be a Category 1 with a bull's-eye on Palm Beach County.

Florida declared a state of emergency in preparation for Erika, but the August
storm never reached hurricane strength, sputtering to its death over the
mountains of Cuba.

"This was a below-average season, but not astonishingly below," said Tim Hall, a
hurricane researcher and senior scientist at NASA Goddard Institute for Space
Studies. "It's just that the storms didn't make a U.S. landfall."

In all, there were 11 named storms in the Atlantic this season, four of which
became hurricanes.

The strongest, Hurricane Joaquin, was the 10th named storm. It formed Sept. 27
hundreds of miles southwest of Bermuda, and wasn't given much chance of
developing into a major threat.

But Joaquin defied forecasts, quickly accelerating to a Category 4 hurricane
with 155 mph winds -- 1 mph shy of a Cat 5 storm. It raked the southern Bahamas
and is blamed for the deaths of 33 people who were aboard a cargo ship that sank
en route to Puerto Rico from Jacksonville.

"I'm sure there will be a lot of studies about what was missed with Joaquin and
why it ramped up so much," Colorado State researcher Philip Klotzbach said.
"There was just this little pocket that Joaquin found that was a friendly
environment and it stayed there."

The official National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 2015 hurricane
forecast predicted a 90 percent chance of a below-average hurricane season. Its
August predictions were for six to 10 named storms, one to four hurricanes and
zero to one major hurricanes.

The average hurricane season has 12 named storms, six hurricanes and three major
hurricanes.

While the sheer number of named storms in 2015 was more than originally
forecast, the four hurricanes were within the predicted amounts. But forecasters
didn't expect two major hurricanes.

Besides Joaquin, tiny hurricane Danny in August proved to be a wily cyclone with
an unexpected punch. It reached Category 3 strength before weakening to a
tropical storm 520 miles east southeast of the Leeward Islands.

"In terms of counts, it's been really close to an average season," said Hugh
Willoughby, a research professor at Florida International University and a
retired 27-year veteran of the NOAA hurricane division. "But what really counts
is ACE."

ACE, or accumulated cyclone energy, is a measure of a hurricane's strength and
duration.

The ACE for 2015 was about 65 percent of the median between 1981 and 2010, and
nearly half of that energy was generated by one storm: Joaquin.

That means while Mother Nature was able to boil up a respectable number of
storms, El Niño cut them down before they could gain much ground.

"A tropical cyclone is like a haystack," said Rob Gutro, deputy news chief and
manager for NASA's hurricane web page. "When it faces vertical wind shear from
El Niño, winds blowing in different directions, it falls apart."

El Niño is a periodic warming of the water across the eastern path of the
Pacific Ocean. The warm water makes radical shifts to rainfall patterns,
suppressing showers over Indonesia and moving them to the eastern part of the
Pacific.

There, strong thunderstorms form, which influences wind patterns in the upper
atmosphere, reducing wind shear in the Pacific and increasing it in the
Atlantic.

The Eastern Pacific has had 18 named storms this season, including 12
hurricanes. Hurricane Patricia, which barreled into Mexico in late October, is
the strongest hurricane ever tracked by the National Hurricane Center with
sustained winds of 200 mph.

Dennis Feltgen, a meteorologist and spokesman for the National Hurricane Center,
said officials there adjusted communication techniques after getting guff about
Tropical Storm Erika's forecast.

Feltgen said while the media were accurately relaying the uncertainty in the
forecast, there was so much attention given the storm it ramped up anxiety.

"There was a constant drumbeat from stations running two, three and four
packages on this thing," Feltgen said. "That doesn't quite emphasize the
uncertainty."

For the first time after Erika, the National Hurricane Center started including
"key messages" with each of its forecasts that it hoped condensed the overall
message.

"It really helped keep everyone on the same page," Feltgen said. "We'll
definitely keep doing that."

He may get more practice in 2016. While it's too early to tell what the 2016
hurricane season will bring, it's almost certain there won't be an El Niño of
2015's prowess in place.

"Ten years without one lousy hurricane, that's just phenomenal to me," Klotzbach
said. "That kind of streak can't continue forever."

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

GET MORE WEATHER ONLINE

Follow weather reporter Kimberly Miller's updates on twitter @kmillerweather and
at The Post's WeatherPlus blog at: palmbeach post.com/weatherplus

named atlantic storms of 2015

The 2015 Atlantic hurricane season included 11 named storms and four hurricanes.

Date Strength

Tropical Storm Ana May 8-11 Top wind 46 mph

Tropical Storm Bill June 16-20 Top wind 57 mph

Tropical Storm Claudette July 13-14 Top wind 52 mph

Hurricane Danny Aug. 18-24 Top wind 115 mph

Tropical Storm Erika Aug. 25-29 Top wind 52 mph

Hurricane Fred Aug. 30-Sept. 6 Top wind 86 mph

Tropical Storm Grace Sept. 5-9 Top wind 51 mph

Tropical Storm Henri Sept. 9-11 Top wind 40 mph

Tropical Storm Ida Sept. 18-27 Top wind 50 mph

Hurricane Joaquin Sept. 28-Oct. 8 Top wind 155 mph

Hurricane Kate Nov. 9-12 Top wind 75 mph

Source: Unisys Weather, National Hurricane Center

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 176 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             June 1, 2016 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Is state poised for big hurricane?;
Previous hurricane droughts were broken by devastating storms;
Previous lengthy hurricane droughts have ended with big storms, but forecasters
say it's all chance. Big storms have ended previous droughts, and it's been 10
years here, but experts say it's all chance.

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 952 words


Florida is enjoying more than 10 years untouched by hurricane-force winds -- an
unprecedented era of climatological calm that has long surpassed previous
storm-free stretches.

As of today, the start of the 2016 tropical cyclone season, the last hurricane
to touch the Sunshine State was 3,873 days ago when Hurricane Wilma bullied
ashore near Cape Romano in October 2005.

Hurricane experts mostly agree this will be a near-to-above average season as La
Niña chances increase, but whether one of the storms will break Florida's epic
hurricane drought is unknown.

What is known is that previous drought-busters were doozies.

Florida's prior record-long stretch of no hurricane days was six years -- 2,191
days -- beginning in 1979.

Hurricane Elena ended that streak in August 1985, drifting close enough to
Florida's Gulf Coast for 92 mph winds to be felt in Pensacola and sending 10
feet of storm surge into Apalachicola, according to National Hurricane Center
records.

In third place for the most extended break between storms was 1,778 days
beginning in 1987.

The storm that ended that reprieve is infamous in the annals of hurricane
history: 1992's Category 5 Hurricane Andrew.

"Hurricanes were not at the top of anyone's mind as the season started in 1992,"
said Weather Channel meteorologist Bryan Norcross, who is credited with saving
lives during Hurricane Andrew as a forecaster for a Miami TV station.

Norcross said he doesn't count 1987's Hurricane Floyd when considering the
drought timeline because it was a weak storm that mostly affected the Keys.

"So in peoples' minds, the hurricane drought really went back to 1965 and
Hurricane Betsy or Hurricane David in 1979," Norcross said when asked about what
people were thinking as the 1992 storm season approached. "We did a hurricane
special on WTVJ, which we did twice a year, but nobody was dreading hurricane
season."

Brian McNoldy, a senior research associate at the University of Miami Rosenstiel
School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, who put together the information on
Florida's hurricane droughts, said the good news is there's no trend in what
kind of storms end long breaks between cyclones.

That means Florida isn't destined to have its current streak broken by an
Andrewesque disaster, but there's no guarantee it won't, either.

"It's somewhat of a random thing that you can't get too much out of," McNoldy
said. "It's just that we're still in this crazy long gap which has never
happened before, and I can't assign much else to it other than a lot of luck."

While, in general, more hurricanes hit Florida during La Niña years than when El
Niño is standing guard, Andrew was an outlier.

In 1992, a moderate El Niño kept the number of hurricanes to just four, but it
let Andrew slip through. The storm, which clocked 186 mph sustained winds,
destroyed 24,524 homes in South Florida and damaged 101,241 others, according to
the NHC.

During El Niño, water across the eastern path of the Pacific Ocean warms, making
radical shifts to rainfall patterns. Showers are suppressed over Indonesia and
moved to the eastern part of the Pacific. There, strong thunderstorms form,
which influence wind patterns in the upper atmosphere, reducing wind shear in
the Pacific and increasing it in the Atlantic.

Westerly wind shear in the Atlantic works to tear apart hurricanes as they
develop.

With La Niña, waters in the Pacific cool, rainfall retreats to the west and the
westerly winds wane -- leaving the Atlantic and the U.S. vulnerable to tropical
cyclones.

As of May 23, the Climate Prediction Center at the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration was forecasting a 75 percent chance of La Niña by
fall.

Hurricane Elena, which spawned multiple tornadoes in Central Florida as it
stalled off the state's west coast, came during a La Niña year.

"If you say Florida is due for a hurricane because we haven't had one in a long
time, that's a misconception," said Timothy Hall, a senior scientist and
hurricane researcher with NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies. "There is a
lot of pseudo-randomness in the system that is essentially weather noise when
you get down to asking more precise and particular questions."

Last year Hall released a study that found the 10-year absence of major storms
-- Category 3 or higher -- in the U.S. is a function of basically what McNoldy
said -- luck.

Hall's research included running 1,000 computer simulations based on sea surface
temperatures and Atlantic hurricanes from 1950 to 2012. The result was the
simulation of 63,000 Atlantic hurricane seasons.

"We also found there is no evidence that the chances of a major landfall in the
next season are related to how deep you are in a drought," Hall said. "It's kind
of like flipping coins."

While Florida's emergency managers fear people have grown lazy about preparing
for hurricanes in the decade since Wilma, Norcross said there is more awareness
of the danger, and more concern.

Part of that has to do with hurricane insurance, he said. Hit people in the
pocketbooks and they pay more attention.

But ample media outlets reporting on storms, and discussion of government
response, especially after 2005's Hurricane Katrina, also boost awareness.

"In 1992, people didn't talk about hurricanes very much, and there certainly
wasn't as much angst as there is now," Norcross said. "There was an assumption
that there would not be a hurricane, if people thought about it at all, which
mostly they didn't."

Now what he hears is, "I have a feeling that this will be our year."

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

BE PREPARED

Meteorologists are watching an area in the Gulf of Mexico for possible tropical
development in the next week. Follow @KMillerWeather on Twitter for updates.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2016 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 177 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                             October 3, 2016 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

HOW ARE HURRICANE INTENSITIES MEASURED?

BYLINE:  STEVEN A. ACKERMAN and JONATHAN MARTIN - UW-Madison department of
atmospheric and oceanic sciences

SECTION: LOCAL; ASK THE WEATHER GUYS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 368 words


Q: How are hurricane intensities measured?

A: An obvious hurricane threat is its powerful wind, which can blow in a single
spot for many hours.

Wind damage is such a hallmark of hurricanes that hurricane intensities are
classified by meteorologists using the Saffir-Simpson scale, which rates
hurricanes on a scale of 1 to 5 based on the damage their winds would cause upon
landfall.

Major hurricanes are those classified as Category 3 and higher on this scale.
Category 3 hurricanes have a one-minute sustained wind between 111 mph and 130
mph.

The one-minute sustained winds in a Category 5 hurricane are greater than 155
mph.

The category of a hurricane is determined by reconnaissance aircraft flights
into the storm along with analysis of satellite images.

The satellite approach is led by scientists at UW-Madison as part of the
Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies, or CIMSS.

This collaboration between the university and the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) supports research on weather satellites.

Hurricane Matthew intensified in the Atlantic Ocean this past weekend and will
threaten the U.S. mainland this week.

A reconnaissance plane recently measured wind speeds in this storm and those
measurements along with the CIMSS analysis led NOAA to list Matthew as a
Category 5 storm.

This is the first Category 5 hurricane in the Atlantic basin since Hurricane
Felix in 2007.

Fortunately, most hurricanes do not produce the extreme winds linked with the
highest category on the Saffir-Simpson scale, but any category storm can do
major damage when it hits land.

Flooding from hurricanes causes major damage to shorelines and buildings. The
winds in a hurricane push ocean water in front of them. The stronger the wind,
the more water is "piled up."

As the hurricane nears shore, the wind pushes this water inland. This process of
wind-induced seawater flooding is called storm surge.

Historically, the storm surge has caused as much as 90 percent of all
hurricane-related deaths.

Flooding from rain can also be dangerous.

Hurricane Floyd made landfall in 1999 as a Category 2 storm. Flooding that
ensued along the U.S. East Coast accounted for most of the death toll of 57.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2016 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 178 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                            August 4, 2007 Saturday
                                  ALL EDITION

The storm season may still have bite;
The very factors that led to downgraded forecasts are waning as September looms

BYLINE: By ANNA SCOTT anna.scott@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 628 words


The factors that led most major hurricane forecasting teams to downgrade their
predictions are waning. September -- typically the strongest month for storms --
could pack a wallop.

Researchers at Colorado State University dropped their predictions just slightly
on Friday, but said conditions were likely to change soon and boost the threat.

Hurricane-busting wind shear is low, said CSU forecaster Phil Klotzbach.

The African dust storms thought to cool the ocean are beginning to thin and are
likely to disappear by next month, coinciding with the peak of the storm season.

And there is a still a likelihood that La Nina, a weather system that fuels
hurricanes, will develop.

With two named storms and one named subtropical storm, the season is already
showing signs of above-average activity.

"Typically we don't get the second named storm of the year until Aug. 6,"
Klotzbach said. "It hasn't been an inactive season. The reason a lot of people
think that is because of the seven storms in June and July in 2005. But that was
an anomaly."

CSU dropped its forecast for named storms this season to 15 from 17. It also
predicted fewer hurricanes, only 8 instead of 9.

At least two other major forecasters have already dropped their predictions,
some by as much as 30 percent.

It is not unusual for forecasters to drop their predictions midway through the
season. The Colorado team raised its forecast in 2005 and lowered it in 2004,
2006 and 2007.

The new forecast calls for above-average hurricane activity in the remaining
months of the season.

CSU's predictions are for three named storms, two hurricanes and one intense
hurricane in August; five named storms, four hurricanes and two intense
hurricanes in September; and five named storms, two hurricanes and one intense
hurricane in October and November combined.

There is a 68 percent chance a major hurricane will hit the U.S. coast this
month, and a 44 percent chance it will hit the Gulf Coast of Florida, according
to the new forecast. Both percentages are more than 10 percentage points above
the average.

Dust storms happen when thunderstorms over the Sahara desert kick up sand and
carry the plumes to large parts of the Atlantic Ocean. Scientists speculate that
the dust blocks some sunlight from the water. Ocean temperatures have only
cooled slightly but one degree is still enough to thwart some storms.

The dust clouds have been rolling off the coast of Africa every three to five
days since late May. The clouds have changed consistency in the past two weeks.

"They've become weak and there's not a lot of stuff in the air; that's really
what's starting to die off," said Amato Evan, a University of Wisconsin climate
scientist who studies African dust.

La Nina, a Pacific Ocean weather pattern, was expected to appear earlier this
summer and bring hurricanes with it. It is present in a weak system that could
strengthen.

Tropical Storm Risk, a London-based forecaster used by insurance companies,
dropped its hurricane prediction 7 hurricanes from 8, and is expected to drop
that estimate further in a forecast coming out Monday.

Weather Services International, which forecasts for energy companies, dropped
its prediction to 6 hurricanes from 8.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration plans to release a new
forecast on Thursday. It projected 13 to 17 named storms this season.

MAKING NEW PREDICTIONS

Colorado State University's revised predictions for 2007. Averages are for 1950
to 2000.

HURRICANE SEASON

* Named storms

Average Old New

9.6 17 15

* Hurricanes

5.9 9 8

**Intense hurricanes

2.3 5 4

AUGUST

* Named storms: 3

* Hurricanes: 2

**Intense hurricanes: 1

SEPTEMBER

* Named storms: 5

* Hurricanes: 4

**Intense hurricanes: 2

OCTOBER-NOVEMBER

* Named storms: 5

* Hurricanes: 2

**Intense hurricanes: 1

*Category 3 or above

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  2007 ATLANTIC HURRICANE SEASON

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
 COURTESY PHOTO/NOAA/AOML/HURRCANE RESEARCH DIVISION Saharan dust gives the sky
an orange glow in the eastern Caribbean. The dust blocks sunlight from the
Atlantic Ocean, keeping the water from warming and producing storms.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 179 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                             August 27, 2007 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

PEAK PRESSURE;
THE BERMUDA HIGH that kept Hurricane Dean away from Florida usually shifts in
the season, leaving the state more vulnerable to storms

BYLINE: By ANNA SCOTT anna.scott@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 656 words


A high-pressure system hovered over Florida last week, shielding it from
Hurricane Dean's devastating 160 mph winds. But if the storm had arrived in
mid-September it could have been a different story.

Ocean temperatures, trade winds and the jet stream all work together to carry
hurricanes to the United States. But the Bermuda high, more than any other
single factor, determines where they hit.

Last week, the Bermuda high was strong enough to push Dean south and west of the
peninsula and through the Caribbean.

The high develops in summer between Bermuda and the Portuguese Azores islands,
bringing warm weather to the U.S. and Europe and directing hurricanes around its
periphery.

But starting in a few weeks, the high will likely drift south or east, weakening
and creating an opening for storms to tunnel north into the Gulf and Florida.

It happens so often that, historically, the peak of Florida's hurricane season
is later than the Atlantic season as a whole.

Forecasters do not know yet when the high pressure will shift, or just how
unfavorable to Florida that will be, but falling temperatures up North will be a
tell-tale sign that storms could start heading to the state.

It works like this: Winds swirl clockwise inside the high pressure system.
Hurricanes travel along its outer edge, like the links in a bike chain.

Later in hurricane season, low-pressure systems begin to push against the high,
weakening it and forcing temperatures to drop. The mix of high and low creates
friction, or holes, that draw hurricanes north into the Gulf or up along the
state's east coast. The storms search northward for the path of least
resistance.

Florida might have suffered had Hurricane Dean come across when the high was in
a more late-season position.

Under a changing pattern often found later, 8 out of 10 times a storm such as
Dean would have moved northwest and threatened the Gulf states, including
Florida, said Jim Elsner, professor of geography at Florida State University.

"If that high doesn't stand in their way, you tend to get a recurviture up to
the U.S.," Elsner said.

Every summer, the high sets up in a different place. This year, it took up a
more typical position over the southeastern U.S. -- good for repelling
hurricanes but bad for bringing record-breaking heat to southeastern states and
flooding, and drought to states on the edge of the weather system.

Recent history suggests just how powerful a factor the Bermuda high is in
determining whether Florida is hit or passed over.

Early in the 2004 hurricane season, the Bermuda high was positioned off the east
coast of Florida, creating a pathway for hurricanes to travel across the
Atlantic and up the state's east coast.

In 2005, its position to the southwest drew storms like Katrina and Rita from
the Caribbean into the Gulf.

Last year, the high was located further east in the Atlantic Ocean, grabbing
storms like Florence and turning them north into the cooler water of the
Atlantic before they could reach Florida's east coast.

Although the high pressure system in its current location tends to move south
and east later in the season, it is also almost constantly breaking rules,
migrating and foiling long-term forecasts.

"We can't rely on it and say, oh, it's going to be here for eight weeks," said
Corene Matyas, a geography professor at the University of Florida.

"It's not going to maintain optimal strength forever, though. It's a question of
when it starts to weaken. Will it be tomorrow or next week? It gets sketchy."

The system can be so fickle that, at any time, it is capable of moving into
other positions that either help or harm Florida.

"The steering currents constantly change," said Richard Pasch, hurricane
specialist at the National Hurricane Center. "It just happened to be situated
over the southeastern United States for the last week or so. There are many ways
to get a hurricane to Florida. We're obviously not out of the woods by any
stretch."

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: THE SCIENCE OF HURRICANES THIRD IN A SERIES

GRAPHIC: PHOTO GRAPHIC
 ASSOCIATED PRESS / ALEXANDRE MENEGHINI Residents walk past debris at the beach
of Tecolutla, in Veracruz, southern Mexico, last week. Hurricane Dean, which
crashed into the Gulf coast of Mexico on Wednesday, might have hit Florida had
the Bermuda high not forced it to the south and west. STAFF GRAPHIC/ JENNIFER
F.A. BORRESEN How the high-pressure ridge directs storms More than tradewinds or
the jet stream, the high-pressure ridge plays a major role in what steers
hurricanes. During the summer months, the ridge is strong and can move over
Florida, protecting it from hurricanes. This high-pressure ridge can shift and
weaken in the fall as cooler air pushes south, leaving Florida more vulnerable
to hurricanes. Summer months The high-pressure system develops in the summer
between Bermuda and the Azores, bringing warm weather to the U.S. Hurricanes
like Dean cannot move through a strong system and are steered around it. Every
year, the high sets up in a different place. Fall months Starting in late
September, the high-pressure ridge will likely drift south or east, weakened by
low-pressure systems moving south. This creates an opening for hurricanes to
penetrate the high, placing Florida at greater risk. Landfalls in Florida 122
hurricanes made landfall in Florida from 1800 to 2006 7 HURRICANES JUNE 7
HURRICANES JULY 23 HURRICANES AUGUST 44 HURRICANES SEPTEMBER 37 HURRICANES
OCTOBER 4 HURRICANES NOVEMEBER (Graphic available on microfilm)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 180 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                          September 10, 2005 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Savvy travellers can reduce risk of being caught in hurricane: Six tips to
avoiding being blown away while on vacation

BYLINE: Camilla Cornell, For National Post; CanWest News Service

SECTION: TRAVEL; Pg. K5

LENGTH: 722  words


Vacation packages to Mexico and the Caribbean are cheap right now, mainly
because the peak travel season to the tropics is a few months away.

But there's another reason: Hurricane season runs from June to November in the
tropics. And, after seeing the images of the devastation wreaked on the southern
United States by hurricane Katrina, getting hit by a hurricane while on vacation
is an experience most would rather avoid.

"They're looking for sun, sand and relaxing," says Gary Sadler, director of
sales and marketing for Beaches/Sandals, "not hurricane winds, rain and
devastation."

The good news is your chances of going head-to-head with one of nature's
monsters are actually pretty slim. The bad news? A hurricane can affect weather
patterns for kilometres around. Here are some tips to avoid being blown away on
vacation.

- Choose the right time to go.

Although August has a reputation as a bad month for hurricanes, the peak of the
hurricane season falls from the beginning of September to mid-October.

- Pick a low-risk paradise.

According to the Caribbean Hurricane Network website, www.stormcarib.com, the
islands least likely to be battered by hurricanes are Aruba and Bonaire, which
have only experienced one serious hurricane since 1851. The next safest are
Trinidad and Curacao, with only one hurricane hit in the same time period.
Topping the list of the islands most often in a hurricane's path are Abaco (in
the Bahamas, with 18 hurricanes) and Grand Bahama with 15. In fact, the Bahamas
is a far more active region for hurricanes than either the eastern or western
Caribbean. To find out how a potential vacation location ranks, check out
StormCarib's climatology chart.

- Cruise around it.

With sophisticated tracking systems, cruise ships are able to avoid hurricanes
by rerouting. As Carnival Cruises president Bob Dickinson told industry
newsletter Cruise Week: "Cruise ships manoeuvre, so we're in front of (a
hurricane) or behind it, but nowhere near it." And since hurricanes pull so much
moisture and wave energy into themselves, it's actually possible for areas not
in their path to have better weather than usual.

- Check whether your resort offers hurricane protection.

Beaches/Sandals is one of the major resort chains offering hurricane protection.
Under the chain's Blue Chip Hurricane Guarantee, if a hurricane (as defined by
the U.S. National Weather Service) hits while you are a guest at any Sandals or
Beaches resort, you will receive a free replacement vacation (excluding air) to
the resort of your choice for the same duration as your original booking. The
replacement trip is valid for one year.

"I had a call from a guy a couple of weeks ago who had been to the Bahamas a few
years back," says Sadler. "He wanted to know when I thought another hurricane
might hit in the Caribbean." Sadler replied that he really didn't know, and
asked why the man was interested. "On my last vacation, I was there for 14
nights," the gentleman told him. "And the hurricane hit on the 13th night. You
gave me back 14 days of vacation." Says Sadler: "He was ready to do that again."

Other chains that offer hurricane protection include SuperClubs (which even
guarantees sunshine for its Jamaican resorts), Club Med and Wyndham Resorts.

- Consider travel insurance.

Trip-cancellation insurance may reimburse you should you lose your vacation to a
hurricane. The trick is to buy it before the hurricane is named or it could be
considered null and void.

- Choose your travel agency wisely.

On Aug. 4, online travel agency Expedia.ca launched its Hassle-Free Hurricane
Promise. Basically, the policy states that any time the Canadian Hurricane
Centre or the U.S. National Hurricane Center issues a hurricane watch or
warning, Expedia will allow its customers to rebook for another date or
destination, waiving any change or cancellation fees. The policy applies for
travel anywhere in North America, including Mexico and the Caribbean.

The company will also act as an advocate with airlines to ensure they help
customers out.

"People look forward to planning trips and we want them to have a feeling of
confidence throughout the process," says Stuart Morris, director of marketing.

"If they choose to go to Florida or the Caribbean, they shouldn't be lying in
bed worrying that a hurricane is somehow going to ruin their vacation."

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Calgary Herald, CanWest News Service; Guests at Sandals Resorts,
such as this one in the Bahamas, are promised a replacement vacation if caught
in a hurricane.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 181 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                              May 29, 2012 Tuesday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

LOOK OUT N.J.! Hurricane horror a Shore thing - expert ,

BYLINE: BY CORKY SIEMASZKO NEW YORK DAILY NEWS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 428 words


A HOWLING hurricane rises forth from the Atlantic and unleashes its fury on the
Jersey S

hore, leaving a swath of death and destruction in its wake from Cape May north
to Sandy Hook.

Sounds unlikely? Not to Rick Knabb, the new head of the National Hurricane
Center.

Knabb said it is precisely that nightmarish scenario being visited on the
nation's most densely populated state that keeps him awake some nights.

"It's really not a matter of if, but when," Knabb told National Public Radio on
Monday.

"The New Jersey coastline" and places like Tampa Bay and the Florida Keys "are
incredibly vulnerable," said Knabb, when asked about his "hurricane nightmare"
scenarios.

Knabb, who has a Ph.D. in meteorology from Florida State University and is the
11th expert to head the Hurricane Center, is no Chicken Little.

He's the meteorologist who signed the advisory announcing that Katrina had
become a major hurricane over the Gulf of Mexico, and then sounded the alarm as
it bore down on New Orleans and the Gulf Coast in 2005, with devastating
results.

After that, Knabb headed the Central Pacific Hurricane Center in Hawaii, where
he wrote the book on preparing for storms for emergency managers.

Knabb also was the tropical weather expert at The Weather Channel, tracking
hurricanes for legions of other weather junkies for two years before taking over
the National Hurricane Center.

Also, it was just last year that New Jersey - and the rest of the East Coast -
had to contend with a powerful hurricane.

Last Aug. 28, Hurricane Irene was a weakened but still potent tropical storm
when it made landfall in southeastern New Jersey before heading up to Brooklyn a
few hours later and drenching the city.

While most of the shore was spared, three people were killed, and there was
widespread inland flooding that did billions of dollars in damage.

In New York, Mayor Bloomberg shut down the entire transit system ahead of the
storm, which flooded parts of the Meatpacking District.

The last storm to crash ashore in the Garden State at hurricane speeds came in
1903. However, several tropical storms have devastated the state - with one of
the worst coming in 1944.

The Great Atlantic Hurricane destroyed homes and wiped out piers that September,
causing $25 million in damage - well above $300 million in today's money.

Knabb's nightmare is unlikely to come true in 2012, forecasters say.

So far, this year's Atlantic hurricane season is not shaping up to be a repeat
of last year, which saw 19 named tropical storms, seven hurricanes and three
major hurricanes.

csiemaszko@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Devastating scenes like this one in Key West, Fla., from the '90s,
could come to New Jersey, according to the head of the National Hurricane
Center. Photo by AP Hurricane Center chief Rick Knabb expects trouble for the
Jersey Shore. Getty

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.


                          FOCUS - 182 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        Florida Keys Keynoter (Marathon)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 8, 2007 Wednesday

Storm numbers lowered: CSU nows calls for four, NOAA report is due Thursday

BYLINE: Kevin Wadlow, Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 574 words


Aug. 8--Hurricane season may be slightly quieter than first predicted, Colorado
State University's recognized forecasting team says.

But that does not guarantee a quiet season, local weather experts say.

"This is not an all-clear signal," said Jon Rizzo, warning coordination
meteorologist at the National Weather Service in Key West.

"It's not putting the kibosh on everything, but we're not running at full
throttle, either," Rizzo said after reviewing the Aug. 3 update from the
Colorado State Tropical Meteorology Project founded by William Gray.

Gray's team, now headed by Philip Klotzbach, lowered the number of major
hurricanes it expects to form in the Atlantic Ocean this year to four.

In late May, the team predicted nine hurricanes, with five reaching Category 3
or stronger.

Even the lower numbers of eight hurricanes and four major hurricanes count as an
above-average hurricane season.

The Climate Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration will release its updated hurricane-season forecast Thursday
morning.

"They don't give us an advance peek, either," said Rizzo.

The meteorologist noted the federal agency's forecasters likely would consider
many of the same factors assessed by the Colorado State team.

"I don't particularly care for the exact-number forecasts, but we can look at
what [the CSU forecasters] think is going right," Rizzo said.

Primarily, those factors include lower ocean temperatures and more Sahara dust.

"The water temperatures in the Atlantic are not as warm as people were thinking
they would be," Rizzo said. "In fact, they're pretty close to normal. That's the
big one right there."

Warmer water temperatures foster the development of tropical storms and fuel
their development into hurricanes.

Large quantities of dust have been blowing off the West African desert, Rizzo
said.

"That creates a more stable air mass over the tropical Atlantic area," he said.
"It's more difficult for thunderstorms to grow and maintain themselves in those
conditions."

"When you put those things together, we may not see the kind of busy activity
Dr. Gray was thinking of in the spring."

However, other atmospheric factors may yet foster an above-average season.

Gray's team believes one major hurricane will form in August, and two in
September.

"We're just now entering the busy time of hurricane season," Rizzo said. "This
is the time

we normally see more [storm] activity."

In late May, NOAA's scientists at the Prediction Center issued a season forecast
for seven to 10 hurricanes, with three to five possibly growing into major
hurricanes.

In 2006, forecasts for an active hurricane season were upended when an El Nino
weather pattern developed, rapidly and unexpectedly. That helped disrupt
hurricane formation.

An average Atlantic hurricane season brings 11 named storms, with six becoming
hurricanes, including two major hurricanes.

Three named storms have developed so far in the Atlantic hurricane season that
started June 1. None turned into hurricanes.

Hurricane season runs through Nov. 30.

To see more of the Keynoter, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.keynoter.com. Copyright (c) 2007, Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20070808-FK-Storm-numbers-lowered-0808

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FK


                      Copyright 2007 Florida Keys Keynoter


                          FOCUS - 183 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 17, 2013 Friday

Hurricane Hunters return to St. Croix

BYLINE: Joy Blackburn, The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 690 words


May 17--ST. CROIX -- They're back.

Members of the 403rd Wing of the Air Force Reserve 53rd Weather Reconnaissance
Squadron -- the Hurricane Hunters -- are on St. Croix this week, getting
equipment and supplies in place and at the ready for what experts predict will
be a busy hurricane season.

"We really like it here," said Col. Roy Deatherage, mission commander and a
meteorologist who has been coming to St. Croix with the Hurricane Hunters since
1996, the first season they based some of their missions here.

The Hurricane Hunters fly WC-130J aircraft into tropical cyclones and
disturbances to gather data that the National Hurricane Center then uses to help
it determine the status of a storm and make predictions.

Before they came to St. Croix, they flew some missions from Antigua. But in
1996, they had to move the operation to U.S. soil, Deatherage said.

"So this was the best place to operate," he said.

The St. Croix location is good because it allows the Hurricane Hunters to
investigate hurricanes and storms churning across the Atlantic, once the storms
reach a longitude about 1,000 miles east of here. The St. Croix location also
puts them in range to fly missions all through the Caribbean, as well as into
the Gulf of Mexico.

The Hurricane Hunters are based at Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi, Miss., and
the amount of time they spend on St. Croix really depends on the tropical
cyclone activity and where that activity is located during any given year,
Deatherage said.

He estimated that on average, some Hurricane Hunter crews are deployed on St.
Croix for about one week per month from July through September -- although that
varies from year to year.

The data they collect is vital to the National Hurricane Center -- and to people
living on U.S. coastlines and on islands across the Caribbean, said Master Sgt.
Brian Lamar, an Air Force Reserve spokesman.

"They -- the National Hurricane Center -- make their predictions based on our
data," Lamar said.

The Hurricane Hunters fly all four quadrants of a storm, and one of their major
functions is to determine the exact location of the center of the storm,
according to Lamar. The location of the center is not always obvious -- and
knowing exactly where it is increases the accuracy of predicting a storm's
track, Lamar said.

Each plane has a five-person crew: a pilot, a co-pilot, a navigator, a weather
officer and a dropsonde operator, he said.

The planes release dropsondes to measure meteorological data from inside the
storm and transmit it back to the Hurricane Center. The dropsondes -- about the
size of a tennis ball canister -- can send two pages of text messaging every
second to the Hurricane Center, Lamar said.

The data collected by Hurricane Hunters enables the Hurricane Center to reduce
the "cone of uncertainty" in its projected hurricane tracks by 25 to 30 percent,
Lamar said. The cost of gathering that data pays for itself, considering the
average cost to evacuate for an impending hurricane in the U.S. -- which is
estimated at $250,000 to $1 million per mile, he said.

"We save the U.S. economy quite a bit each year," Lamar said. "We definitely pay
for our own operating costs if you look at it from this perspective."

There are 10 full-time crews with the Hurricane Hunters and 10 part-time crews,
he said, noting that the squadron has the capability to fly three different
storms at a time. Depending on what's going on, three of those crews may be on
St. Croix at any given point during the season, he said.

The crews on St. Croix are setting up this week and plan to return to Biloxi on
Sunday.

Lamar said that because the Hurricane Hunters are a direct line-item on the
national defense authorization, they have not been affected by sequestration.

"We're not getting our flying hours cut at all," he said. "As long as the
National Hurricane Center needs us to fly a mission, we are flying that
mission."

- Contact Joy Blackburn at 714-9145 or email jblackburn@dailynews.vi

___ (c)2013 The Virgin Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) Visit The Virgin
Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) at www.virginislandsdailynews.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130517-1VI-Hurricane-Hunters-return-to-St-Croix-0517-20130517

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2013 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 184 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             April 11, 2014 Friday

Hurricane watch: Early forecast predicts light season

BYLINE: Mark Reagan, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 380 words


April 11--There is a 7 percent chance a major hurricane will strike the Texas
coast and a 14 percent chance one will slam into Mexico's Gulf coast,
researchers announced.

Colorado State University Department of Atmospheric Science Research Scientist
Philip Klotzbach announced the Atlantic 2014 hurricane season outlook Thursday
morning on South Padre Island during the National Tropical Weather Conference.

According to Klotzbach and Professor Emeritus of Atmospheric Science William M.
Gray, there is a 3.7 probability that one or more named storms will hit Cameron
County and a 2.2 percent chance a hurricane will hit Texas' southernmost county.

Chances for a major hurricane are slim, according to their research.

And that theme runs true for the rest of the season, according to Klotzbach.

"We are predicting a low season," he said, adding that they are predicting nine
named storms, three hurricanes and one major hurricane.

And that's because of a weather pattern called El Niño and cooling in tropical
Atlantic Ocean waters.

"We think we're going to see a pretty significant El Niño," Klotzbach said.

The weather system will warm the Pacific Ocean and in turn reduce hurricane
activity in the Atlantic Ocean.

However, Klotzbach cautioned that April is early and a lot could change between
now and the start hurricane season, which runs from June 1 through Nov. 30.

He said the Colorado State University Department of Atmospheric Science will
provide updated forecasts on June 2 and July 31.

"Despite the quiet forecast, coastal residents are reminded that it only takes
one hurricane making landfall to make it an active season for them," Klotzbach
and Gray wrote in the 2014 Atlantic hurricane season outlook. "They are reminded
to prepare the same for every season, regardless of how much or how little
activity is predicted."

mreagan@brownsvilleherald.com

BY THE NUMBERS

Researchers from the Department of Atmospheric Science at Colorado State
University predict:

9          named storms

35       named storm days

3          hurricanes

12       hurricane days

1          major hurricane

2          major hurricane days

___ (c)2014 The Brownsville Herald (Brownsville, Texas) Visit The Brownsville
Herald (Brownsville, Texas) at www.brownsvilleherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20140411-BV-Hurricane-watch-Early-forecast-predicts-light-season-0411-20140411

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2014 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 185 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    September 17, 2000, Sunday, Home Edition

Tracking hurricanes is still hit-or-miss, despite technology;
 STORM CENTRAL'S SHAKY SCIENCE

BYLINE: Joe Frisaro, For the Journal-Constitution

SOURCE: AJC

SECTION: Reader; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 897 words

Miami

In late August, Hurricane Debby tricked the latest technology and teased the
Florida coastline before it transformed into a mild tropical wave that dumped
needed rain on Cuba, Jamaica and Haiti.

"The computer models, most of them, had it headed toward South Florida," said
Max Mayfield, who became director of the National Hurricane Center in May. "They
also intensified it. Well, that didn't happen."

Tracking hurricanes, even with all the scientific advancements, remains hit-
or-miss. For this, Mayfield makes no apologies. When it comes to warning the
public, the new boss at the hurricane center weighs on the side of caution.

"You're always walking a fine line," Mayfield said. "People put up storm
shutters. It costs money."

Debby caused emergency managers to order 15,000 tourists out of the Florida
Keys.

"The response to hurricanes is like a snow day up north," Mayfield said. "
Occasionally, up north, you will have a forecast of heavy snow. Schools will be
closed. Businesses will be closed, and people will stay home. But occasionally,
you don't have as much snow as they forecasted. Now people aren't happy about
that because they lost money by closing down."

Crying wolf is part of the business.

"I want people to know the uncertainty," Mayfield said. "I'll never second-
guess an emergency manager for ordering evacuations. I'd rather have people mad
at us than dead."

Mayfield, 51, is regarded as a cool customer capable of making hard decisions
under fire. His passion for the job is fueled by the fact his own home was
nearly destroyed by Hurricane Andrew eight years ago. The devastating storm
flattened South Miami-Dade County Aug. 24, 1992, killing 15 people and leaving
125,000 homeless.

The wrath of Andrew also damaged the National Hurricane Center, located west of
downtown Miami on the Florida International University campus. That night,
Mayfield delivered updates at the center while his wife, Linda, and three
children huddled in the hallway of their home in Kendall, a Miami suburb.

A ruptured roof forced Mayfield and his family to move temporarily into a mobile
home until repairs were made.

Surviving Andrew strengthened Mayfield's desire to figure out what makes
hurricanes spin. "You bet," he said. "I was lucky."

Despite all the knowledge available, there's much to learn. "We need to know
from the research community what we're supposed to be observing," Mayfield said.

The computer models have made it easier to track storms. Fifteen were used on
Debby.

"We don't do a good job at capturing the rapidly forming hurricanes," Mayfield
said. "That really scares us."

Andrew intensified from a Category 1 to a Category 4 (winds up to 155 mph) in
the 30 hours before it made landfall. In 1995, Hurricane Opal lingered in the
Atlantic for days before quickly accelerating, skirting up the Gulf of Mexico
and ramming the Florida Panhandle, eventually pushing gale-force winds as far
inland as Atlanta.

While the hurricane specialists watched Opal forge ahead, the media were
tracking another story --- the announcement of the verdict in the O.J. Simpson
trial.

"Luckily, Opal weakened almost as fast as it formed," Mayfield said.

Technology is providing added security and information. A satellite launched in
May provides forecasters with a backup observation tool.

In recent years, new reconnaissance planes have been added to the fleet, capable
of flying into the core of the hurricane to gather data that measures the
temperature, humidity, wind and pressure.

"These computer models provide enough information to gag a horse," Mayfield
said. "There's more information than you can even look at."

Hurricanes still fall into what Mayfield calls a 100-mile "cone of uncertainty,"
capable of changing course north or south of the computer projections.

Debby was a prime example. Earmarked for South Florida, it shifted and fizzled
out south of Cuba.

"Max's biggest theme is the uncertainty theme," said Bill Massey, hurricane
program manager for the Federal Emergency Management Agency in Atlanta.

Since 1995, FEMA has teamed up with the hurricane center to promote public
safety. Inside the hurricane center, FEMA set up a small studio to provide feeds
to local television stations. In addition, they handle the overload of telephone
calls from emergency managers in hurricane-prone areas. FEMA also sponsors
annual training sessions for emergency managers from Texas to Maine.

"We're much more coordinated now than we've ever been," Massey said. "We're all
on the same page now."

Not so last September, when more than 3 million people jammed roadways trying to
evacuate during Hurricane Floyd, which finally struck North Carolina. FEMA
learned a critical lesson and is now better prepared for mass evacuations.

"One of the complaints we had last year is that Georgia had no clue that 60, 000
cars, or whatever, were coming up I-95 (from Florida) into Georgia, and blocking
their evacuation routes," Massey said. "Georgia people had no clue the
interstates were already jammed with Florida people."

Last week, a report by the American Meteorological Society recommended
strengthening the hurricane warning and response system to a year-round, closely
coordinated program involving national, regional and local agencies.

>ON THE WEB: National Hurricane Center: www.nhc.noaa.gov

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
National Hurricane Center Director Max Mayfield says crying wolf is part of the
job. "I'd rather have people mad at us than dead." / Photo courtesy of National
Hurricane Center
Graphic
HURRICANES IN GEORGIA
 Hurricane history: For the most part, Georgia has escaped the wrath of major
hurricanes (Category 2 and higher). Hurricane Alberto left 30 dead in Georgia,
Alabama and northwest Florida in 1994. And an unnamed hurricane struck Georgia,
South Carolina and North Carolina Aug. 11-12, 1940, killing 50 people. Despite
the rare hits, Georgia isn't out of the paths of major hurricanes. Between 1,000
and 2,000 people died in a hurricane in 1893, National Hurricane Center records
show.
Inland flooding: Hurricane strikes on the Georgia coast and in neighboring
states have produced inland flooding stretching into metropolitan Atlanta.
During the past 30 years, inland flooding has been responsible for more than
half the deaths associated with tropical cyclones in the United States. In 1999,
Hurricane Floyd killed 56 people after ramming into North Carolina. According to
the NHC, 50 people drowned.
Inland winds: In 1995, Hurricane Opal made landfall in the Florida Panhandle,
downing numerous trees and knocking out power lines for nearly two million
people in Florida, Alabama, Georgia and the Carolinas. Dobbins Air Reserve Base
in Cobb County reported wind gusts of 77 mph.

                    Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution


                          FOCUS - 186 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                              May 6, 2017 Saturday

Hurricane Hunters on island to prepare for hurricane season

BYLINE: Joy Blackburn, The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 554 words


May 06--They're back.

With the Atlantic hurricane season just around the corner, members of the 403rd
Wing of the Air Force Reserve 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron -- the
Hurricane Hunters -- were on St. Croix this week, getting equipment and supplies
in place and at the ready.

A familiar sight on St. Croix when trouble is brewing in the form of tropical
cyclones, the Hurricane Hunters are based at Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi,
Miss.

During hurricane season, though, they may be periodically forward deployed to
St. Croix, sometimes for a few days and sometimes for a week or more. It all
depends on tropical cyclone activity each season and where that activity is
located.

The Hurricane Hunters may opt for the St. Croix location when hurricanes and
storms are churning across the tropical Atlantic, once they reach a longitude
about 1,000 miles east of here. The St. Croix site also puts them in range to
fly missions all through the Caribbean, as well as into the Gulf of Mexico.

The Hurricane Hunters fly WC-130J aircraft into tropical cyclones and
disturbances to gather data that the National Hurricane Center then uses to help
it determine the status of a storm and make predictions.

"It's a great job," Lt. Col. Phillip Dobson, a navigator for the Hurricane
Hunters, said this week. "It's exciting. You get to go to interesting places."

They fly all quadrants of a storm, and one of their major functions is to
determine the exact location of the center of the storm. That location is not
always obvious, and knowing exactly where the center is increases the accuracy
of predicting a storm's track.

Crew members include a pilot, a co-pilot, a navigator, a weather officer and a
dropsonde operator. Dropsondes, released by the plane, measure meteorological
data from inside the storm and transmit it back to the Hurricane Center.

Every year before hurricane season starts June 1, the Hurricane Hunters come to
St. Croix to pre-position supplies and spare parts in their space in a building
at Rohlsen Airport.

"Right now, we're setting everything up to prepare for storm season. This year,
we've had to renovate the operations facility because the termites have chewed
on it for a few years. And we needed new radios because the radio got struck by
lightning," Dobson said.

They are also trying to bring their computer system here up to Air Force
standards, he said.

About 30 extra people came down this year specifically to do construction work,
according to Dobson.

"We had a lot of extra work to do this year, so the guys that have been down
here doing construction actually came at the end of April. This weekend, they're
going to be ending up two weeks straight down here building," he said.

When the Hurricane Hunters are forward deployed to St. Croix, the different
crews and support staff stay in local hotels and eat in local restaurants,
providing a small boon to the local economy. No estimates were available to
quantify that boon, although officials said forward deployment can involve
scores of people if missions are being flown around the clock.

-- Contact Joy Blackburn at 340-714-9145 or jblackburn@dailynews.vi

___ (c)2017 The Virgin Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) Visit The Virgin
Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) at www.virginislandsdailynews.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20170506-1VI-Hurricane-Hunters-on-island-to-prepare-for-hurricane-season-0506-20
170506

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2017 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 187 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                      Long Island Business News (New York)

                           September 1, 2011 Thursday

NY: Insurers shouldn't charge hurricane deductibles

BYLINE: Claude Solnik

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 603  words


Long Island residents hit hard by Hurricane Irene got some good news Thursday
when state regulators ruled insurers shouldn't try to impose "hurricane"
deductibles, which could significantly increase amounts residents would have to
pay before their coverage kicks in.

Benjamin M. Lawsky, the state's superintendent of the Department of Financial
Services, said because Irene was designated a tropical storm, not a hurricane
when it hit New York, hurricane deductibles shouldn't kick in.

"Therefore hurricane deductibles should not apply on homeowners' insurance
policies," Lawsky said. "Homeowners should not have to pay this deductible and
insurers should be aware that the Department will make sure they are not hitting
consumers with a hurricane deductible. "

Most homeowner policies have standards deductibles set based on fixed numbers,
such as $500 or $1,000, but hurricane deductibles, typically based on a percent
of a property's value, are often higher.

If insurers imposed these provisions, homeowners could be hit by thousands of
charges before coverage kicks in.

A 5 percent deductible on a $300,000 home, for instance, would be $15,000, a
huge difference from the more typical deductibles without that provision.
Hurricane deductibles are customary in 18 states and the District of Columbia.

Hurricane deductibles kick in when sustained hurricane force winds of 74 miles
per hour or greater are measured by the National Weather Service. Irene fell
short of that, providing some financial relief to property owners.

"Almost everybody on Long Island has their hurricane deductible listed as a
percentage on their declarations page," said Michael Barry, a spokesman for the
Insurance Information Institute, in Manhattan.  "It's been many years since
there has been a severe wind storm in Nassau and Suffolk counties. While the
hurricane deductible is listed in a prominent place, not everybody reads through
their policy closely. "

Insurers as of 1993 began imposing hurricane deductibles in New York and many
other states, after Hurricane Andrew hit.

"The industry's been concerned about the implications of a major hurricane
hitting places like the Jersey Shore, Long Island and Connecticut and places
like Cape Cod for more than a decade," Barry said.

Hurricane deductibles have become standard on the East Coast, as insurers seek
some protection, while still providing coverage.

"Due to increased coastal development and greater hurricane risk, hurricane
deductibles were created to help keep private sector property insurance coverage
available and affordable by having the policyholder share more of the risk with
their insurer," Insurance Institute Vice President Loretta Worters said in a
written statement.

Although Irene didn't trigger hurricane deductibles, it attracted attention to
these riders, which could kick in if winds had been stronger.

Lawsky said some people are being told their flood insurance doesn't cover the
damage from the storm. But he said flood insurance does covers flooding reltaed
to Irene "and no insurer should even think about not honoring its commitments
under a flood insurance policy. "

Lawsky issued his statement after Thomas B. Considine, New Jersey's Commissioner
for Banking and Insurance, weighed in with a similar conclusion.

"The National Weather Service did not report winds in New Jersey meeting all of
the above regulatory criteria," Considine wrote in his decision, requiring
insurers not to impose these provisions. "Accordingly, no mandatory or optional
hurricane deductible should be applied to the payment of claims for property
damage attributable to Hurricane Irene. "

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Regulatory

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 188 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JUNE 19, 1995 Monday FINAL EDITION

EXPERT PREDICTS VERY ACTIVE HURRICANE SEASON /

BYLINE: Anthony R. Wood, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. G01

LENGTH: 1204 words


After a 40-year building boom, more than $2 trillion worth of property lines the
coasts of the Gulf and the Atlantic.

After a long hurricane lull, the law of averages suggests that sooner or later
nature will be rolling costly and destructive bowling balls toward some of that
real estate.

William Gray, considered the nation's foremost long-range hurricane
forecaster, believes it will be sooner. He foresees a "very active" 1995
tropical-storm season - for the first time in several years.

Upgrading a forecast he made in April, Gray, a Colorado State University
professor, predicted earlier this month that eight hurricanes would form in the
Atlantic Basin. That's up from six, which is roughly the annual average.

Three of the eight hurricanes would be major, he said, and overall
tropical-storm activity would be 140 percent of normal.

Gray cautions that his work is experimental, and last year, his forecast
overestimated the number of hurricanes. Still, the tranquility of recent decades
is unlikely to persist.

And given that tranquility, Gray said that a normal storm season may seem
severe.

Gray pointed out that between 1947 and 1961, 14 major land-falling hurricanes -
defined as having sustained winds of at least 111 m.p.h. - struck the United
States. Since 1962, only five have, and that includes Emily, which hardly
brushed the coast in 1993.

Hurricane activity has been well below long-term averages for the last four
seasons, with only three observed in 1994.

Gray believes he can explain that lull.

And why it may be about to end.

For all the damage they cause, hurricanes are relatively small storms, their
destructive winds radiating only about 50 to 75 miles from the center of the
storm, said Jerry Jarrell, deputy director of the National Hurricane Center in
Miami. By contrast, winter storms can generate heavy snow and high winds
hundreds of miles from the center.

Take Andrew. Its center passed only 50 miles south of downtown Miami in 1992,
but the city was spared the full ferocity of the storm. Nevertheless, it caused
about $25 billion in damage, according to the National Hurricane Center.

Yet as small as they are, hurricanes are affected by far-reaching forces,
including sea-surface temperatures half a world away and a wind high in the
stratosphere that circles the planet.

One factor has been persistent warmer-than-normal sea-surface temperatures in
the Equatorial Pacific, a phenomenon known as El Nino.

Hurricanes need powerful updrafts to get started. The updrafts cause water vapor
to condense, releasing the heat that fuels the growing beast. El Ninos counter
those updrafts, according to Gray. The strong westerly winds they generate
travel thousands of miles and can have a shearing effect on potential storms. In
El Nino years, hurricane activity is about 40 percent of normal, said Gray.

El Ninos have developed frequently since the mid-1970s. They have recurred on
and off for the last four years.

Now, however, El Nino has dissipated and is not expected to be a factor, said
Chris Landsea, another Colorado State researcher who is Gray's associate.

Gray also takes into account a stratospheric wind that circles the globe above
the Equator. It has the rather intimidating name of "quasi-biennial
oscillation," or QBO. It blows from the east for roughly 13 months and then
switches to blow from the west for another 13 months.

The physical connection is uncertain, said Landsea, but the QBO's westerly
phase, the one it is in now, correlates with active hurricane seasons.

Gray said that hurricane seasons also hinge on rainfall in the Sahel region of
western Africa, not far from the birthplace of many tropical storms.

For most of the last 25 years, that region has been parched with drought,
coinciding with a hurricane lull. Now it appears that those drought conditions
are easing.

Jarrell said that Gray could well be on to something. "He is very reputable,"
said Jarrell, adding that his forecasts have been superior to those that might
be made using pure chance.

Gray has made his forecasts for 11 years. In 1991 and 1992, he correctly
forecast the number of Atlantic hurricanes. The last two seasons, however, his
estimates were too high.

The Hurricane Center does not venture into Gray's territory, eschewing
long-range forecasts.

Nor does Gray venture into the Hurricane Center's turf. He does not forecast
where or if hurricanes will make landfall, something that's often difficult to
pinpoint even 12 hours before it occurs.

Forecasting the path of a hurricane has been likened to predicting the path of a
cork in a swimming pool. Neil Frank, who used to run the Hurricane Center and
now is a TV weatherman in Houston, has used a bowling-ball analogy.

"Forecasting where a hurricane is going to go is a lot like forecasting where a
novice is going to bowl a ball," he once said at a conference. "There is an
alley defined. . . . In 24 hours, our alley is about 200 miles wide, but I don't
know if it's going to be on the left gutter or the right gutter or right on the
head pin, and even a novice occasionally drops the ball and it goes over in
another alley."

Sometimes, forecasters have to deal with more than one storm at the same time.
That's one reason storms have names, to make it easier to keep track of them.

The government began naming them after females in 1953, said the National
Weather Service's Frank Lepore. In the enlightened late 1970s, they were named
for males and females. A cyclone earns a name when it reaches tropical-storm
strength, with sustained winds of 39 m.p.h. Some grow up to become hurricanes.

Today, there are six sets of tropical-storm names, approved by the U.N.'s World
Meteorological Organization, used in a six-year cycle. The names of Hall-of-Fame
level storms, such as Hugo and Andrew, are retired. Hugo struck in 1989. In the
six-year cycle it was to reappear this year, but it has been replaced by
Humberto.

Gray predicts that there will be an Humberto this year. He expects 12 names to
be used, from alumna Allison to Luis.

Eight of those tropical storms will become hurricanes, Gray said, and three of
them will be major, meaning a Category 3, 4 or 5 on the Saffir-Simpson rating
scale. Category 3 storms have sustained winds of 111 to 130 m.p.h.; category 4,
131 to 155 m.p.h., and category 5, 156 m.p.h. or more, strong enough to propel a
flooding storm surge 10 miles inland.

The odds are overwhelming, however, that you won't have to contend with anything
like that this year or any other year.

Philadelphia has been affected by hurricanes, such as Hazel in 1954, but it is
unlikely that it would ever suffer a direct hit.

Even the Shore is somewhat hurricane-resistant. The north-south orientation of
New Jersey makes it far-less vulnerable to landfall than, say, Long Island,
which is more likely to be perpendicular to hurricane paths.

Still, said Jarrell, it doesn't cost very much to be prepared and become
familiar with evacuation routes.

And here is something for Jersey Shore visitors to keep in mind: According to
the Hurricane Center, the Shore happens to have one of the nation's worst
hurricane-escape networks.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;

PHOTO (1)
1. William Gray is a long-range hurricane forecaster. (Colorado State
University, WILLIAM CARTER)
CHART (2)
1. Atlantic-Storm Names for 1995 (The Philadelphia Inquirer)
2. Forecasting Hurricanes (The Philadelphia Inquirer)

                  Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 189 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 29, 2003 Monday

Atlantic storms abound this year

BYLINE: ALANNA MITCHELL

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 411 words


If it feels as though the Atlantic Ocean has been coughing up more disastrous
weather than usual, that's because it is.

This has already been a heavy year for tropical storms and hurricanes, and that
trend is expected to go on until the stormy season is over in late November,
according to the Climate Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration of the U.S. government, the Hurricane Research
Division and the National Hurricane Center.

North America has already made it through the highly disruptive hurricane
Isabel, which came through the U.S. Eastern Seaboard and into southern Ontario
earlier this month. While still over the Atlantic Ocean, it reached the highest
level of intensity possible for a hurricane, finally calming down as it hit the
Toronto area.

Last night, the Atlantic provinces were battening down the hatches for hurricane
Juan, a small but powerful storm expected to flood Halifax and make it difficult
for voters in today's Prince Edward Island election.

At the same time, hurricane specialists were keeping an eye on Kate, a tropical
storm brewing to the north and east of the Caribbean. Kate is the 11th storm
strong enough to be named this season.

In total, the weather experts at NOAA are predicting 12 to 15 tropical storms.
They say seven, eight or nine of those will become hurricanes and three or four
will become severe hurricanes.

Since 1995, this has been a period of high activity for hurricanes, the most
active since reliable tracking started in 1944.

Both the 1950s and 1960s were heavy with hurricanes off the Atlantic Ocean. In
the 24 years from 1971 through 1994, the Atlantic brewed 27 major hurricanes, of
which 15 hit land with fury unabated. Climatologists call that the inactive
period.

In the 24 years that bookended that calm stretch, 1955-1970 and 1995-2002, 67
major hurricanes came ashore off the Atlantic, of which 42 hit land. Of those
42, 31 were still considered strong when they hit and 11 had abated.

Many climate scientists say that it is not certain whether global climate change
is having any effect on the number and intensity of hurricanes, typhoons and
tropical cyclones, or whether it will do so over time.

Instead, they point to a confluence of tropical wind patterns, a shift of
moisture-laden air into the main hurricane development zone, and the warmer sea
surface of the Atlantic as the main influences on whether a year is favourable
for hurricanes or not.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2003 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 190 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             August 14, 2017 Monday

NOAA says signs point to increased hurricane activity

BYLINE: Joy Blackburn, The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 782 words


Aug. 14--The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration thinks the 2017
hurricane season could be the most active since 2010 -- a year when the
territory was the subject of three weather-related disaster declarations.

NOAA is now predicting a higher likelihood of an above-normal hurricane season
after updating its 2017 outlook -- originally released in May -- as hurricane
season kicks into high gear.

"The current and predicted atmospheric and oceanic conditions point to a high
likelihood for an above-normal season, with the possibility now that the season
could be extremely active," Gerry Bell, lead seasonal hurricane forecaster at
NOAA's Climate Prediction Center, said during a media call last week.

NOAA said there is a 60 percent chance of an above-normal season now, compared
with a May prediction of a 45 percent chance of an above-normal season.
Likewise, the likelihood of a near-normal season has decreased to 30 percent,
from 35 percent in May, and the likelihood of a below-normal season has dropped
to 10 percent, down from 20 percent in May.

Bell cited several factors that point to an above-average season:

--Wind patterns conducive to storm development across the tropical Atlantic

--Water temperatures that are much warmer than average, about 1 to 2 degrees
Fahrenheit warmer, with a high confidence that the warmer water temperatures
will persist.

--The lowered chance of an El Niño forming in the Pacific. El Niño would have
helped suppress Atlantic storm development.

--The early season activity in the deep tropics. There have already been seven
named storms this season, with one of them -- Franklin -- becoming a hurricane.

Bell noted that NOAA updates its outlook annually during early August because
that is when the peak months of hurricane season -- August through October --
get under way.

"This three-month period is when the bulk -- about 95 percent historically -- of
the hurricanes and major hurricanes occur," he said.

Bell said NOAA is now predicting 14 to 19 named storms for the 2017 season, with
five to nine of those becoming hurricanes and two to five of those developing
into major hurricanes. Those numbers include storms that have already occurred.
That represents an increase in the projected number of named storms and major
hurricanes from NOAA's May outlook, according to Bell.

Tropical cyclones become named storms when they reach tropical storm status,
with sustained surface wind speeds of 39 to 73 mph. Tropical cyclones with
sustained wind speeds of 74 mph or greater are hurricanes.

Major hurricanes are those that are Category 3 or above on the Saffir-Simpson
Scale, a scale that measures potential damage based on hurricane wind speeds.
Major hurricanes have wind speeds of 111 mph or greater and can cause
devastating to catastrophic damage.

Bell said NOAA was "seeing signs that this could be the most active season since
2010."

In 2010, the territory was the subject of three presidential disaster
declarations between August and November, stemming from severe weather.

President Barack Obama declared a disaster after Hurricane Earl passed by the
Virgin Islands in late August 2010, downing trees and knocking out power.

A little more than a month after Earl, Hurricane Otto formed far to the north of
the territory, pulling moisture up from the southwest from Oct. 4 to Oct. 8,
2010, causing rains, mudslides and widespread flooding. Obama declared that
flooding a disaster as well.

Then, severe storms, flooding, rock slides and mudslides struck the territory
from Nov. 8 through 12.

The torrential rainfall -- which occurred when remnants of Tropical Storm Tomas
combined with a stationary front -- hit St. Croix particularly hard, peaking
Nov. 10, when flash floods rushed across the island, stranding motorists,
damaging roadways, buildings and vehicles and killing a woman, who was swept
away in floodwaters in La Grange.

During the media call last week, Bell also stressed hurricane preparedness.

"You need to know your risks, have a plan and be prepared," he said,
recommending the website www.ready.gov for disaster preparedness information.

In its hurricane season outlooks, NOAA does not try to predict the likelihood of
hurricane landfalls, which are determined by the weather patterns that are in
place as the storm approaches.

Earlier this month, forecasters at Colorado State University also upheld their
predictions for an above-average hurricane season in the Atlantic basin.

-- Contact Joy Blackburn at 340-714-9145 or jblackburn@dailynews.vi

___ (c)2017 The Virgin Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) Visit The Virgin
Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) at www.virginislandsdailynews.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20170814-1VI-NOAA-says-signs-point-to-increased-hurricane-activity-0814-20170814

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2017 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 191 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                             National Post (Canada)

                 June 2, 2004 Wednesday All but Toronto Edition

Atlantic hurricane season could be a busy one, specialists predict: 15 major
storms possible: Forecast is bad news for natural gas and oil producers

SOURCE: Reuters, with files from The Associated Press

SECTION: World; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: MIAMI

MIAMI - The official Atlantic hurricane season dawned yesterday with not a
cyclone in sight but forecasters predicted it will be a busy one before it ends
six months from now.

The average season brings just under 10 tropical storms or hurricanes, but
forecasters say this one could see 14 or 15 in a period of increased activity
that began several years ago.

"Everything is quiet right now," said Lixion Avila, a hurricane specialist at
the U.S. National Hurricane Center in Miami. "The usual weak tropical waves in
the Atlantic. Conditions are not favourable for formation at the moment."

Hurricane activity in the north Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean basin grips
millions of people who live on the vulnerable Caribbean islands or the U.S. East
Coast and Gulf of Mexico coast, as well as insurers, energy suppliers, builders,
retailers and weather watchers.

The U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has predicted a
busier-than-average season, with 12 to 15 tropical storms. It expects six to
eight of those to become hurricanes.

The circular weather systems that become tropical storms and hurricanes are
given names when sustained winds reach 64 km/h. They become hurricanes at 119
km/h.

The average Atlantic-Caribbean season, which runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, sees
9.6 named storms, with 5.9 of those reaching hurricane strength and 2.3 of those
becoming "major" hurricanes with winds of 178 km/h or more.

William Gray, a well-known hurricane researcher at Colorado State University,
has predicted 14 named storms, with eight of those becoming hurricanes. Three of
the hurricanes will be major ones, he said.

The year's first storm will be named Alex, to be followed by Bonnie, Charley,
Danielle, Earl, Frances, Gaston, Hermine, Ivan, Jeanne, Karl, Lisa, Matthew and
Nicole. If the season exceeds Mr. Gray's predicted 14 storms, the others will be
called Otto, Paula, Richard, Shary, Tomas, Virginie and Walter.

Mr. Gray put the chance of a major hurricane striking the United States at 71%,
far beyond the long-term average of 52%. The U.S. coast has been hit by
relatively few major hurricanes in the past nine years.

Numbers aside, Mr. Avila notes, what really matters is where a hurricane hits.

"We cannot tell you where those cyclones are going to hit. It doesn't matter if
you have 20 or two," he said. "If one of those two hits your community, that's
all that matters."

Should a hurricane threaten the Gulf Coast, centre of the U.S. energy industry,
it could put a new crimp in stressed U.S. oil and natural gas production.

"The major source of natural gas is still the Gulf of Mexico," said Bill Gilmer,
chief energy analyst for the Houston office of the Federal Reserve Bank.

"When a hurricane blows through, they're forced to evacuate those rigs and they
shut production down. It's a disruption to supply."

Two recent hurricanes, Claudette and Lili, did not cause many problems for
energy companies or consumers because rigs kept operating and prices and
supplies were stable.

But with supplies already stretched this year, a powerful hurricane could mean
even higher prices at the pump and steeper rates for natural gas users.

In the last century, about one in three major storms in the Atlantic hit land in
the United States. Based on that average, about 10 intense hurricanes should
have hit the U.S. coastline in the past nine years, although only three have.

But for the hundreds of companies running more than 4,000 offshore assets in the
Gulf, from unmanned wells to huge platforms that accommodate more than 100
workers, a hurricane does not have to make landfall to cause problems.

"It just has to be a close call to lose one or two or three days of supply," Mr.
Gilmer said.

"If it actually hits and you're talking about some damage, that implies a longer
delay. Then you're talking about crews effecting repairs and losing days to
weeks, conceivably."

If a storm blows into a major refining centre such as Houston, it could send
already high gasoline prices even higher. About 12% of U.S. gasoline, enough to
fill more than two million automobile tanks a day, is refined in Houston. The
city has not taken a direct hit since 1983.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Business; Statistics

               Copyright 2004 National Post, All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 192 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        MARCH 6, 2000 Monday SF EDITION

AMID A FURY OF CONSTRUCTION, A GRACE OF HURRICANE QUIET

BYLINE: Gilbert M. Gaul and Anthony R. Wood, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2756 words


At daybreak, the six hours of hell wrought by the most powerful hurricane ever
to hit Miami subsided. The winds had wailed as loudly as the frantic rescue
sirens that filled the streets.

Stunned residents and visitors ventured from their houses and hotels to watch
the first light of day break upon the devastated landscape. Some knelt to kiss
the earth.

Then, suddenly, the gales howled anew, this time up to 150 m.p.h. People who had
been lured outside were defenseless against hurtling debris. "The air was
streaked with garbage cans, automobile tops, doghouses, furniture," wrote a
storm survivor, L.F. Reardon.

The storm would leave 372 people dead, more than 6,000 injured, and $1.6 billion
in damage in today's dollars.

It has been more than 73 years since Miami was hit dead-on by a Category 4
hurricane like the one that struck that morning of Sept. 18, 1926. Experts now
warn that Miami, having narrowly escaped the worst of Hurricane Andrew in 1992
and Floyd in September, is long overdue for another catastrophic storm.

When it comes, it won't be a $1.6 billion-dollar storm. If that 1926 hurricane
were to strike today, the bill would be more than $80 billion, researchers
calculate.

In fact, hurricane specialists believe that any year now, the United States will
be blindsided by a $100 billion hurricane - one that would rock the insurance
industry and sock taxpayers with a staggering repair bill.

Statistically, a hurricane catastrophe is most likely to strike South Florida,
where million-dollar high-rises, luxury hotels, and pricey vacation homes line
the coast. But it could be almost anywhere along the built-out Gulf and Atlantic
Coasts - perhaps New Orleans, or Galveston, Texas.

The threat has little to do with global warming. It has everything to do with
human development. A largely unregulated, unplanned building boom has
transformed the nation's coasts, placing nearly $2 trillion worth of property in
harm's way.

During the last 50 years, this unprecedented period of building has paralleled
an era of hurricane quiet.

Now, hurricane experts warn, the party is over. A new era of dangerous
land-falling hurricanes is under way, an era that could last until 2020 or
longer.

"Our memories are so short," said Jerry Jarrell, who just retired as director of
the National Hurricane Center in Miami. "We say it ain't going to happen again.
Well, it's happening again."

THE HURRICANE NEXT TIME

For 40 years, William M. Gray of Colorado State University has studied tropical
cyclones. And for 16 years, with impressive results, he has been making
long-range forecasts of the numbers of hurricanes that will form in the Atlantic
and the Gulf.

Everything he sees tells him that the United States has entered a period of
costly hurricanes. The kind that pack tornado-level winds and haul walls of
water across whole towns. The kind that occurred in 1926, and several times in
the '40s and '50s.

A convergence of data and common sense tells Gray, an atmospheric scientist,
that nowhere in the country is the potential more frightening than in South
Florida.

To illustrate, he points to two maps of hurricane tracks in Florida. The first,
sparsely marked, shows storms prior to 1995. "This 25-year period, nothing," he
says. "This is the period when people buy homes and develop."

Then he points to the second map, one that looks to be covered with the mad
scribblings of a 2-year-old. "Those are the tracks of the '40s and '50s. Now
what happens when we go back to this?" he asks.

We're about to find out, Gray believes.

He is holding a terrifying portrait of high hurricane season in Florida. It is a
vision of palm trees bent to the ground, of flying wood and metal, of wildly
blowing curtains of water and debris, of mobile homes and sailboats tossed like
footballs, of ambulances and tent cities and contaminated water.

But at this moment, from his office in the foothills of the Rockies, it is a
vision that only this gangling man in the argyle sweater can see.

That vision might seem far-fetched to many people in Florida, which has had an
extraordinary run of luck over the last three decades. From 1941 to 1950, 20
land-falling hurricanes hit Florida, six of them major, packing winds from 111
to 150 m.p.h. From 1971 to the present, a mere six hurricanes, only one of them
major, made landfall there.

The residents of Fort Lauderdale, Miami, and the Keys have been particularly
blessed. Southeastern Florida was assaulted by 11 intense hurricanes from 1900
to 1960, but only one, Andrew, in the last 39 years.

The intense hurricanes are the important ones, causing more than half of all
private insured losses nationwide.

ANDREW: NOT THE BIG ONE

A decade ago, insurance industry officials estimated that in a worst-case
scenario, a hurricane would leave Florida with a $7 billion bill.

They were wrong. And in 1992 they would find out how wrong. At 5:05 a.m. on Aug.
24 that year, Andrew buzz-sawed across South Florida, near Homestead. More than
135,000 houses were damaged or destroyed, and more than 250,000 people were left
homeless.

The price tag was staggering: More than $30 billion, including $20 billion in
insured losses, the most expensive hurricane on record.

Yet for all the trauma, Andrew was not the Big One. Not even close.

In geographic coverage, Andrew was actually a small storm. The band of maximum
winds was only about nine miles wide, roughly the distance from Philadelphia
International Airport to City Hall.

In most hurricanes, the storm surge - the wall of water dragged ashore - does
most of the damage. But Andrew moved so quickly that flooding was negligible in
South Florida.

More significant, Andrew followed a relatively benign path.

Andrew's track minimized the damage to Dade County, the government said in its
post-storm report. Had the eye of the storm crossed the coast just 10 miles
north, it would have devastated downtown Miami, probably causing greater loss of
life and more than $50 billion in insured losses.

A COMBUSTIBLE ADDITIVE

Hurricanes have been churning in the Atlantic Basin and the Gulf of Mexico for
thousands of years. Only in modern times have the storms interacted with a
combustible additive: human development.

Consider that Florida has added two-thirds of its population - more than 10
million people - since 1950.

One indicator of the change in building levels came courtesy of Hurricane Opal,
a Category 3 hurricane that made landfall in the Florida Panhandle in October
1995.

The flood damage was greater than the combined total of damage from all coastal
storms in the state in the previous 20 years - $400 million.

Ironically, Opal unleashed a frenzy of speculation, driving up property values.
"We started getting calls from 'bottom fishers,'" recalled Ira Mae Hewatt, a
Realtor. Prices jumped 20 percent in the first six months after Opal.

Beachfront lots that sold for $250,000 before Opal now garner $400,000 or more.
A drive along the 2.5-mile Gulf Boulevard reveals towering condominiums fetching
up to $1 million per unit and pricey new resorts with marble porticos and sleek
pools - and few empty lots.

"What have we learned after Opal?" asked county administrator Hunter Walker. "I
don't think we learned anything."

In 1950, the year the Fort Lauderdale region was leveled by a Category 4
hurricane that produced a record 155-m.p.h. wind, Broward County had a
population of 83,933. Today, it is close to 1.5 million. In 1950, Dade County's
population was less than 500,000. Today it is more than two million. Fewer than
30,000 people lived in the Keys in 1950. Now, more than 80,000 do.

In the last five decades, the number of seasonal residences has more than
quadrupled in Florida, from 78,247 to 360,515, according to state figures. In
Collier County, on the southwest coast, the number of seasonal residences has
jumped 2,000 percent.

From 1909 to 1965, the Florida Keys took direct or indirect hits from major
hurricanes 12 times; Broward County, 10 times; and Collier County, eight.

Yet no major hurricane has affected any of those areas, directly or indirectly,
since 1965.

A FALSE SENSE OF SECURITY

The majority of the nation's coastal residents have never experienced a major
hurricane.

And in virtually every coastal city of any size from Texas to Maine, the United
States is building toward a hurricane disaster, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration said last year.

With satellites and radar providing early warning, it is unlikely that the
United States will suffer a disaster such as Hurricane Mitch, blamed for more
than 12,000 deaths in Central America in 1998, or the great Galveston hurricane
of 1900 that killed 8,000 people.

But though hurricane monitoring has improved immeasurably in the last 25 years,
Gray believes that fancy satellite and radar graphics have given people a false
sense of security.

"People see stuff on television, and they think great advancements are being
made," he said, "but the actual track prediction is only a little bit better."

Hurricane specialists believe that under the wrong circumstances, significant
casualties are possible along the developed coasts.

Emergency-management officials worry that coastal areas have become so crowded
that evacuation routes, such as those linking the Florida Keys, North Carolina's
Outer Banks, and New Jersey's barrier islands to the mainland can't handle all
the evacuees.

In September, as Hurricane Floyd menaced the Southeast coast, gridlock quickly
followed evacuation orders, from Florida to South Carolina. Floyd was able to
move a lot faster than most of the traffic. It was the nation's largest
peacetime evacuation.

Jarrell, the retired National Hurricane Center director, says he is concerned
about New Orleans in particular. "It takes forever to evacuate it," he said.
"Their fallback is to use the Superdome as a shelter. It may not even be safe,
but it's the best you can do. Standing-room-only is better than dying."

In 1997, a hurricane-evacuation study presented a chilling portrait of what
might happen in New Jersey if a major storm approached.

"The clearance times calculated for Cape May County are among the highest
calculated in the United States," it said.

"Basically, what it shows is that you can't get the people off the barrier
islands," said Clark Gilman, the state's director of floodplain management.

That document, prepared by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, and the state police, did not create much of a
stir. State officials did not circulate the study, Gilman said.

If a hurricane hit Atlantic City, Gilman warned in an earlier report, it could
catch people unprepared. Many casino guests, he said, are unfamiliar with their
surroundings and unaware of the peril imposed by a coastal storm or hurricane.

CLOSE CALLS, NOTHING MORE

At the north end of Atlantic City, where the Boardwalk confronted the worst of
the howling storm winds dead-on, a wall of water submerged Virginia Avenue on
Sept. 14, 1944.

The waves were at least 25 feet high. They smashed the world's most famous
promenade into dangerous chunks of debris that rode the surging waters and
crashed into buildings. Four feet of water swamped an area from Virginia to
Maine Avenues, and floodwaters swelled to the tips of the parking meters on
Atlantic Avenue.

The bulk of the destruction came from storm waves churned by a cyclone that was
agitating the ocean like a massive plunger as it moved from south to north about
30 miles offshore. The storm would kill at least 10 people in New Jersey, erase
60 percent of the Atlantic City Boardwalk, and devastate Sea Isle City,
Strathmere, Cape May, and Wildwood.

The damage was stunning, about a quarter of a billion dollars up and down the
Jersey coast, by state police estimates.

But perhaps the most unusual aspect of the 1944 hurricane is this: Nothing like
it has happened since. Hurricane Gloria, in 1985, was a close call, passing 26
miles off the coast. However, it moved swiftly, 44 m.p.h., and it approached at
low tide. The '44 storm was traveling 35 m.p.h. and approached at high tide.

Like the rest of the East Coast, the beach towns of New Jersey have enjoyed a
remarkable period of hurricane immunity.

"They're big-time due," said James Eberwine, the marine-forecasting specialist
with the National Weather Service in Mount Holly.

"When it happens, there's going to be disbelief," said Anthony Gigi, another
weather service meteorologist.

A direct hit by even a modest hurricane could be catastrophic, Eberwine said.
And a hurricane of the same path and intensity as the 1944 storm would do more
damage now, observed Gilman, the state floodplain-management director. Sea level
has risen about 8 inches since 1944, the result of melting glaciers. That
translates to a more dangerous storm surge.

A storm today would also encounter a far different landscape. Over the last 50
years, the total value of property in New Jersey's coastal towns has jumped
fivefold, adjusting for inflation.

A moderate hurricane is a realistic threat to the Shore and the rest of the
Northeast coast, especially late in the hurricane season, which ends Nov. 30.
Although few hurricanes can survive the cool ocean waters of northerly
latitudes, the ones that do are especially erratic and dangerous. The chilly
waters do not have time to drain the power from a storm caught in a fast-moving
air stream.

"If a hurricane leaves the Gulf Stream at 35 m.p.h., it's like a skater out of
control," said Nicholas Coch, a hurricane specialist at Queens College, in New
York.

In 1938, a rapidly moving Category 3 hurricane plowed across Long Island,
slamming into Connecticut and ravaging the forests of New Hampshire and Vermont.
That storm remains the Northeast's worst hurricane. It killed at least 600
people.

On then-sparsely populated Long Island, another area long overdue for a
catastrophic storm, it ripped open seven new inlets and killed 50 people.

In the 1930s, 162,000 people lived in Suffolk County, N.Y., which took the brunt
of the 1938 hurricane.

Today, two million do.

OMINOUS SIGNS

Gray and his team at Colorado State think they understand the reasons for the
long hurricane lull and, alarmingly, why it's over.

Gray relies on old-style statistical relationships, rather than computer models.
Two trends are especially ominous: The waters in the North Atlantic have warmed
up, and it's raining again in western Africa.

In active hurricane periods, sea-surface temperatures are above average in the
North Atlantic, and below average in the South Atlantic. North Atlantic
temperatures have been above average for the last five years, and so have the
numbers of hurricanes.

The oceans are far slower to change than land masses, and temperature trends can
last 25 to 40 years, said Christopher W. Landsea, a hurricane researcher with
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

It appears that the Atlantic contrasts have a profound effect on the upper
atmosphere off the west coast of Africa. That's a spawning region for tropical
storms. It is just far enough from the equator, about 300 miles, for a cyclone
to pick up spin from the Earth's rotation. And it is a perfect location for a
storm to mine deep, warm water.

To get started, a hurricane needs 80-degree waters, penetrating to a depth of
150 feet. To make the most of that heat energy, air currents have to rise
several miles into a moistened atmosphere. The air condenses, releasing more
heat energy and supplying more power to the storm.

A cool North Atlantic, however, favors dry winds that keep the air from rising
and shear off would-be storms.

When the Sahel region of western Africa is dry, hurricanes are infrequent. But
the Sahel has just been through its wettest five-year period since the 1960s,
Landsea said.

Since 1995, as if on cue, the Atlantic Basin has set a record for the number of
named storms for a five-year period.

Gray said that only one thing has saved the United States from catastrophic
damage in that period: Dumb luck - luck that, statistically, can't last.

When the luck runs out, the experts say, insurers, property owners and taxpayers
will pay a price.

Gilbert M. Gaul's e-mail address is ggaul@phillynews.com; Anthony R. Wood's is
twood@phillynews.com

* Inquirer researcher Frank Donahue contributed to this series.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Crisis on the Coast
The risky development of America's shores
Second of six parts

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 193 of 881 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                           September 3, 2005 Saturday
                                Toronto Edition

Hurricane season holiday need not be a disaster: Here's how to avoid being blown
away on vacation

BYLINE: Camilla Cornell, Weekend Post

SECTION: WEEKEND POST: TRAVEL; Pg. WP12

LENGTH: 727  words


Vacation packages to Mexico and the Caribbean are cheap right now, mainly
because the peak travel season to the tropics is a few months away.

But there's another reason for the bargain-basement beach vacations: Hurricane
season runs from June to November in the tropics. And, after seeing the images
of the devastation wreaked on the southern United States by Hurricane Katrina,
getting hit by a hurricane while on vacation is an experience most would rather
avoid.

"They're looking for sun, sand and relaxing," says Gary Sadler, director of
sales and marketing for Beaches/Sandals, "not hurricane winds, rain and
devastation."

The good news is, your chances of going head-to-head with one of nature's
monsters are actually pretty slim. The bad news? A hurricane can affect weather
patterns for miles around. Here are some tips to avoid being blown away on
vacation.

Choose the right time to go Although August has a reputation as a bad month for
hurricanes, the peak of the hurricane season falls from the beginning of
September to mid-October.

Pick a low-risk paradise According to the Caribbean Hurricane Network Web site,
stormcarib.com, the islands least likely to be battered by hurricanes are Aruba
and Bonaire, which have only experienced one serious hurricane since 1851. Next
safest are Trinidad and Curacao, with only one hurricane hit in the same time
period. Topping the list of the islands most often in a hurricane's path are
Abaco (in the Bahamas, with 18 hurricanes) and Grand Bahama with 15. In fact,
the Bahamas is a far more active region for hurricanes than either the eastern
or western Caribbean. To find out how a potential vacation location ranks, check
out StormCarib's climatology chart.

Cruise around it With sophisticated tracking systems, cruise ships are able to
avoid hurricanes by rerouting. As Carnival Cruises president Bob Dickinson told
industry newsletter Cruise Week: "Cruise ships manoeuvre, so we're in front of
[a hurricane] or behind it, but nowhere near it." And since hurricanes pull so
much moisture and wave energy into themselves, it's actually possible for areas
not in their path to have better weather than usual.

Does your resort offer hurricane protection? Beaches/Sandals is one of the major
resort chains offering hurricane protection. Under the chain's Blue Chip
Hurricane Guarantee, if a hurricane (as defined by the U.S. National Weather
Service) hits while you are a guest at any Sandals or Beaches resort, you will
receive a free replacement vacation (excluding air) to the resort of your choice
for the same duration as your original booking. The replacement trip is valid
for one year.

"I had a call from a guy a couple of weeks ago who had been to the Bahamas a few
years back," says Sadler. "He wanted to know when I thought another hurricane
might hit in the Caribbean." Sadler replied that he really didn't know, and
asked why the man was interested. "On my last vacation, I was there for 14
nights," the gentleman told him. "And the hurricane hit on the 13th night. You
gave me back 14 days of vacation." Says Sadler: "He was ready to do that again."
Other chains that offer hurricane protection include SuperClubs (which even
guarantees sunshine for its Jamaican resorts), Club Med and Wyndham Resorts.

Consider travel insurance Trip cancellation insurance may reimburse you should
you lose your vacation to a hurricane. The trick is to buy it before the
hurricane is named or it could be considered null and void.

Choose your travel agency wisely On Aug. 4, online travel agency Expedia.ca
launched a Hassle-Free Hurricane Promise. Basically, the policy states that any
time the Canadian Hurricane Centre or the U.S. National Hurricane Center issues
a hurricane watch or warning, Expedia will allow its customers to rebook for
another date or destination, waiving any change or cancellation fees. The policy
applies for travel anywhere in North America, including Mexico and the
Caribbean.

The company will also act as an advocate with airlines to ensure they help
customers out and waive any fees. "People look forward to planning trips and we
want them to have a feeling of confidence throughout the process," says Stuart
Morris, director of marketing. "If they choose to go to Florida or the
Caribbean, they shouldn't be lying in bed worrying that a hurricane is somehow
going to ruin their vacation."

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Things you need to think about if you're planning to take
advantage of bargain vacation packages in the Caribbean during hurricane season:
destination, timing, cruise ships and travel insurance.;
Colour Photo: Agence France-Presse, NASA; Satellite view of the Bahamas, lying
north of Cuba. One Web site says the region is one of the more active hurricane
areas.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2005 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 194 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 5, 2011 Friday

Officials predict active hurricane season

BYLINE: Laura B. Martinez, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 545 words


Aug. 05--HARLINGEN -- The remainder of the 2011 Atlantic hurricane season is
expected to be busier as forecasters have increased the number of storms.

Fourteen to 19 named storms are expected with seven to 10 that could become
hurricanes, three to five of those could become major hurricanes, said Gerry
Bell, lead hurricane season forecaster for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's Climate Prediction Center.

This means there are 9 to 14 additional named storms, seven to 10 hurricanes and
three to five major hurricanes forecasted for the remainder of the hurricane
season, after the five storms that have already developed.

"There is absolutely no reason that people should be complacent. We are now
entering the peak months of what is expected to be an active season, and now is
the time that people need to really make sure they have their hurricane
preparedness plans in place because we are expecting the activity to pick up
even more than it already has," Bell said.

The NOAA, the parent agency of the National Weather Service and National
Hurricane Center, called for an 85 percent chance of an above-normal season. Its
forecast in May was for a 65 percent chance of an above-normal season.

In May, NOAA forecast 12 to 18 storms, with six to 10 becoming hurricanes and
three to six of them becoming major hurricanes, classified as category 3 or
higher with wind speeds of 111 mph or greater.

"Typically during June and July we average one to two named storms, so we don't
generally see much activity during June or July," Bell said. "By far the bulk of
the activity in an above normal season such as we are predicting occurs during
August, September and October," Bell said.

The Atlantic Hurricane season that began June 1 and runs through Nov. 30 has
produced five storms. Tropical Storm Arlene in June and Tropical Storm Don in
July approached the Rio Grande Valley.

Bell said the updated forecast and increase in the number of named storms is
attributed to the absence of an El Nino weather system and the possible
redevelopment of the La Nina weather system in the fall, as well as warmer water
temperatures in the Atlantic Ocean.

"The El Nino normally would suppress the hurricane season...the El Nino has not
developed," Bell said.

According to NOAA records, the last hurricane to make landfall in the United
States was Ike in 2008, which struck Galveston. Last year was also an
above-normal season although none of the storms reached the U.S.

Federal authorities warned coastal residents against "a false sense of
security."

Richard Serino, deputy administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
said residents living along the U.S. coastlines have been lucky these pass few
year since there have been no direct strikes.

"Now is the time, if you haven't already, for you and your family to get
prepared ... we encourage to get a plan, get a kit and stay informed," Serino
said.

To see more of the Valley Morning Star, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.valleymorningstar.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, Valley Morning Star,
Harlingen, Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more
information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110805-HR-Officials-predict-active-hurricane-season-0805-20110805

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HR


                       Copyright 2011 Valley Morning Star


                          FOCUS - 195 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   September 17, 2004, Friday, FINAL EDITION

Storms dash dreams of Florida home

BYLINE: Marilyn Adams and Adam Shell

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1796 words

DATELINE: MIAMI

MIAMI -- Florida, which has lured more retirees and vacation homeowners than
anywhere else, might be losing some appeal for the same reason it's so
beautiful: its place in the tropics.

Florida's hurricane-prone geography might be a growing liability. The poundings
it has taken recently from hurricanes Charley, Frances and Ivan -- with millions
evacuated and millions left without power -- are making some people think twice
about buying property or retiring in a state so vulnerable. If government
meteorologists are right, significant weather changes mean Florida will be
seeing more hurricanes and more destructive hurricanes in decades to come.

Tony DosSantos, 54, a federal employee in New York, is reconsidering plans to
retire to the Sunshine State. Florida was high on his list of dream places to
move to with wife RoseMaria. But Arizona, with its dry heat and quiet desert,
now tops his list. Recent hurricanes convinced him he doesn't want to spend his
golden years fleeing life-threatening storms.


"News reports did a good job of dramatizing what people go through when a
hurricane hits," he says. "I don't want to experience that trauma." Santa Fe is
looking better to Sheryl Kottler Oshrin, 48. The Case Western University
professional in Cleveland spent 12 years in Florida as a college student and at
work. She dreamed of owning a home on Florida's Gulf Coast.

Now, "The idea of being down there is terrifying," she says. "You look at this
storm from your safe cocoon in the Midwest, and it looks really frightening."

Hurricane Frances was such a wide storm that on TV, it looked like a huge orange
blob out to swallow the state. Ivan, whose strong winds made it at one point a
Category 5 storm, the most destructive, was called "Ivan the Terrible." It
thundered ashore Thursday near the Alabama-Florida border, crushing buildings in
Pensacola, Fla., before heading inland. About 300,000 Florida Panhandle
residents lost power.

Aside from the fear factor, shoppers are finding that real estate in much of
Florida is no longer so cheap to buy and own. Florida has no state income tax, a
big draw for prospective buyers. But in some areas, home and condominium prices
last year jumped 20% or more amid record-low mortgage interest rates, strong
housing demand and investor speculation.

Past hurricanes already have roughly doubled insurance premiums statewide. In
southeast Florida, premiums have at least tripled since Hurricane Andrew, the
nation's costliest natural disaster, damaged or destroyed 130,000 homes 12 years
ago.

With the new spate of storms, "there will be a group of buyers who say, 'I don't
need this,' " says veteran real estate adviser Michael Cannon of Integra Realty
Resources in Miami. "People are already paying top dollar for real estate. Now,
some may decide to rent rather than buy. If that happens, prices will top off."

In the first half of 2004, the average price of a new single-family home hit a
record $400,000-plus in Broward and Palm Beach counties, Cannon's figures show.
But in the most exclusive neighborhoods in southeast Florida, homes start at
around $700,000, and homes right on the water start at $1 million.

John Talbott, author of The Coming Crash in the Housing Market, notes that baby
boomers buying vacation and retirement homes are helping drive up prices, but he
thinks the hurricanes might give some pause. "Such a devastating natural
disaster would have to make some of them rethink their choice of location," he
says.

State officials are quick to point out that Florida has weathered numerous
hurricanes in the past and continued to prosper. "Florida has proven itself an
extremely resilient state," says Scott Openshaw, spokesman for Gov. Jeb Bush's
economic development office. He says Bush and other state officials think this
hurricane season will have a short-term effect on investment, but no long-term
damage.

Building while dodging

Hurricane Andrew preceded a decade of spectacular growth in southeast Florida,
fueled in part by billions of dollars in insurance payouts. But during that
decade, southeast Florida was repeatedly spared a direct hit from a major
hurricane. Southeast Florida became the glamorous address of choice for sports,
film and music stars. Miami Beach enjoyed a renaissance, with condo towers
reaching new heights and "South Beach" becoming a metaphor for everything hot.

But even before hurricane activity heated up this year, U.S. retiree migration
to Florida had been slowing. In 2000, 19% of people over age 60 who migrated
across state lines for retirement went to Florida, vs. 26% in 1980, says Charles
Longino, a sociology professor at Wake Forest University.

Florida still is the top destination for retirees over age 60 moving across
state lines, followed by Arizona, California and Texas, he says. But Longino's
research shows three-quarters of all retirees spend their golden years in the
same homes and towns they lived in before they retired, a pattern he calls
"retiring in place."

He doubts Florida's recent reputation as a bull's-eye for deadly storms will put
a big dent in the migration there.

"The odds of having three or four hurricanes in one season are infinitesimal,"
he says. But the nation's top meteorologists say this season's storms aren't a
fluke. Scientists say subtle changes in ocean temperatures and winds are likely
to make Florida's annual hurricane season -- from June through November -- worse
in coming years.

Prominent academics and scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) say the region has entered a period of more powerful
hurricanes than the USA has seen in a quarter century.

Florida, with a vulnerable coast increasingly packed with homes, hotels and
condominiums, could be at risk of much greater property damage and loss of life
in the next two decades.

Hurricanes have done an average of $5 billion in annual damage in recent
decades; Hurricane Andrew, a Category 5 storm that struck the Miami area in 1992
and did $16 billion in damage (in 1992 dollars), was the exception.

But since 1995, scientists say, the waters of the Atlantic and Caribbean have
warmed slightly, and wind patterns that served to prevent formation of
hurricanes, or break up existing ones, have weakened. As a result, experts
foresee more hurricane damage, because storms will be stronger and because so
many affluent people now live along Florida's coast in expensive homes and
condos. About three quarters of Florida's 16 million residents live near the
coast.

Frances and Charley together have done about $11 billion in insured damage so
far this season. Ivan's damage is yet to be tallied, and hurricane season isn't
over.

In this new hurricane period, "a $10 billion hurricane won't be a
once-in-a-lifetime event. It could happen every three or for years," says
meteorologist Chris Landsea of NOAA's Hurricane Research Division in Miami.

"There's no way Florida won't get more of these destructive storms," says
Colorado State University professor Bill Gray, who has studied hurricanes since
the '50s.

More hurricanes would surely raise the price of paradise: higher building costs
due to stricter building codes, higher insurance costs and more storm
evacuations.

Backing out of buying

Already, some real estate agents have seen deals fall through. Paulette Butcher
of Century 21 Aaward Associates in Port Charlotte, near where Charley came
ashore, says one buyer backed out of a waterfront canal lot with a sale price of
$240,000. Another canceled a deal for a single-family home priced at more than
$400,000.

But agents say the risks haven't deterred buyers elsewhere, especially when they
think they're getting a deal. Greg Antonich, a ReMax agent in Daytona Beach, has
seen no letup in demand for condo units starting at $200,000 in a converted
oceanfront hotel there. Because of hurricane scares, developers haven't been
able to line up insurance and close sales. Even so, "We have people clamoring
for units," Antonich says. "They are upset because they can't get reservations."


Many people outside Florida still think the state's warm weather beats where
they live. Bill and Mary Kalmar of Lake Orion, Mich., north of Detroit, plan to
relocate to Florida next year, hurricanes or not. The winter cold and snow in
Michigan are worse than anything they can imagine in Florida.

"I think I can outrun a hurricane," says Bill Kalmar, 61. "You can't outrun a
Michigan winter."

Deep thoughts

But even some longtime Florida residents are having second thoughts this
hurricane season.

Carmel Ellis, 27, who owns a condo near Clearwater, is re-thinking her Florida
dreams. Hurricane Charley missed her area, but gave her pause about a long-term
plan to live on the Florida coast.

"Growing up in Des Moines, I always had a dream about opening my doors and
walking out onto a beach," says Ellis, a Web designer. After Charley, she says,
she'd be happy with an inland house and backyard pool.

To those who lost homes during Hurricane Andrew, that storm was a wrenching
financial and emotional loss. Every new storm warning makes them uneasy.

Linda and Irwin Bernstein evacuated their 3,800-square-foot home in the suburb
of Pinecrest, south of Miami, before Andrew hit. When they returned, "It looked
like an atomic bomb had struck," recalls Linda, 65. Their block was
unrecognizable. Half their house was gone, and what contents were left were
strewn everywhere.

They sold the house as is, and moved to a condo on Miami Beach. When Frances
brushed the Miami area Sept. 4, they evacuated again.

"I've thought about leaving Florida," says Linda, who has lived in the state 43
years. "I'd love to have two homes, so we could spend the winter here and summer
somewhere else. You can keep hurricane season. We're tired of it."

---

Adam Shell reported from New York

State's had run-ins with lots of storms

Since Hurricane Andrew in 1992, Florida has not sustained a direct hit from a
catastrophic major hurricane. Storms that have affected the state from
1994-2003:

1994

Tropical Storm Alberto

Tropical Storm Beryl

* Hurricane Gordon

1995

Tropical Storm Allison

* Hurricane Erin

Tropical Storm Jerry

* Hurricane Opal

1996

Tropical Storm Josephine

1998

* Hurricane Earl

* Hurricane Georges

Tropical Storm Mitch

1999

Tropical Storm Harvey

* Hurricane Irene

2000

* Hurricane Gordon

Tropical Storm Helene

2001

Tropical Storm Barry

Tropical Storm Gabrielle

2002

Tropical Storm Edouard

2003

Tropical Depression Henri

Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color; PHOTO, B/W, Candace Barbot, The Miami Herald via AP;
Dream home no more: Jack McAllister sits in what was his living room. He bought
his dream retirement home in Punta Gorda, Fla., three months ago. <>Mixed
message: A sign at the entrance to Pensacola Beach, Fla., says it all on Sept.
14.

TYPE: COVER STORY

                      Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 196 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                  thesun.co.uk

                      August 25, 2017 Friday 10:24 AM GMT

BLOWIN' IN THE WIND What causes hurricanes, what's the strongest category and
when is the Atlantic hurricane season?;
Hurricanes are divided into precise categories based on their wind speed so the
public can brace themselves for the potential damage

BYLINE: By Neal Baker

SECTION: NEWS; Version:7

LENGTH: 903 words


THE Caribbean has been battered by a quick-fire string of devastating hurricanes
in 2017 including the deadly category five storm Hurricane Irma.

Here is our guide to how hurricanes form and an explanation of the different
categories used to rate their destructive power...

What is a hurricane and how do they form?

A hurricane is another name for a tropical cyclone - a powerful storm that forms
over warm ocean waters near the equator.

Those arising in the Atlantic or eastern Pacific are called hurricanes, while
those in the western Pacific and Indian ocean are dubbed typhoons or cyclones.

North of the equator they spin anticlockwise because of the rotation of the
earth, while they turn the opposite way in the southern hemisphere.

Cyclones are like giant weather engines fuelled by water vapour as it evaporates
from the sea.

Warm, moist air rises away from the surface, creating a low pressure system that
sucks in air from surrounding areas - which in turn is warmed by the ocean.

As the vapour rises it cools and condenses into swirling bands of cumulonimbus
storm clouds.

The system grows and spins faster, sucking in more air and feeding off the
energy in sea water that has been warmed by the sun.

At the centre, a calm "eye" of the storm is created where cooled air sinks
towards the ultra-low pressure zone below, surrounded by spiralling winds of
warm air rising.

The faster the wind, the lower the air pressure at the centre and the storm
grows stronger and stronger.

Tropical cyclones usually weaken when they hit land as they are no longer "fed"
by evaporation from the warm sea.

But they often move far inland - dumping huge amounts of rain and causing
devastating wind damage - before the "fuel" runs out and the storm dies.

Hurricanes can also cause storm surges - when the low air pressure sucks the sea
level higher than normal, swamping low-lying coasts if they coincide with high
tide.

What are the different hurricane categories on the Saffir-Simpson scale?

When wind speeds reach 39mph a storm is officially classed as a Tropical Storm.
Above 74mph and it is called a Category one hurricane.

A storm heading towards Britain -  Hurricane Ophelia -was upgraded to a category
one hurricane after its winds were measured at 75mph.

Further categories up to a maximum of five are available for very powerful
storms, with those of Category three and above considered a "major hurricane".

The Saffir-Simpson scale was devised in 1971 by civil engineer Herbert Saffir
and meteorologist Robert Simpson, who was head of the US National Hurricane
Centre.

It was introduced to the public in 1973 as a means of communicating the danger
of upcoming storms so that populations could better prepare.

The scale was tweaked in 2009 to remove air pressure and storm surge ranges,
transforming it into a pure measurement of wind scale.

It helps to paint a clear picture of the damage to buildings that can be
expected from hurricane force winds.

But it does not take account of the potential devastation caused by monsoon
downpours or tidal storm surges caused by the low air pressure.

The categories are as follows:

liCategory one: Wind speeds 74-95mph - very dangerous winds will produce some
damage

liCategory two: Wind speeds 96-110mph - extremely dangerous winds will cause
extensive damage

liCategory three: Wind speeds 111-129mph - devastating damage will occur

liCategory four: Wind speeds 130-156mph - catastrophic damage will occur

liCategory five: Wind speeds 157+mph - areas will be completely razed

What is the strongest category of hurricane?

The strongest category of hurricane is a category 5, with winds of over 157mph.

Hurricane Katrina - which struck New Oreleans, Missippi and the neighbouring
states in late August 2005, killing 1,833 both directly and indirectly - was a
category 5 hurricane.

It was the  single most catastrophic natural disaster in US history, according
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Total damage for Hurricane Katrina is estimated at $108billion (£82million),
making it the costliest hurricane in US history, FEMA said. Hurricane Irma was
also classified as a category five storm.

It is the most powerful Atlantic hurricane ever with sustained winds over 185mph
and gusts of 220mph.

Irma  devastated a number of islands in the Caribbean before smashing into
Florida on the US mainland. Hurricane Jose, following a similar path, reached
category three with winds above 110mph. And category one  Hurricane Katia hit
Mexico in September before dissipating.

In August around 60 people were killed and  billions of damage caused by
devastating flooding brought by category four Hurricane Harvey.

When is hurricane season in the Atlantic?

Hurricanes form when the ocean is warm. In the Atlantic this means the summer
and autumn.

Meteorologists class the Atlantic hurricane season as running from June 1 to
November 30, although intense storms can happen outside these dates.

Forecasters said in August that the 2017 hurricane season would be
"above-normal," with 14 to 19 named storms ahead of the peak season.

An average Atlantic hurricane season produces 12 named storms, of which six
become hurricanes and three major hurricanes.

Some scientists have blamed  the series of intense storms on the absence of the
El Niño weather phenomenon in the Pacific.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBTSUN


                    Copyright 2017 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 197 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                  thesun.co.uk

                    September 6, 2017 Wednesday 2:18 PM GMT

JOSE ON THE WAY Hurricane Jose latest - what is its path, where is it now, where
is it expected to hit and what category is it?;
Hurricane Jose has strengthened as it makes its way north up the Atlantic coast
of the US

BYLINE: By Felix Allen

SECTION: NEWS; Version:19

LENGTH: 381 words


HURRICANE Jose is continuing to travel up the Atlantic coast of the US -
bringing with it strong winds and creating dangerous "rip currents".

Here is the latest info on the storm which has arrived in the midst of one of
the worst hurricane seasons in recent memory.

Where is Hurricane Jose?

On Monday night, Hurricane Jose was roughly 225 miles east of North Carolina and
heading in a north east direction.

As it is currently over the ocean, Jose is causing strong wind and waves but no
damage to property.

Residents on the East Coast have been urged to continually monitor the
hurricane.

What is Jose's latest path?

The latest weather models predict that Jose will continue to move north, several
hundred metres off the east coast of America.

Hurricane Jose weakened to a tropical storm with maximum 70mph winds on Tuesday
night.

Forecasters said dangerous surf and rip currents were likely to continue along
the US East Coast but said the storm was unlikely to make landfall.

Big waves caused by Jose swept five people off a coastal jetty in Rhode Island
and they were hospitalised after being rescued.

A tropical storm warning was posted for coastal areas in Rhode Island and
Massachusetts, and tropical storm watches were up for parts of New York's Long
Island and Connecticut.

How does Jose compare to Hurricane Irma?

Hurricane Jose is the 10th Atlantic storm named so far this year, following on
from  Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma.

But Irma, is the most powerful storm ever recorded in the Atlantic, ranked at
the maximum Category 5.

Forecasters said last month the Atlantic hurricane season would be
"above-normal," with 14 to 19 named storms ahead of the peak season.

Irma's monster weather system is likened to the size of France.

It battered the Caribbean islands over several days, wreaking devastation with
winds of 185mph - leaving at least 25 people dead.

What category is Hurricane Jose now?

Hurricane Jose is currently a Category 1 hurricane but is expected to weaken as
it moves north and could be downgraded to a tropical storm.

figcaptionHurricane Jose storms towards land aerial footage from the
International Space Station shows

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBTSUN


                    Copyright 2017 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 198 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                  thesun.co.uk

                     September 7, 2017 Thursday 3:01 PM GMT

WHY THE WIND BLOWS From Irma to Maria, why are there so many hurricanes hitting
the US and will there be more in the future?;
Hurricane Maria made its devastating mark as the third major megastorm to batter
the Caribbean and South East US region in 2017

BYLINE: By Jon Lockett and Neal Baker

SECTION: NEWS; Version:4

LENGTH: 678 words


AMERICA and the Caribbean have been struck by multiple hurricanes during the
summer and autumn of 2017. Harvey pounded Texas in August, while 160mph  Irma
struck the Caribbean, Bahamas and the US mainland around Florida in September,
bringing utter devastation to thousands and killing dozens - but what is causing
the  extreme weather in the region?

Why are

The Atlantic is primed for making major hurricanes right now due to three major
ingredients.

America usually has a ridge of low pressure along its east coast, which helps
steer storms away.

But this invisible ridge has pushed west this year, leaving the eastern
seaboard, the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico unprotected and exposed to
hurricanes.

The other two ingredients are warm Atlantic Ocean temperatures that extend deep
underwater, creating high levels of moisture in the air as it evaporates.

Irma grew in power thanks to sea temperatures hovering around 85 degrees
Fahrenheit, which are ideal for fuelling hurricane intensification.

Irma followed on the heels of Harvey, because of this change in air pressure
along the East Coast.

And  160mph Maria followed suit on 18 September, utterly levelling the island of
Dominica and causing "mind-boggling" levels of destruction, according to its
prime minister Roosevelt Skerrit. Tropical Storm Nate is the fourteenth of its
kind to move across the Atlantic this year.

Nate formed off the coast of Nicaragua on Thursday and is expected to drench
part of Central America and Mexico.

Officials from the US National Hurricane Center predicted the storm to dump as
much as 50 cm of rain across Nicaragua - with some localised areas receiving
increased downpours.

Why didn't the experts see these huge storms coming?

Some did, including Philip Klotzbach, an atmospheric scientist at Colorado State
University.

In early July, Klotzbach's team predicted the Atlantic Ocean would experience an
above-average hurricane season because of the El Niño-Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) - or rather because of its absence this year.

"We've only had 16 other hurricanes on record that have been as strong as Irma
is right now," he told  Newshour at the time of the hurricane.

The El Niño weather phenomenon creates extremely warm temperatures in the
Pacific Ocean, which pushes strong winds into the Atlantic, creates high levels
of wind shear and stops hurricanes.

When Pacific sea temperatures reverse and cool, it creates La Niña, which tends
to drive hurricanes.

Gusts from Hurricane Irma topped 220mph[/caption]

Why do hurricanes never hit the West Coast of the US?

Hurricanes form both in the Atlantic basin, to the east of the continental US
and in the Northeast Pacific basin, to the west of the US.

The hurricanes in the Northeast Pacific almost never hit the US, however,
whereas the ones in the Atlantic basin strike the US mainland just less than
twice a year on average.

There are two main reasons for this disparity.

The first is that hurricanes in the northern hemisphere form at tropical and
subtropical latitudes and then tend to move toward the west-northwest.

In the Atlantic, such a motion often brings the hurricane into the vicinity of
the East Coast of the US.

In the Northeast Pacific, the same west-northwest track carries hurricanes
farther offshore, well away from the US West Coast.

The second factor is the difference in water temperatures along the US East and
West coasts.

Along the East Coast, the Gulf Stream provides a source of warm (above 80
degrees Fahrenheit, or 26.5 degrees Celsius) waters, which helps to maintain the
hurricane.

Along the West Coast, however, ocean-surface temperatures rarely rise above the
lower 70s F (the low 20s C.) even in the middle of summer.

Such relatively cool temperatures do not provide enough thermal energy to
sustain a hurricane's strength.

So the occasional Northeast Pacific hurricane that does track back toward the US
encounters the cooler waters of the Pacific, which can quickly reduce the
storm's strength."

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBTSUN


                    Copyright 2017 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 199 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             August 10, 2008 Sunday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

DON'T PANIC, JUST BE WARY

BYLINE: CURTIS KRUEGER, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 843 words



HIGHLIGHT: In this surprisingly busy hurricane season, planners say to be
prepared.


It's easy to forget this hurricane season: Plywood and shutters are gathering
dust in garages across Tampa Bay, and no named storm has hit Florida.

So why does state meteorologist Ben Nelson say "it's a very active year"?

Because more tropical storms have formed early this hurricane season than all
but four years of the last 150, Nelson said. And because we are now in the
busiest part of the hurricane season.

Last week, experts raised their predictions for this year's Atlantic hurricane
activity.

"It's likely that we're going to have more storms" compared to the relatively
mild years of 2006 and 2007, said Florida emergency management director Craig
Fugate. "Whether they'll come to Florida, we don't know."

No one can predict whether a hurricane will hit us during the
June-through-November hurricane season this year. But this much is clear: When
more bullets fire out of the machine gun, it's more likely one will hit you. And
this year, the tropics are firing.

The NOAA, the federal agency that oversees the National Weather Service and the
National Hurricane Center, last week said there was an 85 percent chance that
2008 will be an above-average hurricane season. In May it set the figure at 65
percent. Also last week, noted hurricane researcher William Gray increased his
forecast to 17 named storms for the year in the Atlantic region, compared to the
15 he predicted in early June.

Bay News 9 chief meteorologist Mike Clay said in some seasons, the storms all
seem to sputter out before they get started. This time, it's the opposite.

"We're in one of those years where everything just wants to develop," Clay said.

Which brings us to a perennial question: Is Tampa Bay ready?

"I don't even know where we would go," said Amanda Dell, 35, of Largo, when
asked about hurricane evacuation plans. Dell, who is pregnant, said she and her
boyfriend do not have an emergency hurricane kit for themselves or their
children, who are 2, 5 and 10. She couldn't really explain why.

Karin Ryan could. "I've just been so busy I haven't had time," said Ryan, 64, of
St. Petersburg. But then she thought about it for a moment, and realized she did
have canned goods and a portable radio on hand. "I think I'm in pretty good
shape, I really do," she said.

The Tampa Bay region does get slashed with tropical storms and other severe
weather, but hurricanes have spared the region from a direct hit since 1921.
That's good, of course, but it also worries emergency planners, who fear local
residents have no personal experience with hurricanes and have failed to take
the threat to heart.

"There is some complacency across the board," said Jim Martin, director of
emergency management for Pasco County.

Anyone who doubts a hurricane could hit here should reflect back on 2004,
several disaster planners said. That's when Hurricane Charley steamed up the
Gulf of Mexico toward Pinellas County, but took a slight curve to the east and
smashed Punta Gorda instead.

Pinellas emergency management director Sally Bishop said when she saw Hurricane
Bertha, which began off the coast of Africa at an especially early date this
July, she thought it was "probably an indication that it's going to be an active
hurricane season." But she also said that doesn't really matter; a hurricane
could smash into us even in a below-average year. She urges people to prepare
like "there's one coming and it's going to be our problem."

Although it's rare for hurricanes to hit Tampa Bay, it's more common to face
power outages, sometimes for days, when severe storms do pass through. That's
one reason the planners suggest food, water and a portable radio for the
hurricane kit. With the struggling economy on many people's minds, this year
Pinellas officials prepared a video on how to stock hurricane supplies on a
budget.

Tina Oliver of the Lealman area north of St. Petersburg said she always keeps
extra canned food and water on hand, and has a portable radio. She even prepares
for hurricanes when choosing a place to live.

"I try to move to a place where it's not a low-lying area," she said.

FAST FACTS

Prepare for the worst

Decide early whether you will leave or stay put during a hurricane. If you live
in an evacuation zone, you may want to find a friend who lives on high ground
who would put you up until the storm passes. Don't forget to make a plan for
your pets.

Either way, it's a good idea to prepare a hurricane kit that at the very least
should contain food, water and medicine for three days, plus a portable radio
with extra batteries.

Pinellas County officials say you can stock your hurricane box without spending
much money by using canned goods already in your house and using supplies you
already may have, such as flashlights or a portable radio. Also, avoid buying
expensive bottled water; you can fill your bathtub. Or, fill plastic containers
with water and put them in your freezer, which will also help keep your food
cool.

For more information on local hurricane evacuation zones and how to stock a
hurricane box, go to: tampabay.com/specials/2008/reports/hurricane-guide/.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2008 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 200 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                              May 28, 2010 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricane forecast ominous; Officials worry that storm surges would spread Gulf
of Mexico oil spill, worsening its impact

BYLINE: RICHARD FOOT, Canwest News Service; Reuters

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 622  words

DATELINE: HALIFAX


Just when cleanup crews in the oil-slicked Gulf of Mexico are hoping for months
of undisturbed weather, hurricane forecasters in the United States and Canada
warned yesterday that the summer and fall could bring more than a dozen of the
storms hurtling into the Gulf, and up the East Coast of North America.

"We're definitely expecting an above-average hurricane season in the Atlantic
Ocean," said Chris Fogarty, a supervisor at the Canadian Hurricane Centre, at a
news conference in Halifax.

The U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -the agency that
forecasts the annual number of expected hurricanes - announced yesterday that it
expects 14 to 23 named storms to develop in the equatorial waters of the
mid-Atlantic this year.

The agency said eight to 14 of those could turn into hurricanes, with winds
reaching 118 kilometres an hour. Three to seven could become major Category 3 or
higher hurricanes, with winds of at least 177 km/h.

That troubling forecast - 14 to 23 storms and eight to 14 hurricanes - far
exceeds the 10 named storms and six hurricanes that have occurred each year, on
average, between 1951 and 2009.

NOAA's prediction was also supported this week by non-government forecasters in
the U.S.

Hurricane experts at Colorado State University and at the private firm Weather
Services International are also calling for a highly active hurricane season,
from June to November. Weather Services International said the 2010 season could
be the most active since 2005, the busiest hurricane season in recorded history,
and the year Hurricane Katrina devastated New Orleans.

In Halifax, Fogarty cautioned that it's difficult to accurately predict how many
storms the season will bring. And even if a large number of storms develop in
the Atlantic, he said, it's even harder to know how many might move north into
Canadian waters.

"There is the potential for these storms to curve up into our area, (but) the
number that will move into the Canadian region is impossible to count," he said.
In 2005, for example, 28 named storms emerged in the open Atlantic, but only six
had any impact on Canada.

"Our main message this year is, don't worry too much about whether the hurricane
season will be above or below normal," Fogarty said. "Instead, be prepared and
understand the risks to your property, and be prepared for these events that do
come up our way."

Fogarty declined to speculate on whether Canada-bound storms could churn up oil
from the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico and move the slick into the
Northwest Atlantic. U.S. government officials, however, acknowledged hurricane
storm surges carrying oil inland is a major concern.

"If we have a severe storm come into the Gulf, my biggest concern is storm
surge. Pushing oil up on land even further, up on beach areas in Mississippi,
possibly Alabama," said Aaron Studwell, chief meteorologist for First Insight
Trading in Houston. Even if BP's current "top kill" effort works, the oil
hanging at and below the surface still needs to be cleaned up before a storm
makes it worse, Studwell said.

Fogarty and other experts say record warm surface ocean temperatures in the
Atlantic tropics, where hurricanes take shape, plus a calming of strong, El Nino
winds over the eastern Pacific Ocean - which sweep toward the Atlantic and break
up, developing hurricanes - are the main factors in their dire 2010 forecasts.

Last year, a serious hurricane season was also expected, but the El Nino winds
broke apart many Atlantic storms before they could mature and gather strength.

"This year, with cooler waters in the Pacific, we'll likely have much weaker
winds, allowing storms to develop vertically in the atmosphere. That's one of
the biggest predictors," Fogarty said.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: NOAA HANDOUT; Satellite image shows Hurricane Katrina in 2005, the
busiest hurricane season in recorded history. Eight to 14 hurricanes are
expected this year.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2010 The Gazette, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 201 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                The Denver Post

                              June 1, 2015 Monday
                              MON REGIONAL Edition

Hurricane cities due for storm

BYLINE: Seth Borenstein

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 612 words


OCEAN CITY, MD. For millions of Americans living in hurricane zones on the Gulf
and East coasts, recent decades have been quiet maybe too quiet.

Cities like Tampa, Houston, Jacksonville and Daytona Beach historically get hit
with major hurricanes every 20 to 40 years, according to meteorologists. But
those same places have now gone at least 70 years sometimes more than a century
without getting smacked by those monster storms, according to data analyses by
an MIT hurricane professor and The Associated Press.

These are places where people may think they know what to expect from a major
hurricane, but they really don't. These are cities where building construction
has boomed but haven't been tested by nature at its strongest. In the Tampa
region, an Andrew sized storm could cause more than $200 billion in damage,
according to a local government study in 2010.

Few of Tampa's current residents witnessed the last major hurricane that hit
there in October 1921. Movies were silent, booze was illegal and Warren Harding
was president. For northeast Florida and southern Georgia, the last major
hurricane was sometime in the 19th century.

"We've been kind of lucky," said MIT meteorology professor Kerry Emanuel, who
along with the AP crunched numbers on how often hurricanes have hit metro
regions and compared them to when the last time they were hit. "Luck will run
out. It's just a question of when."

This hurricane season, beginning Monday, doesn't look to be as busy. The
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecasts a 70 percent chance of
fewer than normal hurricanes, mostly because of an El Ni\xF1o weather
oscillation. But even a quiet season can have one devastating storm hit. That's
what happened when Andrew smashed parts of Miami in 1992; it was the second
costliest hurricane on record, in a below average year for overall hurricane
activity.

Craig Fugate, administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, is
preparing for the worst and worrying that other people aren't. Inexperienced
people "generally underestimate how bad it will be and make decisions about
staying when they should be evacuating," Fugate said. "You have to accept the
fact that every time a major storm threatens, it's a new experience for 99
percent of the people involved."

Experts are especially worried about the Tampa region. Emanuel calculates using
past storm data and computer simulations that a major hurricane in general
should hit Tampa every quarter century or so. The National Hurricane Center,
calculating on past storms a bit differently, says a major hurricane should hit
every 30 years or so. But it's been decades upon decades since the big one hit.

It has been more than nine years since the U.S. was struck by a major hurricane
Superstorm Sandy did major damage but didn't qualify meteorologically as a major
hurricane. That's a streak that is so unprecedented that NASA climate scientist
Timothy Hall went looking to see if it could be explained by something that was
happening with the weather or climate. He found that big storms formed, they
just didn't hit America, coming close and hitting islands in the Caribbean and
Mexico. The lack of hurricanes hitting the U.S. "is a matter of luck," Hall
concluded in a peer reviewed study.

Hurricane center director Rick Knabb lives in a city, Fort Lauderdale, that
hasn't been directly hit by a major hurricane since 1950, though Andrew came
close. "We should count our blessings that in any particular location, you've
gone a long time without a significant impact," Knabb said. "It's not like
hurricanes or tropical storms haven't happened anymore. They just haven't
happened here or where you live."

LOAD-DATE: June 04, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: This photo taken Aug. 25, 1992, shows the water tower, a landmark in
Florida City, Fla., still standing over the ruins of the coastal community that
was hit by the force of Hurricane Andrew. Associated Press file

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2015 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 202 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The Washington Post

                     August 20, 2000, Sunday, Final Edition

Jonathan Yardley

Jonathan Yardley

SECTION: BOOK WORLD; Pg. X02; JONATHAN YARDLEY

LENGTH: 1239 words



INSIDE THE HURRICANE

Face to Face With Nature's Deadliest Storms

By Pete Davies

Henry Holt. 264 pp. $ 25


Writing about Hurricane Mitch, the ghastly storm that sat on top of Honduras two
years ago for what seemed an eternity and ultimately pounded that poor country
to the edge of extinction, Pete Davies notes that "not for nothing is the
Spanish word for storm el tormento." Or, as he writes elsewhere: "The word
hurricane derives from the name of an evil deity, the Carib god Hunrakan. This
malign spirit craves human life; it is reliably estimated that, in the five
centuries since Columbus first arrived in the Bahamas, at least a quarter of a
million people--perhaps a third of a million--have been killed in the Atlantic
tropics by hurricanes."

Whether that is a precisely accurate account of the derivation of hurricane is
open to dispute--the Oxford English Dictionary cites considerably more varied
and less specific origins--but the point is well taken, and the imagery is
appropriate. The hurricane ("the term used in the Americas for a storm system
more correctly known by meteorologists as a tropical cyclone") is nature at
close to its most malign, its destructive powers exceeded only--perhaps--by the
volcano and the earthquake. Yet like the volcano if not the earthquake, the
hurricane is also nature at its most beautiful and majestic. Here is how Davies
describes flying inside the eye of Hurricane Bret in August 1999, aboard a
Lockheed P-3 flown by a crew from the federal Hurricane Research Center:

"The cloud parted around us, there was a sudden blinding brilliance of sunlight,
the plane banked to start circling around the wall and as my sight grew
accustomed to the glare, I began slowly to realize the astounding vastness and
beauty of the place we had entered. . . . the eyewall was an enormous bank of
whiteness sloping steeply upward to 50,000 feet or higher, and curving sharply
beneath us down to the sea. It seemed to be built of roll upon roll, coil upon
coil of bundled cloud, like a massive pile of folded towels. . . . It had an
eerie blend about it of impassive poise and furious motion, a titanic stillness
containing terrible energies. It soared up to a clearly delimited rim, and
within that lay a blazing, spotless hole of sunlit blue sky. Below, patches of
sea boiled in a seething mayhem of broken water. It was a perfect eye. . . . But
it was God's stadium nonetheless, an almighty bowl of tranquillity surrounded by
epically vast stands of wind-packed white cloud climbing all about us, unbroken,
smoothly towering taller than mountains."

If Davies's prose gets a bit out of control there, who can blame him? If the
thought of flying into the eye of a hurricane in an elderly turbo-prop plane
leaves you a trifle queasy--which certainly is how it leaves me--by the same
token the chance to see such unearthly beauty would make almost any hazard a
fair price to pay. Besides which, as Davies points out, these men have by now
flown into scores of hurricanes, and they always come back to tell the tale, not
to mention bring back the information about wind speed, sea temperature and
other matters that help make the inexact science of hurricane forecasting
somewhat less so.

Inexact it may be, but it attracts the interest of millions and, as hurricanes
heat up and aim for some unfortunate stretch of coastline, it affects the
apprehensions of tens or hundreds of thousands. As these words appear the 2000
Atlantic hurricane season is only a couple of weeks away from its peak, and no
doubt audience numbers for the Weather Channel are beginning to climb
commensurately. Viewed from the safety of one's house, a hurricane is grand
entertainment, and viewed from the director's chair it is a grand commercial
opportunity: "Early Saturday morning the eye was abeam of Miami; outer rainbands
skimmed a whisker away from West Palm Beach. The Weather Channel became excited
and, sponsored as they are by Home Depot, started to film people buying
plywood."

Touche. But as the heart of this book makes abundantly clear, a hurricane is not
a movie or a photo op. It is deadly serious and deadly business, yet we
resolutely decline to see it as such. Yes, Americans who were caught in two of
the worst hurricanes of recent vintage, Hugo and Andrew, most likely will never
again say a frivolous or dismissive word about such storms, but the rest of us
mostly shrug them off. In part this may be the human inclination to say that it
can't happen here, or to me; in part it may be that more often than not
hurricanes drift away and die at sea, or land in lightly inhabited regions or
foreign places; in part it may be because they are relatively infrequent and
usually do not live up to the calamitous hype they get on television and in the
press.

Yet if there is a single lesson to be learned from Inside the Hurricane, it is
Listen up. Hurricanes are bad, they're likely to get worse and more frequent in
years to come, and our apparatus for forecasting and defending against them is
woefully underfunded and understaffed. Financial support for the Hurricane
Research Division and the National Hurricane Center is a pittance, adding up to
far less than 1 per cent of "the average annual damage bill for hurricanes in
the United States." Yet not merely do 40 million Americans now live on shoreline
within hurricane range, not merely are their numbers rising steadily as more and
more of us seek the good life by the water, but there is strong evidence that we
are heading into one of those "periods of intense [hurricane] activity lasting
from 20 to 40 years" in which "the surface of the Atlantic is measurably warmer,
and an overall regime of lower wind shear across the ocean is measurably more
conducive to letting hurricanes build."

Inside the Hurricane is thus valuable as a red alert of sorts, and it is also
both informative and--dare the word be uttered in this context?--entertaining.
As already indicated, Davies's prose sometimes gets the worst of him, and the
book is oddly organized--its structure, to put it charitably, is eccentric--but
there is some solid reporting. Davies describes in detail the storm
chasers--"good science done by brave men on a puny budget"--who take to the
skies whenever hurricanes threaten. He sets forth a clear (at least to this
untrained eye) description of how hurricanes come into being. He gives an
amusing and instructive account of "weather modification," the vainglorious
attempt in the 1970s to "try to weaken hurricanes, to dissipate them and break
them up." He takes a few well-aimed whacks at the media, quoting one hurricane
expert, "I hate the TV news media. It's so transient. Dan Rather standing on the
beach with his hair flapping." He describes how Bill Gray, from the unlikely
vantage point of Colorado, devised a system for uncannily accurate long-range
hurricane forecasts. And he conveys vividly the randomness of hurricanes, the
twists of winds or seas or whatever that steer hurricanes away from great
population centers (viz., Hurricane Floyd in 1999) at the last minute or guide
them unerringly toward some unfortunate spot (viz., Honduras in 1998) and then
leave them there to do unspeakable damage.

All in all a good and useful book. And talk about beach reading. . . .


Jonathan Yardley's e-mail address is yardley@twp.com. His columns appear Mondays
and Thursdays in Style.


LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 2000 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 203 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           December 2, 1992 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

EXPERT WHO CALLED `92 CORRECTLY PREDICTS 3 BIG HURRICANES IN `93

BYLINE: By SCOTT G. CAMPBELL, Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 669 words


If a Colorado scientist is right-- and he almost always is-- the hurricane

season that ended Monday was nothing compared with what's coming next year.

Imagine that first a Hurricane Andrew hits, leaving 55 dead and $30

billion in damage. And then a Hurricane Gilbert hits somewhere. And then a

Hugo.

It could happen next year, said William Gray, a professor at Colorado

State University, who predicted this year's hurricane season with almost 100

percent accuracy.

Gray cannot predict when or where a hurricane will hit. But since 1984, he has
been eerily accurate in forecasting how many storms will form, how severe they
will be and how long they will last.

For the 1993 hurricane season, which runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, Gray

predicts 11 tropical storms will form, six will become hurricanes, and three

will be severe, with winds of 111 mph or above.

To gauge the reliability of Gray's prediction, consider the forecast he

made in November 1991 for the 1992 hurricane season.

* Gray predicted four hurricanes. There were four hurricanes.

* Gray predicted one of those would be a severe hurricane. Andrew hit

south Dade County with winds of about 145 mph.

* Gray predicted there would be 15 hurricane days-- 24-hour periods in

which a hurricane was blowing. There were 15.75 days.

* Gray predicted there would be 35 named storm days in which a tropical

storm or hurricane was blowing. There were 38.25 days.

"To come this close required both skill and luck," he said.

But since 1984, Gray's predictions have been 75 percent to 90 percent

accurate, which meteorologists say is good, and he's been refining his

technique every year.

"I'm gaining in confidence," Gray said. "We learn more every year."

Gray said three observations figure into his prediction for next year.

First, a band of winds about 12 miles above the Equator are starting to blow

strongly to the west instead of being predominantly to the east. Next, a band of
water in the Pacific Ocean that has been warmed by the little-understood El Nino
effect is starting to cool. These two things should combine to ease the

drought in Africa, and altogether they create conditions favorable for

hurricane and tropical storm formation, Gray said.

These conditions seem to be a one-shot phenomenon and not a signal of a

shift to a cycle of more active seasons such as those that prevailed from the
1920s to 1950s, Gray said.

"We're still in one of our down periods," he said. "That should change,

but we don't know when."

A spokesman for the National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables said Gray's
predictions are interesting but of little value to the center's work.

"What's important to us is what happens with each individual storm

-- where it forms, how strong it is and who it hits," said Ed Rappaport, a

hurricane specialist. "There could be 50 out there, but if they don't hit

anybody, the season could be perceived as a mild one. But if one Andrew hits,
the season seems heavy."

The end of this year's hurricane season also signaled the end of the rainy
season, and Palm Beach County and Lake Okeechobee fared well, according to

South Florida Water Management District spokesmen and the National Weather

Service.

For November, 12.56 inches of rain was recorded by the Weather Service at Palm
Beach International Airport-- the third highest November total on record. The
average for the month is 3.39 inches, and the record is 14.63, set in

1982. For the year, Palm Beach County has received 59.26 inches vs. a 57.46

average.

Lake Okeechobee is at 15.96 feet; its average level is 14.7 feet.

HURRICANE PREDICTIONS

Colorado scientist William Gray has been predicting hurricane activity

since 1984 with an accuracy of 75 percent to 90 percent. The following are his
predictions from November 1991 for the hurricane season that ended Monday,

what actually happened and his prediction for next year.

FORECAST `92 ACTUAL FORECAST `93

Hurricanes 4 4 6

Named storms 8 6 11

*Hurricane days 15 15.75 25

*Named-storm days 35 38.25 55

Major hurricanes 1 1 3

*Major hurricane days 2 3.2 7

*Days that type of storm is blowing.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions....info. box at end of text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 1992 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 204 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                          February 22, 2006 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SAFE HAVEN, OR HOT AIR?

BYLINE: By EVE SAMPLES Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1464 words

DATELINE: HERNANDO


In parts of this quiet community north of Tampa, local legend swirls through the
hills, kicking up answers to this question:

Why has Citrus County been spared the worst of Florida's recent hurricane
seasons?

Some longtimers have heard that prevailing winds steer the worst storms away, or
that the cool waters of the fresh springs deter oncoming 'canes. Others think
the eastward jog of the county's coast is the protector; that the high elevation
is a built-in buffer.

It's the type of mythology that emerges between sips at local watering holes or
as casual talk on the greens - the chatter that not everyone believes, but many
want to.

"There's lots of local lore, none of which can be substantiated," said George
Sleeman, director of sales and marketing for Hernando's massive golf course
development Terra Vista of Citrus Hills.

But that hasn't stopped Sleeman from seizing on the hilly community's reputation
as a hurricane haven perched high above sea level. Sitting in his office at the
development's welcome center on a cloudy afternoon, he points to the facts. A
hurricane-strength storm hasn't rolled ashore in Citrus County since Gladys hit
as a Category 3 in 1968.

"The history is the history, and that's all we can rely upon," Sleeman said.

So, after years of selling Terra Vista simply as a less-crowded, more-affordable
alternative to South Florida, he added this sales pitch about a month ago:

In newspaper ads running from Palm Beach County to Naples, he's calling Terra
Vista "a unique coastal area known for its lush rolling hills and low hurricane
risk."

And for certain hurricane-battered residents on Florida's southeast and
southwest coasts, the selling point is effective.

"We definitely looked at that as a factor," said Lake Worth resident John Brown,
who in December signed a contract to build a home in Terra Vista.

As the owner of more than a dozen Palm Beach County properties, Brown spent
eight months trying to collect $40,000 from insurance companies after the 2004
hurricane season. Now, the 34-year-old is selling everything and moving to
Hernando with his wife and three children. His parents, who live nearby, also
are tagging along, buying their own home.

Property values and affordable private schools were the first priorities for the
Brown family, but hurricanes also contributed to their decision.

"Every one of my properties sustained some type of hurricane damage (in 2004),"
he said. "It was a lot of work on our end."

Realty and hurricane factor

Sleeman sees his hurricane pitch as a market-driven sales tactic. Others see it
as schadenfreude, or taking pleasure in other people's misfortune.

"We sure haven't seen anybody talking about this kind of stuff in the last three
years. I'd say the love fest in real estate is over," said Jack McCabe, chief
executive of McCabe Research & Consulting LLC in Deerfield Beach.

Not that he's surprised.

With the housing market constricting, he suspected hurricanes would start to
play more prominently in promotions across the state.

Ultimately, that could mean builders tempting buyers with inland locations and
upgrades such as hurricane-resistant windows and sturdier construction.

Terra Vista of Citrus Hills appears to be at the leading edge of that trend.

Storm-weary refugees

During the last hour of the four-hour drive from South Florida to Citrus County,
the state's plywood-flat plane breaks into a steady roll. Citrus trees cling to
hillsides; the soil becomes sufficiently drained to accommodate vineyards.

Another hour beyond, in the unincorporated area of Citrus County known as
Hernando, the hills rise as high as 250 feet - creating a sandy ridge some
locals know as Florida's Alps.

That's what Citrus Hills salesman Joe Campbell tells visitors as he points out
vistas across the 10,000-acre development.

Terra Vista, which now has about 800 homes and ultimately will have as many as
5,000, is the newest section of the larger, 20-year-old Citrus Hills
development. Best known as the former home of baseball great Ted Williams, it's
the brand the developer, Citrus Hills Investment Properties LLC of Hernando, is
pushing hardest to out-of-towners. Homes in the three-golf course community run
from the $280,000s to the $800,000s.

Campbell, a retired Chicago cop, estimates he's seen more than 15 people from
South Florida close on homes here in recent months. And he intimately
understands the attraction coastal residents have to the area, which sits more
than 15 miles east of the Gulf of Mexico.

Having lived in the small Panhandle town of Niceville for years, Campbell got
battered by Hurricane Opal and several successive hurricanes. His home didn't
have major damage, but the inconveniences of lost power and closed roads got to
him.

"It was just getting out of hand," he said. So, in 2002, he moved to Citrus
Hills.

Since then, the hurricanes that have thumped other parts of Florida have been
little more than "big rain events," in east-central Citrus County, he said.
Peripheral winds during the 2004 season knocked down some trees but did little
major damage, he said.

"By the time they do get across here, it's going to be tropical storm variety,"
Campbell said.

His friends Joe and Norma Saeva were attracted to Terra Vista for similar
reasons.

After living in Boca Raton for 13 years, the couple moved to Melbourne in 1991.
Nine years, two hurricanes and one new roof later, the couple relocated to Terra
Vista.

"That's what made her say, 'Let's go,' " Joe Saeva said, adding that Terra
Vista's elevation is a major plus.

But there are no guarantees for even the highest parts of Citrus County when it
comes to hurricanes, weather experts caution. Despite the rumors justifying the
county's good fortune, there's no scientific explanation for it.

"Memory is not history. Just because you can't remember it and your grandpappy
can't remember it doesn't mean it has not happened at some point in the past,"
said Frank Lepore, public affairs officer for the National Hurricane Center in
Miami.

Since 1851, the centers of 27 hurricanes have passed within 25 miles of Citrus
County. Yet all of those were before 1969. Since then, only tropical storms and
depressions have come that close, according to records kept by the National
Hurricane Center.

But that luck could run out at any moment.

Experts: Nowhere immune

"There's no part of Florida that's truly hurricane-invulnerable," said Jack
Beven, hurricane specialist at the National Hurricane Center.

Higher areas such as Citrus Hills may be protected against storm surge, but
they're susceptible to stronger hurricane winds, he said.

There's one part of Florida, however, where weather patterns do help protect the
coast: the northeast quadrant of the state, around Jacksonville.

Duval County has been hit by about half as many hurricanes as Citrus County in
the past 155 years. The explanation, experts say, is that the Bermuda
high-pressure ridge sits off the coast at about the same latitude as
Jacksonville, steering hurricanes southward.

"It's a lot less common to have a weather pattern that drives a storm straight
into the coast in that part of Florida," Beven said, adding that it can happen.
And it did in 1964 when Hurricane Dora hit.

So are Jacksonville developers jumping aboard the "low hurricane risk"
bandwagon?

Hardly.

Maxine McBride's marketing firm near Jacksonville represents about 15 builders
and developers - and none of them are selling their communities as "low
hurricane risk."

"And if the topic ever came up, I would advise them not to go that route," said
McBride, president of Clockwork Marketing Services Inc. of Ponte Vedra Beach.

Developers have to be careful about what they promise in their advertising, she
said. Though the county might be less hurricane-prone, the tornadoes, flooding
and power outages can affect even counties that aren't in a storm's direct path.

"I think it's bad practice to capitalize on other people's misfortune, and I
think it's bad to capitalize on their fear of something like that," McBride
said.

Then, of course, there's the jinx factor associated with Terra Vista's ads.

"It sounds like maybe it's a clever marketing idea, you know? Although if it was
me, I'd be knocking on wood every time I said that," said Brett Wattles,
executive director of the Citrus County Economic Development Council.

- eve_samples@pbpost.com

'Low risk' is just plain luck

The sales pitch: Terra Vista is "a unique coastal area known for its lush
rolling hills and low hurricane risk."

The facts: It's true that a hurricane-strength storm hasn't rolled ashore in
Citrus County since Gladys hit as a Category 3 in 1968. But since 1851, the
centers of 27 hurricanes have passed within 25 miles of the county. That
post-1969 string of luck could run out at any moment, according to a hurricane
specialist at the National Hurricane Center.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions. Info box at end of text.

GRAPHIC: MAP (C) & PHOTO (3 B&W)
 1. (C) STEVE LOPEZ/Staff Artist No-'cane zone? Terra Vista is part of the
10,000-acre Citrus Hills development in Citrus County. 2. Photo by PRESTON C.
MACK STILL GOING UP: Terra Vista, the newest section of 20-year-old Citrus
Hills, has about 800 homes and could have as many as 5,000. 3. HEIGHTENED
AWARENESS: Joe and Norma Saeva took elevation into account when they moved.
(mug) 4. Norma Saeva (mug)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 205 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             March 26, 2006 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

HURRICANE SEASON: ILL WINDS AFOOT

BYLINE: By ROBERT P. KING Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1343 words


South Florida is still a land of blue tarps. Homeowners' insurance bills are
soaring. And the clock is ticking, with just 67 days until hurricane season.

So Floridians will be spared this time around - right?

Don't count on it. Hurricane experts say conditions around the globe are ripe
for yet another hectic season, heightening the danger to everybody on the U.S.
Atlantic and Gulf coasts. The ill omens include the Pacific climate pattern
known as La Nina and a trend of warm, hurricane-friendly temperatures in the
Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico.

At least in the number of storms, nobody expects a repeat of last year's record
28, which went six names deep into the Greek alphabet. Then again, none of the
experts predicted it last year.

And as deadly as 2005 was, meteorologists point to all the ways it could be
worse this time around: No hurricane last year, not even Katrina, struck the
U.S. coast at Category 5 fury. No large U.S. city took the full force of a major
storm. Large stretches of the nation's densely developed East Coast have gone
unscathed for decades, including New York, Philadelphia and Washington.

Will this year's hurricanes again make a beeline for Florida and the Gulf Coast?
Or will they swirl harmlessly in mid-ocean?

Nobody knows - which means everybody must get ready before the season starts
June 1.

"We want people by June to have a plan in place," said Rob Molleda, a
meteorologist at the National Weather Service's office near Miami. "Have your
supplies ready to go. Hopefully people will have a chance to repair their homes
by then."

Yet many people have not, more than five months since Hurricane Wilma buzz-sawed
through the region - a state of disrepair that stunned one expert.

"The amount of damage down there was phenomenal," said Colorado State University
researcher Philip Klotzbach, who flew over South Florida early this month on his
way to a hurricane conference in the Bahamas. "I was surprised by the sheer
number of blue tarps."

But hasn't Florida earned a break, after surviving four hurricanes in 2004 and
then Dennis, Katrina, Rita and Wilma last year? Sorry, but that's not how nature
works. In one previous busy patch, from 1945 to 1950, hurricanes hit Florida
every year - usually more than once.

For all-out freakishness, it would be hard to surpass last year's nonstop
treadmill of 28 Atlantic storms, including 15 hurricanes, four of which reached
Category 5. All of those figures are the highest ever recorded.

The 2005 storms began right on schedule in early June and continued a week past
New Year's Eve. The season produced Katrina, the deadliest U.S. hurricane since
the 1928 storm that spilled Lake Okeechobee; Wilma, the strongest Atlantic
hurricane ever recorded; and Vince, the only tropical cyclone ever known to hit
Spain.

The 2004 season had produced a less extreme - but still busy - 15 storms.

One reason for all of this activity: The Atlantic entered an active hurricane
cycle in 1995 and likely will stay there the next couple of decades, most
researchers say. This means a lot of seasons like the storm-ravaged 1940s and
'50s.

Other omens also offer little cause for optimism:

- La Nina is back. The pattern of cool water in the eastern Pacific, last seen
from 1998 to 2000, affects wind patterns around the globe. One result is that
winds at various layers of the atmosphere tend to blow in harmony over the
Atlantic, lessening the shear that would tear hurricanes apart.

The opposite phenomenon, El Nino, turns the Atlantic into a wind-shear factory
in which hurricanes have a hard time forming. Scientists say the last El Nino
emerged in late 2004, largely ending that hurricane season in mid-October.

The 2005 season was in a neutral phase, although wind shear was abnormally weak
for much of the summer.

Some scientists expect La Nina to stick around throughout the coming season,
allowing hurricanes to spawn near Africa and gain strength as they cross the
Atlantic. But National Hurricane Center researcher Chris Landsea said forecasts
so far "are all over the board."

"Some say La Nina will be in place through the fall. Some go to El Nino," he
said. "That's one reason we don't issue a forecast in January."

Then again, at least one scientist thinks Florida might fare better if La Nina
sticks around because hurricanes forming farther east would have more time to
curve north.

"La Nina means more hurricanes, but guess what - it tends to send them to our
cousins in Carolina and New Jersey," said James O'Brien, a professor of
meteorology and oceanography at Florida State University. "Floridians want La
Nina to keep going strong."

- The Atlantic and gulf are still warmer than average. That's bad news, because
warm water is hurricane fuel.

Some good news: Waters are not yet as heated as they were at this time in 2005,
the region's warmest year since 1871.

Researchers at the hurricane center and the University of South Florida say the
Atlantic never fully cooled after the 2004 season. So the 2005 season was primed
by June, producing a record seven storms before Aug. 1, including the two
strongest July hurricanes in recorded history.

- Wind and pressure patterns could steer hurricanes into Florida, as they did in
2004 and 2005. For much of both years, a ridge of high pressure known as the
Bermuda High squatted over eastern North America, aiming the storms into the
U.S. coast, hurricane center scientists say.

So far, FSU researcher James Elsner said, pressure patterns in the North
Atlantic resemble those that would put the state in jeopardy. Then again, he
cautioned that the patterns can change quickly, so March isn't necessarily a
good predictor of the summer and fall.

CSU researcher Klotzbach said his hopes are "a very active season, and
everything stays nicely out to sea."

And if not? "At least people are learning the Greek alphabet."

bob_king@pbpost.com

Storm 2006

Prepare for the upcoming season with our preseason checklists.

PalmBeachPost.com/storm

More signs of the season

Warm seas

The Gulf of Mexico and most of the North Atlantic are warmer than average,
offering plenty of potential fuel for hurricanes. But they're slightly cooler
than this time in 2005.

Outlook: Expect plenty of storms, but they might not start as early in the
season.

Moist air

For much of 2005, layers of dry, stable air laden with Saharan dust kept
hurricanes from forming in the eastern Atlantic, but not from emerging closer to
the U.S. coast. Meteorologists say it's too soon to predict whether that will
happen this year.

Outlook: Impossible to call.

Steering winds

Troughs, the jet stream and the elusive Bermuda High all play roles in where a
hurricane might steer and are difficult to predict so many months in advance.
But the entire U.S. Atlantic and Gulf coasts are at elevated risk in an active
year.

Outlook: Meteorologists might know more in May.

Counting the 'canes

Early predictions for the 2006 hurricane season:

Philip Klotzbach and William Gray

Colorado State University

17 named storms; nine hurricanes; five major hurricanes.

Weather 2000 Inc.

New York

15 to 22 named storms; eight to 13 hurricanes; four to seven major hurricanes.

Benfield Hazard Research Centre

University College London

10.5 to 18.7 named storms; 5.2 to 10.4 hurricanes; 1.8 to 5.2 major hurricanes.

James Elsner

Florida State University professor

7.2 to 12 hurricanes.

As a basis of comparison, the average season has 9.6 named storms, 5.9
hurricanes and 2.3 major hurricanes. The 2005 season had 28 storms of tropical
strength or higher and 15 hurricanes, the highest number ever recorded; and
seven major hurricanes.

What are the odds?

Chances of a Category 3 or stronger hurricane's making landfall this year:

Entire U.S. coastline

81 percent (average for past century: 52 percent).

East Coast including Florida

64 percent (average for past century: 31 percent).

Gulf Coast, from Florida Panhandle to Brownsville, Texas

47 percent (average for past century: 30 percent).

Sources: Philip Klotzbach and William Gray, Colorado State University

Storm 2006

Prepare for the upcoming season with our preseason checklists

PalmBeachPost.com/storm

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions. Info boxes at end of text.

GRAPHIC: MAP (C)
 STAFF GRAPHIC Signs of the season La Nina could make the coming hurricane
season a scary sequel to 2004-05. Here's why: A cold-water pattern in the
eastern Pacific changes winds over the Atlantic, weakening the shear that would
tear hurricanes apart. Storms forming off the African coast will have an easier
time surviving and strengthening as they cross the Atlantic. Source: NOAA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 206 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             May 23, 2007 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

DON'T EXPECT QUIET ON HURRICANE FRONT;
NAMED STORMS: 13 TO 17;
HURRICANES: 10;
MAJOR HURRICANES: 3 TO 5

BYLINE: By LARRY LIPMAN Palm Beach Post Washington Bureau

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Forget the fact that no hurricanes hit the United States last year. This year's
hurricane season is likely to be more active than usual, with three to five
major storms forecast -- some of which could strike land.

"With expectations for an active season, it is critically important that people
who live in east and gulf coastal areas, as well as the Caribbean, be prepared,"
said Bill Proenza, director of the National Hurricane Center.

Scientists with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted
Tuesday that 13 to 17 named storms will develop in the Atlantic this year, with
seven to 10 becoming hurricanes.

Of those, three to five are forecast to become major hurricanes -- those with a
strength of Category 3 or higher, according to Conrad Lautenbacher, NOAA's
administrator.

In an average year, there are 11 named storms in the Atlantic, six of which
become hurricanes, including two major hurricanes.

Even if the forecast is off, "it just takes one hurricane to make it a bad year
for everyone here," Lautenbacher said at a news conference at Ronald Reagan
National Airport, where several hurricane-hunter planes were on display.

"Last year was an unexpectedly easy season," Homeland Security Secretary Michael
Chertoff said. "There is no guarantee that this season is going to be anything
less than very tough.

"Complacency and disarming yourself are the biggest threats that people face in
terms of getting themselves prepared. It is a big mistake to count on being
lucky. You're much better off preparing yourself for the worst, and then if you
get lucky that's a bonus," he said.

Forecasters said they cannot predict where hurricanes will strike, but they
emphasized that current conditions are conducive to storms forming off Africa
and moving west toward the Caribbean.

Largely present since 1995, the conditions include warm water temperatures in
the Atlantic, weak easterly trade winds and a high-pressure system in the upper
atmosphere off the west coast of Africa. Gerry Bell, NOAA's lead seasonal
hurricane forecaster, said these conditions cause high-activity periods that
historically last 25 to 40 years.

"The difference this year is La Nina," which could produce conditions in the
Atlantic that are "really juiced up for hurricanes," Bell said.

La Nina is a weather pattern caused by colder-than-normal water temperatures in
the Pacific and is the opposite of the better-known El Nino.

Bell and other forecasters said the unexpected development of El Nino conditions
last summer offset the predictions of an active hurricane season in 2006.

La Nina could occur this year in the next one to three months, Bell said, and
when its conditions are combined with the long-term pattern of increasingly
active hurricane conditions, it could result in the number of hurricanes
approaching or exceeding the upper level of this year's forecast.

Even if La Nina does not materialize, last year's lack of storms should not be
considered the end to the high-activity period, Bell said.

The government forecasts are similar to those produced recently by two groups of
independent experts who also predicted a busier-than-normal hurricane season.

Proenza said the public should take the predictions seriously and not be lulled
by last year's quiet season.

"We're always concerned that infrequency can be disarming," he said.

"We're asking the U.S. population in the coastal areas to join us ... in
preparing yourselves, your families, your businesses, your communities, to make
sure that you have plans to do what is right to assure the proper response when
your area comes under a hurricane warning," he said.

Several experts noted that more than half of the American public -- 53 percent
-- now lives within 50 miles of a coastline, and many coastal areas have not
seen a serious storm in years.

Echoing the need for personal responsibility, Chertoff said, "A storm is no
place to be a hero."

He criticized people who choose to ride out a hurricane rather than evacuate
when told to do so.

He called such evacuation "a civic responsibility" and said those who ignore
evacuation orders endanger not only themselves but rescue personnel who may have
to get them out.

David Paulison, head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and a former
Miami-Dade County fire chief, said people need to stock up ahead of time to have
enough food, water and ice to survive at least 72 hours after a major storm.

Paulison criticized the lack of preparedness among South Florida residents who
were hit by Hurricane Wilma in 2005, resulting in "tens of thousands of people
lined up for food and water and ice when they should have been able to take care
of themselves. We cannot tolerate that anymore."

The hurricane season officially begins June 1, but already this year one named
storm has occurred, Andrea.

But Bell noted that Andrea is not an indicator of the hurricane season ahead.

"With or without Andrea, NOAA's forecast is for an above-normal season," he
said.

In 2005 -- which saw Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma -- active storms
continued well past the end of the season Nov. 30 and used up all the planned
names for that year, forcing weather officials to use the Greek alphabet to
continue naming the storms.

~ larryl@coxnews.com

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTER'S 2007 PREDICTIONS Ran all editions.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC (C)
 STEVE LOPEZ, CHRISTOPHER SMITH/Staff Artist Conditions ripe for an active
season A high-pressure system off West Africa and other climatic conditions are
expected to allow hurricanes to develop into strong storms this season and keep
them churning straight toward the East Coast. 1. High pressure in upper
atmosphere forces winds from Africa to stay in lower, warmer latitudes. 2.
Favorable African easterly jet: Waves of turbulence can spin off this jet and
spawn hurricanes. 3. Weaker-than-usual trade winds in the lower atmosphere means
less cooling of water temperatures. 4. High-pressure system also produces
reduced wind shear and warmer surface temperatures, helping storms gain
strength. Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2007 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 207 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             June 9, 2007 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

HURRICANE CHIEF GIVES NEW PROBLEM TO WATER MANAGERS

BYLINE: By MITRA MALEK Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 436 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH


Far from ending one hardship -- the drought -- South Florida water managers are
bracing for another: hurricane season.

To gear up, the new head of the National Hurricane Center on Friday visited
them.

It was Bill Proenza's first visit to the South Florida Water Management District
since taking over the helm from former Director Max Mayfield in January. The
meeting also marked the first time a hurricane center director has addressed a
gathering of district staff.

Proenza's talk of flooded roads and torrential downpours was a sharp departure
from water managers ongoing worries over South Florida's unprecedented drought.

"It's nice to get away for a little while," water district Executive Director
Carol Wehle joked as she introduced Proenza to more than 150 staffers gathered
in the agency's auditorium.

Give us three strong tropical depressions over Lake Okeechobee and the Kissimmee
River Valley, which flows to the lake, and the district will consider you a
success, Wehle continued.

Beneath the quips, though, the seriousness of both weather extremes was
apparent. The district, which covers 16 counties, was created to handle floods
and droughts.

During hurricanes, water managers monitor 600 floodgates and pumps from Orlando
to the Keys. They stay in close contact with the hurricane center during storms
to anticipate what action to take to prevent flooding.

Among the most striking slides Proenza presented was that of a blood-red blur
obscuring most of the continental United States, a few states in the Northwest
visible. It was a composite of the 1,400 major storm tracks across the nation
since 1851.

What's more, South Florida happens to be one of the most active areas in the
world for severe weather, Proenza said.

This year, the absence of El Nino gives the hurricane season more steam: 13 to
17 named storms are expected, with seven to 10 of them becoming hurricanes, and
three to five of those major hurricanes.

But Proenza's talk wasn't all doom and gloom. There was a bit of hurricane lore:
In the 1970s, storm names expanded to include the masculine variety.

There was hurricane humor: The hurricane center has fielded many unsolicited
suggestions on how to prevent massive storms, including dropping a hydrogen bomb
on one.

And there was a hurricane pep talk: An effective partnership among the media,
government, storm agencies and first responders will make the season a
manageable challenge.

~ mitra_malek@pbpost.com

Storm season at a glance
                               Typical year  2007
Tropical storms                          11 13-17
Hurricanes                                6  7-10
Major hurricanes (Cat. 3-plus)            2   3-5
Tropical storms                          11 13-17
Hurricanes                                6  7-10
Major hurricanes (Cat. 3-plus)            2   3-5

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Did not run MSL. Info box at end of text.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2007 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 208 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    August 26, 1995, Saturday, ALL EDITIONS

RETURN OF THE FURIES;
The hurricane season is at its midpoint - and already it's the worst in decades.
And experts say the threat of destruction in the years ahead may be growing.

BYLINE: Mike Toner; STAFF WRITER

SECTION: SCIENCE, Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 757 words


When it comes to hurricanes, September and October are the mean season. And with
10 named hurricanes and tropical storms on the books already this year, there
are growing signs that the next two months may be meaner than usual.

If hurricane experts are right, the emergence this week of Hurricanes Humberto
and Iris - as well as Tropical Storm Jerry - represents only the halfway point
in what is, for late August, the busiest season since 1936.

This year's burst of activity, moreover, may signal the resurgence of the
long-dormant Atlantic "conveyor belt"that, during the '50s and '60s, sent dozens
of destructive storms slamming into the U.S. mainland. With 44 million people
living along hurricane-prone coasts - double the number 25 years ago - experts
say conditions are ripe for extensive damage.

By the time the current season ends in November, the National Hurricane Center
could be dipping deeply into its alphabetical list of names for storms - all the
way to Pablo - to identify the final furies of the season.

"This has been an active early part of the season already, and the factors we
use to forecast hurricanes call for that activity to increase as the season
progresses," says William M. Gray, professor of atmospheric sciences at Colorado
State University. He predicts a total of 16 named storms, including nine
hurricanes, by Nov. 30.

"We hope many of the storms that form either will not come ashore or will miss
populated areas," he says. "But the more storms there are, especially intense
hurricanes, the more likely we are to see storm damage."

Although forecasters have trouble predicting the course of individual storms a
day or two in advance, the success that Gray and his research team have had in
predicting overall activity since 1984 has earned them an avid audience, even at
the National Hurricane Center.

"Bill Gray has been right a lot more than he has been wrong over the years,"
says center Director Robert Burpee. "And this year he seems to be right on
track."

The 65-year-old Gray makes no effort to predict individual storms. But he says
the greater number - along with the increased chance that some storms will
strike populated areas - makes the destructive potential of this season 30
percent above normal. That's double the potential of the past four years.

The danger of major hurricanes - Category 3, 4 or 5 - is greatest during the
late summer and fall, when tropical disturbances tend to form off the coast of
Africa and build strength in the tropics as they work their way westward toward
the Caribbean and the U.S. mainland, much as Humberto is doing now.

The conditions setting the stage for this year's heightened hurricane activity
have actually been taking shape for months.

It began with the demise of El Nino, the periodic warming of the tropical
Pacific. Although El Nino conditions often raise havoc with weather on the West
Coast of the United States, they tend - for reasons still poorly understood - to
suppress hurricane formation in the Atlantic. During the Pacific warmings of
1992, 1993 and 1994, for instance, the Atlantic averaged only seven named storms
a year.

Gray says El Nino's demise - coupled with increased westerly stratospheric winds
over the equator, increased rainfall in Africa's Sahel region and shifts in sea
level pressure in Africa and the Caribbean - has made 1995 a "banner year" for
hurricane activity.

But he says there is a chance that 1995 may be the start of something more
ominous. Increasing salinity of the North Atlantic suggest that the Atlantic
thermohaline circulation, the giant conveyor belt that distributes heat and
storms, may be speeding up after a 30-year lull.

Gray's computer models don't predict hurricane activity more than a year in
advance, but he says more research on the changes in ocean circulation are
"desperately needed" to see if they presage a sustained increase in tropical
activity - something the hurricane center and other experts have long maintained
is bound to occur sooner or later.

"This is a more assured and immediate threat to the U.S. than that of greenhouse
gas warming and other environmental problems," says Gray. "The lull in major
landfalling hurricane activity cannot continue indefinitely."

"A return of increased major landfalling hurricane activity should be expected
within the next decade or two," he says. "When this happens, because of coastal
development during the last 25 to 30 years, the United States will see hurricane
destruction as never before."

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Color Photo: Mug shot of William M. Gray. Color Photo Illustration:
Hurricane Erin, off the coast of Florida.
Chart: STORMS THIS YEAR
Allison
June 3-6 --Earliest hurricane to make landfall in Florida this century.
Little damage to Gulf Coast, but lots of rain; maximum winds 65 mph.
Barry
July 6-9 --Tropical storm never reached land or achieved hurricane
status; maximum winds of 50 mph.
Chantal
July 13-20 - Tropical storm remained well offshore in the Atlantic;
maximum winds were 60 mph.
Dean
July 28-31 --Never achieved hurricane status before making landfall on
Texas Coast near Galveston. Maximum winds 40 mph.
Erin
July 31 - Aug. 3 --Caused moderate damage as wallowed across the Bahamas,
Florida and Gulf Coast of Mississippi and Alabama. Top winds of 75 mph.
Felix
Aug. 8-21 --Slow moving, moderately powerful hurricane lashed East Coast
with winds and high tides, but never came ashore. Maximum winds were 95
mph.  Gabrielle
Aug. 10-12 --Tropical storm dropped heavy rains on Mexico's Gulf Coast.
Maximum winds were 60 mph.
Humberto
Aug. 22-current --Born west of Cape Verde Islands and quickly grew to
hurricane force. Still a long way from land.
Iris
Aug. 23-current --Formed east of the Lesser Antilles, reached hurricane
strength Thursday.
Jerry
Aug. 23-current --Formed just off the Southeast Florida coast.

Chart: Gray's predictions
Category.. ..........Average....June.............Updated
..............................Pr ediction........Prediction
Named Storms..........9.3........12................16
Named Storm Days.....46.0........65................65
Hurricanes............5.7.........8. ................9
Hurricane Days.......23.0........35................30

Line Graph: THE PAST 26 YEARS
Number of named storms per year
1969: 18 storms (actual)
1983: 4 storms (actual
1995: 16 storms (predicted by Gray)
1995: 10 storms to date
Source: Predictions by William M. Gray, Colorado State University.

                    Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution


                          FOCUS - 209 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    September 16, 1996, Monday, ALL EDITIONS

NEWS FOR KIDS;
HURRICANE SEASON IS HERE

BYLINE: --Holly Morris

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 03A

LENGTH: 373 words


Last year turned out to be a record-breaking hurricane season in the Atlantic.
There were 19 named storms, including 11 hurricanes. It was the stormiest year
since 1933.

After a slow start, 1996 is also proving to be a pretty active hurricane season.
Hurricanes since July have been Bertha, Cesar, Dolly, Edouard, Fran (which
resulted in 22 deaths) and, most recently, Hortense.

Hurricane expert William Gray has said that after 28 years of relatively low
hurricane activity, we may be on the brink of a period of greater storm
activity. Gray's hurricane team at Colorado State University is known for its
accurate seasonal predictions of hurricane numbers.

With more people living on or near East Coast beaches, it becomes more urgent to
predict exactly where and when a hurricane will hit. This is the job of the
folks at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Miami. Hurricane
Fran showed us what a difficult job it can be.

NOAA uses Air Force pilots to fly special hurricane hunter propeller, or "prop,"
planes right into the eye of the storm to gather the data needed for forecasts.
The planes' instruments measure temperature, wind speed and direction, humidity
and air pressure.

Prop planes can fly through heavy rain better than jets. But hurricanes can be 8
miles high, higher than prop planes can fly. So scientists have had information
only about the bottom half of hurricanes.

This year, NOAA is preparing a Gulfstream jet to fly over hurricanes and drop
instrument packages down through them. It is hoped the information they get will
help them figure out what drives a hurricane and where it's going.

How are storms named?

Tropical storms in the Atlantic and Caribbean have been named by the
Geneva-based World Meteorological Organization since the 1950s. Naming them
turned out to be a good idea: People paid more attention to hurricane warnings,
and the number of hurricane-related deaths dropped. With eight named storms so
far this year, the next will be Isidore.

The 1996 list of names:

Arthur, Bertha, Cesar, Dolly, Edouard, Fran, Gustav, Hortense, Isidore,
Josephine, Kyle, Lili, Marco, Nana, Omar, Paloma, Rene, Sally, Teddy, Vicky,
Wilfred.

--Holly Morris

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Illustrations (4) and information boxes: How thunderstorms can evolve
 into a hurricane
 Thunderstorm cluster
 Big, blustery thunderstorms roll off the coast of west Africa. The warm
 seas and trade winds nudge the storms into clusters, 100 to 300 miles in
 diameter. Tropical depression
 The thunderstorm cluster forms a center of low pressure. Surface winds
 reach 20 to 38 mph as the storm drifts. It begins to rotate and is
 reclassified as a tropical depression.
 Tropical storm
 Evaporation and condensation intensify in the storm clusters and rising
 warm air funnels up, releases heat, then spills out the top and down,
 forming rain bands. Spinning, due to the Earth's rotation, increases and
 winds reach 39 mph.  Hurricane
 Billions of gallons of water evaporate and condense, fueling the storm.
 Warm air in the center loses its moisture, forming the eye. Winds reach
 74 mph and the storm is reclassified as a hurricane. Average diameter is
 300 miles.The National Hurricane Center classifies hurricanes according
 to wind speed and destructive potential.
 SOURCES: National Hurricane Center, Knight-Ridder Global Weather,
 National Geographic
 Chart: How are hurricanes rated?
 category..wind speed....damage
 1....... 74-95 mph... minimal
 2....... 96-110 mph....moderate
 3........111-130 mph....extensive
 4........131-155 mph....extreme
 5........156+ mph..... catastrophic
 Photo: Fran was a Category 3 hurricane that moved slowly, pushing sea
 water ahead of its heavy winds at Wrightsville Beach/ W.A. BRIDGES JR. /
 Staff Resident surveying damage of Hurricane Fran in Porters Neck, N.C./
 W.A. BRIDGES JR. / Staff
 Photo: Flood damage in Surf City, N.C./ DAVID TULIS / Staff

                    Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution


                          FOCUS - 210 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              November 30, 1998, Monday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

HURRICANE SEASON '98 // Deadly, destructive season

BYLINE: DAVID BALLINGRUD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1021 words



The 1998 hurricane season, finally over at midnight tonight, produced
contrasting images of the storms' vast destructive power and of man's
propensity to ignore it.

The first is in the hills of Honduras and Nicaragua, where Hurricane Mitch
caused floods and mudslides that killed an estimated 11,000 people - a
modern-day record in this hemisphere.

The second is in the Tampa Bay area, where officials issued the most  extensive
local evacuation order since 1985's Hurricane Elena in advance of  Hurricane
Georges, only to be rebuffed by many of those told to leave.

By the numbers, the season was more active than "normal." There were 14  named
tropical storms, and 10 developed into hurricanes.

Those numbers surpass the forecast of Colorado State University expert  William
Gray, who predicted a "normal" year: 10 named storms and six  hurricanes.

But 1998 will forever be the year Hurricane Mitch brought economic ruin and
suffering beyond measure to Honduras and Nicaragua. Georges was a deadly  storm,
too, first triggering floods and mudslides in Haiti and the Dominican  Republic
that killed 600, then turning north to pound the Florida Keys and  flood the
Panhandle.

In all, tropical cyclones killed 11,629 people in the 1998 hurricane  season, 21
in Florida. They caused $ 3.2-billion in damage in the United States  and an
economic disaster in Central America. "There's no real way to put a  dollar
value on what happened down there," said National Hurricane Center  forecaster
Richard Pasch.

The number of deaths is a modern record for the Atlantic Basin, made up of  the
North Atlantic, the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico.

According to hurricane center records, the largest loss of life occurred in  the
Lesser Antilles in mid-October of 1780, during what became known as the  Great
Hurricane.

About 22,000 deaths are blamed on that storm - among them 9,000 in  Martinique,
4,000 to 5,000 in St. Eustatius and more than 4,000 in Barbados.

The Galveston hurricane of 1900 killed between 8,000 and 12,000, said  Pasch,
and Hurricane Fifi killed somewhere between 3,000 and 10,000 in  Honduras in
1974.

"Those early death tolls are somewhat imprecise," said Pasch, "but we  know that
Mitch is right up there with the worst."

The 1998 season began slowly, then became very active.

"In one 35-day span, from Aug. 18 to Sept. 23, we had 10 tropical storms
develop," said Pasch. "That's a remarkable number. During that period we  also
had four hurricanes in progress at the same time: Georges, Ivan, Jeanne  and
Karl. That's the first time that has happened this century."

And more of the same is possible next year, said hurricane forecaster Gray.

"We are going to see the return of some of these type of storms," Gray  said.
"People have to face up to it. The insurance industry has a major  problem."

Gray said the past four years have been the most active ever for hurricanes  in
the Atlantic basin. He expects even more hurricanes in 1999.

This year, Tampa Bay area emergency managers were largely ignored when they
ordered hundreds of thousands of people out of low-lying and coastal areas as
Hurricane Georges approached in September.

The Tampa Bay area's last evacuation was "strongly recommended" in August  1995
during Hurricane Erin, and concerned mobile home residents only, said  David
Bilodeau, Pinellas County's emergency management coordinator.

Bilodeau said he is "totally and completely comfortable" with his 1998
evacuation decision, even though the storm went elsewhere and many people
yawned.

"If you don't start the (evacuation) process early," he said, "there is  no way
it can be done."

He said the fact that the county was never actually in a hurricane warning
zone, "and the weather stayed pretty nice," probably made people reluctant  to
leave their homes. "If it had rained, even incidental to the hurricane, I  think
people would have taken the evacuation order more seriously," he said.

Some unexpected lessons were learned.

"We caused the School Board a lot of problems, because people showed up at  the
schools (used as shelters) at 6 a.m., expecting breakfast," said  Bilodeau.

Many elderly people need to have food with their medications, he said, "so  we
should have told them to eat something first."

"Many, many" shelters reported a lot of grumbling about not only the lack  of
food, but also about creature comforts, Bilodeau said.

"Many people were appalled there were no beds or cots," he said. Others  who
signed up with the county for transportation assistance "envisioned an
ambulance, and instead were taken to shelters in buses without air
conditioning."

All in all, Bilodeau said, the evacuation had value as "a good drill."

- Information from the Associated Press was used in this report.

A review of the named storms of the 1998 hurricane season

Here's the National Weather Service's list of all the major tropical storms  and
hurricanes it has named and tracked in the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of  Mexico
this year:

                                             Highest sust.

Storm                              Date          winds (mph)

Tropical Storm Alex:        July 27-Aug. 3     45

Hurricane Bonnie:           Aug. 19-30        100

Tropical Storm Charley:     Aug. 21-Aug. 22    50

Hurricane Daniellle:        Aug. 24-Sept. 3    90

Hurricane Earl:             Aug. 31-Sept. 3    85

Tropical Storm Frances:     Sept. 8-12         55

Hurricane Georges:          Sept. 15-19       130

Tropical Storm Hermine:     Sept. 17-20        40

Hurricane Ivan:             Sept. 20-27        80

Hurricane Jeanne:           Sept. 21-Oct. 1    90

Hurricane Karl:             Sept. 23-28        90

Hurricane Lisa:             Oct. 5-9           65

Hurricane Mitch:            Oct. 22-Nov. 5    155

Hurricane Nicole:           Formed Nov. 24     75

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, Reuters; COLOR PHOTO, Associated Press; BLACK AND WHITE
PHOTO, JOAN KADEL FENTON; BLACK AND WHITE CHART; A girl wanders amid debris in
southern Honduras, the hardest-hit country by Hurricane Mitch.; Key West
residents hold on as they try to take cover from Hurricane Georges. ; Perry
Smith of Dunedin was one of many area residents evacuated for Georges.; lists
the named storms of the 1998 hurricane season, their dates and highest sustained
winds with map locating the paths of each

                    Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 211 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 Guardian.com.

                           September 13, 2013 Friday

Where have all the hurricanes gone?

BYLINE: Harry J Ententheguardian.com

LENGTH: 871 words

ABSTRACT

Harry J Enten:The US was supposed to have another intense hurricane season a
year after Sandy, but the forecasts were off yet again

FULL TEXT

Forecasting anything is hard, and forecasting the weather is extremely
difficult. I've seen storms predicted to drop two to three feet of snow on New
York City leave only three inches. Long-range winter forecasting? Forget about
it. Hurricanes usually fall under a different category, though they too prove
the limits of modelling in this day and age.

You might have heard that Noaa (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)
was predicting 13 to 20 named storms (which have sustained winds of at least
39mph) just before hurricane season started in June. In addition, they called
for seven to 11 hurricanes (maximum sustained winds of at least 74mph) and three
to six major hurricanes (winds of at least 111mph).

The estimates from other weather agencies and private entities were basically
the same: somewhere between 12 and 20 named storms, five and 11 hurricanes, and
three to six major hurricanes. The record so far suggests these early forecasts
were too bold.

However, we are below the number of storms we should have had at this point. On
average, there are five named storms after 10 September. There have been eight
named storms, with only one hurricane just formed. That hurricane, Humberto, was
almost the latest forming hurricane of the past 40 years. The chances we get the
13 predicted named storms are decent.

The chances we come anywhere close to the number of hurricanes or major
hurricanes forecasted by the NHC (National Hurricane Center) are far lower,
though. On average, only three more hurricanes, and only one more major
hurricane, form this late into the season.

Basically, fewer hurricanes form under the conditions we've had this year: too
much wind and dry air in the middle and upper atmosphere. (Noaa has pointed this
out.)

What caused the inaccurate hurricane forecast (inaccurate so far, anyway)?
Long-range tropical storm and hurricane forecasts are based off of a number of
environmental factors, such as the development of an El Niño or La Niña in the
Pacific, and wind shear and sea surface temperatures in the eastern Atlantic.
These variables are then put into historical context to create a type of analog
forecast.

Not surprisingly, forecasters update these prognostications throughout the year
and even during the hurricane season, which lasts from June to November. If the
El Niño weakens, then one would think there would be a more hurricanes. The
opposite would occur with a La Niña. An increase in the wind shear decreases the
chances of a hurricane, while an increase in sea surface temperatures has the
opposite effect.

This year the lower atmospheric conditions were predicted correctly. The sea
surface temperatures have been warm. That has meant that tropical storms have
been able to develop. The upper atmospheric conditions were not forecasted
accurately, though. Hence, storms haven't been able to intensify into
hurricanes.

If the westerly winds that have disrupted hurricane growth die down, then we
could end the season with a bang. If we don't see a particularly impressive end,
then it tells what past data hints at; we're not nearly as good at long-range
hurricane forecasts as we might think.

Last year, the final pre-season forecasts missed the mark by a pretty wide
margin. Instead of nine to 15 named storms in 2012, we had 19. And rather than
four to eight hurricanes, we had 10. In other words, an average to
slightly-above-average year ended up with numbers well above average, with Sandy
topping it off.

These inaccurate forecasts more represent the norm than the exception. The
actual number of storms should fall within the forecast 70% of the time per the
NHC. From 2002 to 2012, five of the 11 tropical storm forecasts have fallen
outside this interval.

This includes 2009 and 2012, even as the NHC widened their estimate ranges in
2009. If 2013 ends up below the 13 to 20 range, then it will mean three out of
five years predictions were off, both above and below the forecast.

The hurricane pre-season predictions leave even more to be desired. Seven of the
last 11 years have featured the actual number of storms falling outside the
pre-season range, including 2009 and 2012. Given that we're going to need one
amazing end to the 2013 season to reach seven hurricanes, it's looking like
eight out of 12 seasons and three out of the last five forecasts were wrong.

Perhaps paradoxically, the major hurricane forecasts have been most accurate of
all. Eight of the past 11 seasons have been called correctly. Even if this year
ends up off the mark, forecasters have hit 75% accuracy over 12 years.

Overall, however, this season seems to be fitting a trend. Long-range tropical
storm and hurricane predictions aren't as accurate as we might hope. Perhaps
forecasters should widen their ranges, or lower their confidence interval. This
trend contrasts with short-range individual storm predictions, which are getting

 increasingly accurate in terms of forecast track.

Therefore, the general rule should be: don't freak out over long-range
predictions, but once a storm develops, pay very close attention to the
forecast.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies
                              All Rights Reserved
                  Registered in England and Wales. No. 908396
   Registered office: PO Box 68164, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1P 2AP


                          FOCUS - 212 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                          September 10, 2005 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Avoiding a hurricane season disaster

BYLINE: Camilla Cornell, For CanWest News Service

SECTION: TRAVEL; Pg. H6

LENGTH: 729  words


Vacation packages to Mexico and the Caribbean are cheap right now, mainly
because the peak travel season to the tropics is a few months away.

But there's another reason for the bargain-basement beach vacations: Hurricane
season runs from June to November in the tropics. And, after seeing the images
of the devastation wreaked on the southern United States by hurricane Katrina,
getting hit by a hurricane while on vacation is an experience most would rather
avoid.

"They're looking for sun, sand and relaxing," says Gary Sadler, director of
sales and marketing for Beaches/Sandals, "not hurricane winds, rain and
devastation."

The good news is your chances of going head-to-head with one of nature's
monsters are actually pretty slim. The bad news? A hurricane can affect weather
patterns for kilometres around. Here are some tips to avoid being blown away on
vacation.

Choose the right time to go

Although August has a reputation as a bad month for hurricanes, the peak of the
hurricane season falls from the beginning of September to mid-October.

Pick a low-risk paradise

According to the Caribbean Hurricane Network website, www.stormcarib.com, the
islands least likely to be battered by hurricanes are Aruba and Bonaire, which
have only experienced one serious hurricane since 1851. The next safest are
Trinidad and Curacao, with only one hurricane hit in the same time period.
Topping the list of the islands most often in a hurricane's path are Abaco (in
the Bahamas, with 18 hurricanes) and Grand Bahama with 15. In fact, the Bahamas
is a far more active region for hurricanes than either the eastern or western
Caribbean. To find out how a potential vacation location ranks, check out
StormCarib's climatology chart.

Cruise around it

With sophisticated tracking systems, cruise ships are able to avoid hurricanes
by rerouting. As Carnival Cruises president Bob Dickinson told industry
newsletter Cruise Week: "Cruise ships manoeuvre, so we're in front of (a
hurricane) or behind it, but nowhere near it."

And since hurricanes pull so much moisture and wave energy into themselves, it's
actually possible for areas not in their path to have better weather than usual.

Check whether your resort offers hurricane protection

Beaches/Sandals is one of the major resort chains offering hurricane protection.
Under the chain's Blue Chip Hurricane Guarantee, if a hurricane (as defined by
the U.S. National Weather Service) hits while you are a guest at any Sandals or
Beaches resort, you will receive a free replacement vacation (excluding air) to
the resort of your choice for the same duration as your original booking. The
replacement trip is valid for one year.

"I had a call from a guy a couple of weeks ago who had been to the Bahamas a few
years back," says Sadler. "He wanted to know when I thought another hurricane
might hit in the Caribbean." Sadler replied that he really didn't know, and
asked why the man was interested. "On my last vacation, I was there for 14
nights," the gentleman told him. "And the hurricane hit on the 13th night. You
gave me back 14 days of vacation." Says Sadler: "He was ready to do that again."

Other chains that offer hurricane protection include SuperClubs (which even
guarantees sunshine for its Jamaican resorts), Club Med and Wyndham Resorts.

Consider travel insurance

Trip-cancellation insurance may reimburse you should you lose your vacation to a
hurricane. The trick is to buy it before the hurricane is named or it could be
considered null and void.

Choose your travel agency wisely

On Aug. 4, online travel agency Expedia.ca launched its Hassle-Free Hurricane
Promise. Basically, the policy states that any time the Canadian Hurricane
Centre or the U.S. National Hurricane Center issues a hurricane watch or
warning, Expedia will allow its customers to rebook for another date or
destination, waiving any change or cancellation fees. The policy applies for
travel anywhere in North America, including Mexico and the Caribbean.

The company will also act as an advocate with airlines to ensure they help
customers out and waive any fees.

"People look forward to planning trips and we want them to have a feeling of
confidence throughout the process," says Stuart Morris, director of marketing.

"If they choose to go to Florida or the Caribbean, they shouldn't be lying in
bed worrying that a hurricane is somehow going to ruin their vacation."

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Herald Archive, Courtesy, Signature Vacations; Sandals Resorts, such as
this one in Ochos Rios in Jamaica, offers a free replacement trip to vacationers
if a hurricane strikes.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 213 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 13, 2010 Thursday

Regional officials discuss hurricane evacuation plans

BYLINE: Jazmine Ulloa, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 518 words


May 13--There are three chief reasons hundreds of residents in the Rio Grande
Valley do not evacuate before a hurricane, says Johnny Cavazos, Cameron County
emergency management coordinator.

"One, past experience," he said. People think that because they have been
through one or two hurricanes, the next will be the same. Two, residents think
about their property or possessions over their own lives, and three, they or
their family members do not have legal documents.

But region officials must work to change such attitudes, Cavazos said before
Cameron County officials and city leaders gathered Wednesday for a workshop on
hurricane evacuation and recovery plans in time for the beginning of the 2010
hurricane season.

"Every hurricane is different. The dynamics are different," he said. "We need to
be prepared."

At the workshop, officials discussed hurricane preparedness efforts at the
state, county and city level, emphasizing the "spirit of cooperation" that must
exist among the three layers of government for exit procedures during a major
storm to be successful.

County and state leaders described the transportation network that would be
organized in case of a major hurricane, such as the use of up to 3,500 charter
buses to take residents out of the county to Laredo and San Antonio. A ground
and air hub also would be set up for the county in San Benito, where residents
would be flown out in case of emergencies.

Officials urged community members to take their own steps to prepare for the
hurricane season. One way is to register for transportation to evacuation
checkpoints if needed by dialing 2-1-1. The more residents that register for the
2-1-1 evacuation service, the greater the chances are the county can secure
funds for transport assets -- such as buses and airplanes--from the state
legislature. Only a little more than 5,404 residents have registered so far.

Meanwhile, the 2010 hurricane forecast is set to be released May 20th by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Weather Service.
Other entities, such as world forecaster AccuWeather, have predicted between 16
to 18 named storms this season, 8 to 10 hurricanes and 3 to 5 major hurricanes
this season.

Barry Goldsmith, warning coordination meteorologist for the National Weather
Service, also urged residents to know the hazards of a hurricane.

"'Category' matters less than impact," he said, citing "the big four" major
dangers of hurricane: wind, storm surge flooding, inland flooding and tornadoes.

"There is not such thing as 'only' a category X hurricane," he said. "Hurricane
Ike was only a category 2 hurricane but had storm surge of a category hurricane
higher than that."

To see more of The Brownsville Herald, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.brownsvilleherald.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Brownsville Herald,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100513-BV-Regional-officials-discuss-hurricane-evacuation-plans-0513

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2010 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 214 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        Florida Keys Keynoter (Marathon)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 29, 2010 Saturday

Feds predict active hurricane season

BYLINE: Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 590 words


May 29--Hurricane season 2010 shapes up as "very aggressive," with a long-range
forecast suggesting up to 14 hurricanes may form, according to the National
Weather Service.

Never in the dozen years since the Weather Service's Climate Prediction Center
began issuing long-range forecasts has the agency started with a high-end
prediction of 23 named tropical storms, said Chris Vaccaro of the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

The NOAA prediction says there could be seven major hurricanes, with Category 3
winds of 111 mph and higher.

An average season would see six hurricanes, with two reaching major-hurricane
strength.

Gerry Bell, lead seasonal hurricane forecaster at NOAA's Climate Prediction
Center, "has been saying it's not a matter of whether this season will be above
average, but how far above average," Vaccaro said.

"If this outlook holds true, this season could be one of the more active on
record," NOAA administrator Jane Lubchenco said when the report was released
Wednesday. "The greater likelihood of storms brings an increased risk of a
landfall."

The forecast for the entire Atlantic Basin for the six-month season that starts
on Tuesday, with a 70 percent probability, includes:

--Fourteen to 23 named storms (top winds of 39 mph or higher).

--Eight to 14 hurricanes (top winds of 74 mph or higher).

--Three to seven major hurricanes (Category 3 or higher).

"This is a very aggressive forecast, the most aggressive forecast we've issued
in May," Vaccaro said.

There were three hurricanes in the 2009 season, with two reaching
major-hurricane force at some point. No hurricane made landfall in the United
States.

The busiest hurricane season on record came in 2005, with 28 named storms and 15
hurricanes. Those included Hurricane Katrina that devastated New Orleans, and
Hurricane Wilma's surge that caused serious flooding in the Florida Keys.

Factors that could make this hurricane season so busy:

--The expected absence of the El Nino weather system, which typically helps
break up storms that may strengthen. That happened last season.

--Warm Atlantic waters, currently about four degrees Fahrenheit above normal.

--A years-long period of high hurricane activity. NOAA noted that after a
relatively quiet era ended in 1995, "Eight of the last 15 seasons rank in the
Top 10 for the most named storms."

Craig Fugate, the former Florida emergency management director now heading the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, said "it's important that families and
businesses in coastal communities take steps now to be ready."

"You can't control when a hurricane or other emergency may happen," Fugate said,
"but you can make sure you're ready."

In April, the Tropical Meteorology Project at Colorado State University issued a
season forecast of 15 named storms, with eight hurricanes, four of them major.

That group, founded by Dr. William Gray, will issue a revised forecast Wednesday
based on conditions that have changed since its first report.

The Colorado State team calculated the chances of a hurricane landfall on the
southeast U.S. coastline, which includes Florida, ranges from 44 to 45 percent
this season.

To see more of the Keynoter, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.keysnet.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100529-FK-Feds-predict-active-hurricane-season-0529

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FK


                      Copyright 2010 Florida Keys Keynoter


                          FOCUS - 215 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Victoria Advocate (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 5, 2010 Saturday

Conference gives pointers on hurricane preparation

BYLINE: Adriana Acosta, Victoria Advocate, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 564 words


Jun. 5--PALACIOS -- Megan Dobbins is concerned about hurricane season.

Dobbins, the manager of Sixth Street Coin Laundry in Palacios, wants to be
prepared should a hurricane hit the area.

"I am running a business, and need to protect it in case a hurricane passes
through," she said.

Dobbins and other concerned Matagorda County residents attended the 2010
Community Awareness Conference on Saturday at the Palacios Recreation Center.

She hoped to educate herself by finding out evacuation plans, routes and
re-entry procedures and what emergency items to purchase in preparation of a
hurricane.

"We are preparing the community for an active hurricane season," said Doug
Matthes, Matagorda County's emergency management coordinator.

The conference is done to provide residents with information on how to prepare
their family and property for a hurricane or tropical storm threat to this area,
Matthes added.

The conference was sponsored by Texas AgriLife Extension Service, Matagorda
County, the city of Palacios, city of Bay City and the Rio Colorado Chapter of
the American Red Cross.

Guest speakers included Texas Department of Public Safety Lt. Daniel Terronez
and Matagorda County Sheriff Gary L. Mathis, who discussed the procedures
Matagorda County takes when evacuating residents from the area.

Representatives from the Texas Department of Insurance Windstorm Inspection
Program offered information on how to get free windstorm inspections.

Hurricane checklists, emergency contact information and hurricane assistance
information were offered by the Matagorda Emergency Management team.

"Grab & Go" evacuation kits were given out by the American Red Cross that
provided hurricane checklists, emergency contact information and a hurricane
evacuation contraflow route map.

The Matagorda Regional Medical Center handed out free emergency medical kits.

Dan Reilly, severe weather meteorologist for the National Weather Service's
Houston-Galveston office, provided the 2010 hurricane outlook for the Atlantic
and Gulf of Mexico basins.

Different factors are lining up for a very active season, and having this
conference is important to educate people who have not been through a major
hurricane in recent years, said Reilly.

"Some people might not know what to expect and need to be aware of, especially
in the storm surge area, where it can be a life and death decision," he said.

People really need to know what they are dealing with, he said.

"We also have warmer than normal ocean water in the Atlantic," he said.

Reilly encouraged the audience to listen to local officials when they order an
evacuation.

During Hurricane Ike, many people waited too long to leave their homes, he said.

"Run from the water and hide from the wind -- don't risk your life for your
property," he said.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicts an active to
extremely active hurricane season with 14 to 23 named storms, eight to 14
hurricanes and three to seven major hurricanes.

To see more of Victoria Advocate, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.thevictoriaadvocate.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Victoria Advocate, Texas
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100605-VI-Conference-gives-pointers-on-hurricane-preparation-0605

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VI


                        Copyright 2010 Victoria Advocate


                          FOCUS - 216 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                              June 11, 2006 Sunday

First storm of season heading to Florida;
Early forecasts predict the system will bring rain to the northeast part of the
state.

SECTION: Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 569 words


A tropical depression in the Caribbean headed toward Florida on Saturday and was
expected to become the first named storm of the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season,
bringing with it much-needed rainfall for a parched state.

But a National Weather Service forecaster predicted most of the heavy rainfall
would occur south of Jacksonville. The storm track puts the projected path right
through the city.

There would be increased winds and a 60 percent chance of rain by Monday in
Northeast Florida, forecaster Phil Peterson said.

The rain is needed. As of Saturday, the recorded rainfall amount was 10.48
inches, well short of the normal for the year to date of 19.01 inches. Last year
on the same date, Jacksonville had recorded 17.92 inches of rain.

The depression formed Saturday, nine days after the official start of the
season, but the poorly organized system was not expected to become a hurricane,
according to the National Hurricane Center.

''It will be relatively weak in terms of wind, but that doesn't mean it's going
to be weak in terms of rainfall,'' senior hurricane specialist Stacy Stewart
said.

The system, which had maximum sustained wind near 35 mph, would be named Alberto
if it reaches the 39 mph threshold for a tropical storm.

At 11 p.m., the depression was centered over the Eastern Gulf of Mexico about
290 miles west-southwest of Key West, or about 440 miles south of Apalachicola,
forecasters said. It was moving north-northwest near 9 mph.

The hurricane center recommended tropical storm warnings for the Cuban provinces
of Pinar Del Rio and the Isle of Youth.

Over the next three days, the system is expected to move through the Yucatan
Channel into the southeastern Gulf of Mexico, then toward Florida where it could
make landfall Monday or Tuesday, forecasters said.

The depression's outer rain bands stretched Saturday to the southern tip of
Florida, and heavy rain was forecast over the state's Gulf Coast and the Florida
Keys through Monday.

Scientists predict the 2006 season could produce up to 16 named storms, six of
them major hurricanes.

Last year's hurricane season was the busiest and most destructive in recorded
history. Hurricane Katrina devastated Louisiana and Mississippi and was blamed
for more than 1,570 deaths in Louisiana alone.

The 2005 Atlantic hurricane season was the busiest in 154 years of storm
tracking, with records set for the number of named storms (28) and hurricanes
(15). Forecasters used up their list of 21 proper names (beginning with Arlene
and ending with Wilma) and had to use the Greek alphabet to name storms for the
first time.

Meteorologists have said the Atlantic is not as warm as it was at this time in
2005, meaning potential storms would have less of the energy needed to develop
into hurricanes.

Atlantic hurricane seasons were relatively mild from the 1970s through 1994.
Since then, all but two years have been above normal. Experts say the ocean is
in the midst of a 20-year cycle that will continue to bring strong storms.

From 1995 to 2005, the Atlantic season averaged 15 named storms, just over eight
named hurricanes and four major hurricanes, according to the hurricane center.
From 1971 to 1994, there were an average of 8.5 named storms, five hurricanes
and just over one major hurricane. The Atlantic hurricane season ends Nov. 30.

ONLINE

STORM UPDATES

@For the latest in tropical weather information, go to Jacksonville.com,
keyword: hurricane.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: None

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 217 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                          December 29, 2004 Wednesday
                    Flagler/palm Coast News-tribune Edition

We're not done yet

BYLINE: STAFF REPORT

SECTION: SECTION E; Pg. 5E

LENGTH: 324  words


After facing three hurricanes in August and September, Flagler County residents
are ready for an easier time in 2005. Unfortunately, that is not likely to be
the case. While recovery efforts from Hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne are
still under way, the forecast for the 2005 hurricane season is for slightly more
activity than average. William Gray and his staff at the Department of
Atmospheric Science at Colorado State University predict 11 named storms in 2005
and six Atlantic hurricanes.

"The probability of U.S. major hurricane landfall is estimated to be 30 percent
above the long- period average," Gray said in a report released earlier this
month. The report said major hurricane activity in the Atlantic has increased
since 1995 and the conditions allowing for that "largely persist" today. "If the
recent 10-year shift follows prior occurrences, it is likely that enhanced
Atlantic basin major hurricane activity will persist through the early decades
of the 21st century, contrast with the diminished major hurricane activity that
was present from 1970-1994," the report said. "We expect that the hurricane
season of 2005 will follow, although with somewhat less intensity, this recent
10-year upswing in hurricane activity." On average, the United States
experiences two to three landfalling hurricanes during above-normal hurricanes,
well below the eight landfalls recorded this year, according to the National
Weather Service. "What could not be anticipated this season was the high number
of U.S. landfalling hurricanes," said David L. Johnson, weather service
director, in a news release. "The 2004 season was one to tell your grandchildren
about," said Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center. "I believe
and stress at every opportunity that residents should have a plan, stay informed
and act when told to do so by their local officials." Atlantic hurricane season
begins June 1 and runs through Nov. 30.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Caption: Photo 1: Teddy Lawrence, Palm Coast, braves the remaining
rains of Hurricane Frances to get some needed supplies from a local store as the
slow-moving storm finally moves out of the area.Photo 2: Members of the Florida
National Guard, out of Starke and Jacksonville, hand out precious supplies of
ice, water and prepackaged meals to Flagler County residents.Photo 3:
Tree-removal units line up along State Road 100 near I-95 in Flagler County in
an effort to get fuel before heading farther south as Hurricane Frances slowly
leaves the area.Photo 4: Mark Heikkinen, with M&L Mobile Home Service, Port
Orange, removes twisted and broken pieces of a sunroom damaged by Hurricane
Jeanne in the Surfside Estates manufactured home community in Beverly Beach on
Sept. 27.Photo 5: Shannon Ryan and Candy Goligoski, both of Flagler Beach, fill
sandbags provided by the Flagler County Road and Bridge Department in Bunnell as
they prepare for the arrival of Hurricane Charley on Aug. 13.Photo 6: Making the
best of what nature provides, cousins Jerry and Mitchell McNitt use a bed sheet
to "sail" their skateboards, in the wind from Hurricane Jeanne, down South 19th
Street in Flagler Beach on Sept. 26. "Man, we were really cruising," Mitchell
said after their ride.Photos by Brian Myrick

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2004 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2004 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 218 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                             May 23, 2007 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Experts agree: 'Canes coming Forecast shows Volusia at risk for wind damage

BYLINE: DINAH VOYLES PULVER - ENVIRONMENT WRITER

SECTION: SECTION A; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 729  words


No matter which weather forecast or model assesses the chances of a busy
hurricane season this summer, they say the same thing: Be ready to ride out
another conga line of tropical cyclones.

Two forecasts released this week for the season that starts June 1 call for an
above-normal season, especially in Volusia County.

Volusia is among 20 counties in the Southeast facing the greatest risk of
hurricane-force winds, according to a forecast from University of Central
Florida statistics professor Mark Johnson and his colleague Chuck Watson.

That's not good news for thousands of oceanfront residents along eroded
shorelines or folks still trying to get homes and property repaired from the
2004

hurricanes.

Local and federal officials are urging residents and businesses to get ready.

Last year was an unexpectedly easy season," Michael Chertoff, secretary of the
Department of Homeland Security, said during a teleconference from Washington on
Tuesday. "There's no guarantee that this season is going to be anything less
than tough."

The chance of a busier-than-normal season was set at 75 percent in the federal
outlook from the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration and its National
Weather Service and National Hurricane Center.

The group forecasts 13 to 17 named storms, seven to 10 of them hurricanes and
three to five of those major hurricanes with winds of more than 110 mph.

The forecast from Johnson and Watson says a handful of Florida counties,
including Volusia, faces a one-in-six chance of getting hurricane-force winds at
least once this summer. That's double the risk the area faces in a normal
season, said Watson, a Georgia researcher who founded the Kinetic Analysis Corp.

Normally the northern coast of Florida is a little bit protected, Watson said.
This year, as in 2004, "the potential is there for storms to crisscross the
state from the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic."

The forecasts use a combination of statistics from past hurricane seasons and
various computer models that look at current and future conditions in the
Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico.

The Atlantic hurricane region is in the clutches of an ocean and atmospheric
current that ebbs and flows over several decades. Hurricane researchers realized
in the late 1990s that the circulation pattern, called the Atlantic
Multi-decadal Oscillation, causes periods of busy hurricane activity and
less-busy hurricane activity that last between 25 and 40 years.

The latest busy cycle began in 1995 and is blamed for the crazy 2004 and 2005
seasons.

But what happened last year?

Looking back at last year, we over-predicted, mainly because of a rapidly
increasing El Nino during August and September," said Gerry Bell, the lead
seasonal hurricane forecaster for NOAA's Climate Prediction Center. "This year
we're looking at opposite conditions instead."

El Nino is a pattern of warmer-than-normal water in the tropical Pacific Ocean.
It puts a lid on Atlantic hurricanes, partly because it increases wind shear
that prevents the storms from forming the towering columns of clouds that give a
hurricane its muscle.

Water temperatures in the Pacific are neutral at the moment, but seem to be
trending toward cooler than normal. If the water does get colder, it will
trigger a La Nina, which means less wind shear over the Atlantic.

And that, combined with warmer-than-normal water temperatures in the Gulf of
Mexico and the Atlantic, ramps up the risk and could mean bad news for
Floridians.

As the experts are fond of saying, even one hurricane can make it a very bad
year.

Johnson and Watson collaborate on a Web site that tracks storms worldwide and
lets users see projected property damages, as well as disruptions to oil and gas
production. http://hurricane .methaz.org/ NOAA Hurricane information can be
found at: http:// hurricanes.noaa.gov

Weathering The Numbers

75%

chance of busier than normal hurricane season

1 in 6

chance of hurricane force winds in Volusia

13-17

forecast for named storms

7-10

hurricanes forecast

3-5

major hurricanes forecast

28

named storms in 2005, the busiest season on record

SOURCES: NOAA; hurricane.methaz.org

Storm Names

Hurricane season officially starts June 1, but it started early this year with
Andrea in May. Other names to be assigned to storms this summer are:

Barry

Chantal

Dean

Erin

Felix

Gabrielle

Humberto

Ingrid

Jerry

Karen

Lorenzo

Melissa

Noel

Olga

Pablo

Rebekah

Sebastien

Tanya

Van

Wendy

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2007 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2007 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 219 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         Portland Press Herald (Maine)

                           August 25, 1998, Tuesday,

Hurricanes' wrath difficult to predict;
 As the South wonders if Bonnie will hit, forecasters suggest Mainers prepare
for a storm.

BYLINE: MEREDITH GOAD Staff Writer

SECTION: FRONT, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 976 words


The unpredictable Hurricane Bonnie is causing a lot of anxiety down South,
packing 115 mph winds and stirring up dangerous riptides as the storm tries to
decide which way it wants to go next.

The National Weather Service issued a hurricane watch Monday afternoon for much
of the Southeast coast, but scientists still weren't certain where Bonnie would
hit or if it would make landfall at all. Residents from Georgia to Virginia were
preparing for possible hurricane conditions to appear by Wednesday morning.

Here in Maine, the word is don't panic - but be prepared.

"I don't want to minimize the threat, but people hear 'hurricane' and they tend
to think of Hurricane Andrew, Hurricane Hugo, Camille, some of the big,
devastating hurricanes, and the chances of getting something like that along the
Maine coast are almost nonexistent," said Al Wheeler of the National Weather
Service in Gray.

Though strong hurricanes usually lose a lot of steam before they reach the Maine
coast, often fizzling to the level of a tropical storm, they still can cause
significant damage. When Hurricane Bob hit the state on Aug. 19, 1991, winds in
Portland reached just 40 mph, gusting to 61 mph.  But there were widespread
power outages, downed trees, numerous washouts of roads and culverts, and even
three deaths. Damage was estimated at $ 26 million.

"It's like any type of storm you get into," said George Flaherty, director of
the Cumberland County Emergency Management Agency. "You've got to prepare for
the worst, and you can't half-prepare because you never know what it's going to
do. They can zig and zag on you very quick."

Maine hasn't had to take the extraordinary precautions for hurricane season that
southern states have, Flaherty said, such as making buildings hurricane-proof.
But the state is participating in some federal programs designed to decrease the
amount of damage during these immense storms.

For example, scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
and the U.S. Corps of Engineers have created a computer model called "Slosh"
that's already being used in southern states, and they were in Maine last week
to begin building a similar model for southern Maine.

"It's a computer model that models the winds and the tides and all that so they
can tell what the storm surge is going to do," Flaherty said.

This week, Flaherty has been distributing 60-minute videotapes to Maine Medical
Center, Mercy Hospital, the Barron Center and other local health-care facilities
to show them what major medical problems crop up during a hurricane.

"It involves a lot of history of what they did with Hurricane Andrew and
Hurricane Hugo in the South - what hospitals did there, what their preparations
were and what the result was during the storms," Flaherty said.

The heart of Maine's hurricane season is mid-August to mid-October.  Years of
tracking hurricanes as they make their way up the eastern seaboard have shown
that they seem to have a mind of their own.  Yet certain patterns have emerged,
especially regarding a storm's behavior as it churns its way into the colder
waters of the North Atlantic.

"Looking at climatology from past hurricanes, when they get up into this area
they tend to be moving fairly quickly as opposed to what's happening right now
(with Hurricane Bonnie) where it's just sort of drifting around," Wheeler said.
"They may pick up a forward speed of 30 or 40 miles per hour, which is pretty
fast for a hurricane."

The track of a hurricane up the coast depends a lot on the steering currents in
the troposphere, about 18,000 to 20,000 feet up.

Once a hurricane develops in the tropical Atlantic, easterly winds push it
toward the eastern coast of the United States. Then, as it starts to curve
northward, the prevailing westerlies take over and it starts to get pushed back
out to sea.

At this point the hurricane could be shoved northward by a high pressure system,
or interact with a cold front moving down from the northwest. There are many
possibilities.  But it is at this moment, as the storm is poised to take off in
one direction or another, that the mid-level atmospheric winds are relatively
weak. That's why Hurricane Bonnie is stalled now, in a way, wobbling around as
if she didn't know which way to go next.

By the time a hurricane reaches the mid-Atlantic states, it gets picked up by
mid-latitude winds and begins to move faster. The farther north it travels, the
more it picks up speed and loses some of its strength.  Once the storm is out of
the Gulf Stream and moves over the cold waters of the Gulf of Maine, it packs a
much smaller wallop.

"It's warm water that really is kind of the heat engine for a hurricane,"
Wheeler said, "and once a hurricane gets away from that source of energy, they
start to lose steam."

Hurricanes also tend to hit southern New England first, and making landfall
there takes a lot of punch out of the storms.

History has shown that the major problems caused by hurricanes in Maine usually
come from flooding. Flooding can be a significant problem because of the way
hurricanes act when they get this far north. The heavier rains tend to fall to
the west of the eye of the storm, Wheeler points out, while the strongest winds
tend to stay to the east.

"That's a fairly typical pattern," he said.

Despite the advances made in weather forecasting, when it comes to tracking
hurricanes meteorologists feel lucky if they can predict the storm's path within
a couple hundred miles in any direction.  For now, only time will tell whether
Bonnie is headed our way, bringing winds, rain and flooding.

"The best thing people can do at this point in our area is just kind of be aware
that there's something down there and stay tuned and make sure you listen to the
latest forecast," Wheeler said.


LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 1998 Guy Gannett Communications, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 220 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Port Arthur News (Texas)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            August 18, 2015 Tuesday

Hurricane season not over, be prepared

BYLINE: Mary Meaux, The Port Arthur News, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 630 words


Aug. 18--This year's hurricane season, which began June 1, has been a slow one
with three named storms but coastal residents still need to be prepared as the
height of the season approaches.

"We are concerned about the safety of every Texan during hurricane season," Mark
Hanna, spokesman for the Insurance Council of Texas, said. "Even if a hurricane
in the Gulf of Mexico is only a 'Category 2' coastal residents should still make
sure they're prepared to protect their property and evacuate if needed. Texas
homeowners and businesses who have been through a hurricane can tell you how
devastating the storms can be."

The last storm to strike Texas was Hurricane Ike in 2008 -- a Category 2
hurricane with winds ranging from 96 to 110 mph. Ike claimed more than 100 lives
and completely wiped 3,000 homes and businesses off the Bolivar Peninsula.
Extensive damage was also experienced in Bridge City in Orange County where
almost every home received damage.

Roger Erickson, warning coordination meteorologist with the National Weather
Service-Lake Charles, said El Nino put a damper on this year's hurricane season.

The problem, he added, is the possibility of a quick strike hurricane. For
example, Hurricane Humberto which struck High Island on Sept. 13, 2007, was a
minimal storm with winds of 85 mph. The storm formed and intensified faster than
any other hurricane on record before making landfall.

"It was a quick strike on the back of a cold front," Erickson said.

The minimal Hurricane Humberto caused for $$30 million in losses.

Currently there is an area of low pressure located several hundred miles
southwest of the Cape Verde Islands that shows signs of organization. While the
area is still too far out to accurately predict formation and path, Erickson
said the area is not a threat anytime soon if at all.

El Nino will have an effect on the winter though.

"With El Nino we typically colder, wetter winters," he said. "The typical El
Nino pattern is for stormy weather and cooler temps with a higher risk of ice
storms. From our perspective, there is more to talk about later for the long
range."

Manuel Villarreal, Texas Windstorm Insurance Association ombudsman, works on
education and outreach to policyholders in 14 counties. Performance-wise, things
have gotten better when filing claims, he said. For example, a hailstorm that
struck Beaumont on April 27 resulted in 2,294 new claims; many of those claims
were finalized within 12.3 days.

"The fact that a majority of those claims were closed shows a lot about TWIA
management."

In related news, changes are coming for the Texas Windstorm Insurance
Association.

Senate Bill 900, also known as the Windstorm Reform Bill, affects the way TWIA
is funded, composition of the boards and programs to reduce the total amount of
policies TWIA has.

Mark Hanna, with the Insurance Council of Texas, explained that by Oct. 1, a new
TWIA board will be appointed consisting of three insurer representatives, three
coastal representatives and three non-costal representatives.

SB 900 also changed TWIA's funding structure requiring TWIA to fund, at minimum,
a 100-year-storm season which has been accomplished, according to information
from TWIA.

The bill requires TWIA to sustain this level of funding in future years, using
the following sources: TWIA premiums and the Catastrophe Reserve Trust Fund
(CRTF), a combination of $1 billion in company assessments and $1 billion in
bonds repaid first by TWIA policyholders and if necessary, by all coastal
policyholders and sufficient reinsurance or other risk financing to achieve the
100-year storm season, according to their website.

___ (c)2015 The Port Arthur News (Port Arthur, Texas) Visit The Port Arthur News
(Port Arthur, Texas) at panews.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150818-ZH-Hurricane-season-not-over-be-prepared-20150818

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZH


                      Copyright 2015 The Port Arthur News


                          FOCUS - 221 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                The New York Post

                              June 2, 2009 Tuesday

ALL ABOUT HURRICANES

BYLINE: JASMIN K. WILLIAMS

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 724 words


Hurricanes are among nature's deadliest storms. Here's a bit more about them.

Hurricane season begins on June 1 and continues though Nov. 30. Weather experts
watch storm formations over the Atlantic Ocean. Many tropical depressions will
form and a few will turn into hurricanes. This year promises to be a busy
season.

These storms pack a real punch, causing the ocean to surge, creating flooding
rains and winds that can reach more than 150 miles per hour.

A hurricane has three parts:

Eye -- the low-pressure calm center of the storm

Eye Wall -- the area around the eye with the most violent winds

Rain Bands -- thunderstorms circulating from the eye that feed the condensation
and evaporation cycle that powers the storm.

Hurricanes start out as tropical depressions far away from land. They form over
the warm ocean waters near the equator. Warm, moist air from the ocean's surface
begins to rise. As it does, it cools and forms rain droplets and storm clouds.
The rising air below is replaced by more humid air from the ocean's surface. As
this cycle of evaporation and condensation continues, winds swirl in different
directions, combining with the rising ocean air. The storm grows into the
familiar white swirl pattern you've seen on TV. This can take a few hours or
several days.

As many of 100 of these systems can form during hurricane season, but only about
10 will develop into tropical storms. These are not dangerous -- until they hit
land.

A tropical depression becomes a tropical storm when its winds reach a dangerous
39 miles per hour or more. Though not as destructive as hurricanes, tropical
storms can still flip over trucks, destroy buildings and topple trees.

Once a tropical storm's winds hit 74 mile per hour or better, the storm takes a
cyclone shape and officially becomes a hurricane.

Hurricanes are classified in categories from one to five, depending on the
storm's strength. A category five is the strongest and has the most potential to
do the greatest amount of damage to land, property and human life.

The areas hardest hit by hurricanes are the Caribbean islands and the southeast
coast of the U.S. bordering the Gulf of Mexico. Southern Florida gets a lion's
share of hurricanes.

Though New York rarely takes a direct hit from a hurricane, we sometimes get
tail effects like heavy rain and flooding -- the major cause of death and
destruction. These storms do most of their damage further south and lose
strength by the time they head north and out to sea. However, in 1938, a
Category 3 storm hit Long Island. High winds hit New England and the heavy rains
caused river flooding in New York, Massachusetts and Connecticut. Six hundred
people were killed.

What's in a name?

Our word "hurricane" is similar to words used by other cultures to describe
these violent and deadly storms. Hurakan is the name of a Mayan god that blew
his breath over the water. Hurrican is the name of an ancient evil Caribbean
god.

With as many as 100 tropical storm forming during hurricane season, naming them
is necessary to keep track of them. Both male and female names are used. If a
storm has been especially deadly, its name is retired and not used again. Deadly
storm names Agnes, Hazel, Andrew, Camille, Gloria and Katrina are retired

The deadliest hurricane in U.S. history was an unnamed Category 4 storm that hit
Galveston, Texas in 1900. It killed 8,000 people.

On Aug. 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina slammed into the Gulf Coast and devastated
parts of Mississippi and Louisiana. New Orleans was especially hard hit as its
fragile levee system failed, completely flooding parts of the city. Thousands of
residents are still without homes. It was the nation's costliest natural
disaster at more than $81 billion in damages.

2009 Hurricane Names:

Ana   Henri   Odette

Bill   Ida   Peter

Claudette   Joaquin   Rose

Danny   Kate   Sam

Erika   Larry   Theresa

Fred   Mindy   Victor

Grace   Nicholas   Wanda

----

New York Post Activities

* Check the weather page of today's Post for information on Hurricanes or
tropical storms.

* Create a hurricane safety check list. How would you prepare yourself if you
were caught in a hurricane?

* Use the Internet or an encyclopedia to learn more about tropical storms and
hurricanes.

Today's lesson fulfills the following New York standards: E1c, E3c, E3d, Science
S3c, S4a, S6a.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: In 2005, Hurricane Katrina slammed into the Gulf Coast and devastated
New Orleans.   [Photo: NOAA / Bloomberg News]

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 222 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                           Ledger (Lakeland, Florida)

                             June 1, 2002, Saturday

LOOKING BACK AT ANDREW; THE STORM IS REMEMBERED AS HURRICANE SEASON BEGINS

BYLINE: DIANE LACEY ALLEN The Ledger

SECTION: Hurricane 2002; Pg. S1

LENGTH: 1000 words


Contractors are the topic of conversation for the Laidlaws again. Only this time
they are expanding their Miami home, rather than rebuilding a house ruined by a
hurricane.

Almost 10 years after Hurricane Andrew cut a tight path of destruction across
South Florida, conversations no longer are dominated by the nation's costliest
storm.

But hurricanes can become the topic of conversation each year at this time: the
Atlantic hurricane season starts today and won't end until Nov. 30. Those six
months can be life threatening to those who find themselves in the path of these
powerful storms.

The Laidlaws, however, like so many others who lived through that August night
in 1992, have carried on.

David Laidlaw, who graduated from Lakeland High School in 1976, has spent the
post-Andrew decade raising a family with his wife, Robin, and working in the
graphic design business.

Everett is now 12 and Ash is 17.

So instead of spending nights filling out detailed insurance forms, there are
now guitar lessons and ice hockey.

"It's hard to believe it's been 10 years," says Robin Laidlaw, 43. "It's almost
like we've forgotten about it."

Sure there are the reminders. Like when they go out to eat at the restaurant
where they dined just before Andrew hit.

There are the questions about "the big hurricane" from people who didn't live in
the area when it slammed the state -- killing 26 and causing $ 26 billion in
damages before it ran out of steam.

The storm shutters have been purchased since the Category 4 storm arrived with
sustained winds of 145 mph.

And there's always extra water and batteries just in case.

"Ash remembers it," Robin Laidlaw said. "At the time, we thought it would leave
a great scar, but it really didn't. He never talks about it."

But it has been 10 years.

It is the widening gap between fading terror and possible fatalities that
concerns people like Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center.

"We haven't had a hurricane hit the U.S. coast in two years, and that's good,
but a lot of people have hurricane amnesia," said Mayfield. "We're still setting
up for disaster because of all the development we have along the coast line."

To head off complacency, emergency management officials have worked hard to
prepare for disaster.

Plans now call for opening both sides of major freeways to accommodate
evacuations -- a lesson learned from both Andrew and 1999's Hurricane Floyd.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration also is moving into the
second year of experimental forecasts, which officials hope will extend
three-day forecasts to five days by 2003.

And Florida continues to look to soothsayer William Gray, a meteorologist at
Colorado State University.

For 2002, he has predicted 12 named storms will develop into seven hurricanes --
three of them major storms with winds higher than 110 mph.

Federal experts predict the formation of nine to 13 tropical storms that will
grow into six to eight hurricanes, including two or three major storms.

The average year produces 10 named systems, including six hurricanes and two
major hurricanes.

Last year, 15 systems developed, including nine hurricanes, four of them
intense.

The federal estimate of hurricanes is based on numerous factors, including
conditions in the eastern Pacific, where a mild El Nino weather pattern is
expected to develop this summer.

El Ninos bring relatively warm water to that portion of the Pacific and tend to
produce strong crosswinds that sheer off the tops of hurricanes developing in
the Atlantic.

But researchers warn that the region is in a long-term period of
higher-than-average hurricane activity.

"It takes just one hurricane over your community to make it a bad year,"
Mayfield said.

A decade after Andrew, hurricane experts are still discussing its severity.

Although long a topic among meteorologists and storm junkies, Andrew could quite
possibly have been a Category 5 on the Saffir-Simpson scale of hurricane
strength.

Because Andrew was so strong, it took out a buoy and other instruments as it
terrorized the state.

New estimates mean Andrew might be bumped into the Category 5 status reserved
for only two other storms that have smacked the United States.

Regardless of classification, Andrew's legacy is one of big numbers.

By FEMA's inventory, the storm meant:

250,000 left homeless after the storm.

8,373 homes destroyed.

37,245 homes with major damage.

40,632 homes with some damage.

8,974 mobile homes destroyed.

But such is the world of hurricane forecasts and followup. Andrew, for instance,
cost $ 2 billion in cleanup alone.

Other storm seasons may not have been as costly, but they have been prolific.

The second half of the 2001 June-through-November season was the third busiest
in history. The first hurricane was Sept. 8.

The good news, Mayfield said, was that none struck the United States for the
second year in a row. That happened in the past in 1930-31 and 1981-82.

Three tropical storms made landfall -- Allison in Texas in June, Barry in the
Florida Panhandle in August and Gabrielle in September on Florida's Gulf Coast.

But, as Mayfield says, all it takes is one storm to make a dramatic difference
in Florida's history.

And then it is up to its residences to act.

Have they become complacent?

"It's 'Whatever' over the last couple of years," said David Laidlaw. "They've
closed schools and (been) implementing policies designed to prepare everybody
and nothing has happened. The old 'Cry Wolf' again."

So Laidlaw will probably wait and see what happens if a storm comes barreling
his way again.

He'll think about putting up the storm shutters, factoring in the four to five
hours he'll need -- and the help he'll get from his growing boys.

Diane Lacey Allen can be reached at diane.allen@theledger.com or 863-802-7514.
Reports from The Associated Press, Knight Ridder and Cox News Service were used
in this story.


LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: National Hurricane Center: As the terror of 1992's Hurricane Andrew
begins to fade, the National Hurricane Center is setting up for disaster. A
hurricane has not hit the U.S. coast in two years.

             Copyright 2002 Lakeland Ledger Publishing Corporation


                          FOCUS - 223 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     April 15, 1995, Saturday, City Edition

Hurricane forecast: six for '95

BYLINE: DAVID OLINGER

SECTION: NATIONAL; HURRICANE SEASON; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 844 words

DATELINE: ATLANTIC CITY



The American guru of hurricane prediction expects 1995 to be the stormiest
season in five years.

Climate professor Bill Gray closed the 1995 National Hurricane Conference  in
Atlantic City with this bet:

There will be 10 tropical storms in the Atlantic this summer and fall. Six  will
become hurricanes. Two will be intense hurricanes, carrying winds greater  than
110 miles per hour.

In the century-long history of hurricane records, that would be a pretty
typical season. But it wouldn't seem that way to the millions of people who
have moved to the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico shorelines in a generation of
waterfront development.

Gray has toned down an earlier prediction that 1995 could break a long lull  of
hurricane activity in disastrous fashion.

Even so, "this forecast is still more active than the last four years have
been, and more active than the last 25 years," he said Friday.

If his forecast is correct, this will be the busiest hurricane season since
1990, which brought eight hurricanes and 14 tropical storms.

Gray, a lanky, white-haired professor, studies climate patterns and teaches  a
course in tropical storms from a very safe distance, at Colorado State
University.

He has been making annual hurricane season predictions for 11 years, and so  far
his meteorological batting average has been much better than the Farmer's
Almanac.

That's because his forecasts are based on global weather patterns that
correlate closely with the formation of tropical storms in the Atlantic.

Two of the most important factors are ocean temperature in the eastern  Pacific
and rainfall in western Africa.

A cruel fact of climate variation on Earth is that one continent's  deliverance
can be another's disaster.

Since the 1960s, few hurricanes have reached U.S. shores because of a  prolonged
drought in western Africa, the region where many Atlantic storms  originate.

Secondly, the Gulf of Mexico states have been blessed by a prolonged visit  from
El Nino, a cyclic warming of the eastern Pacific. That gives rise to  westerly
winds, which help to shear the tops off large storms forming in the  Atlantic.

Hurricane Andrew notwithstanding, the last four years have been the  quietest
period of hurricane activity in 80 years. The last comparable lull,  1911 to
1914, accompanied El Nino's last four-year visit.

Gray believes Pacific temperatures are cooling again, and there are signs  of a
normal rainfall pattern returning to the western Sahel region of Africa.

That could spell trouble for coastal residents of the United States this  year.

"Much more important" - and too early to forecast - "is the multi-decade  trend
of these storms," Gray said.

To those who think hurricanes have been bad in recent years, he offers this
comparison:

From 1947 through 1960, 14 severe hurricanes struck the eastern shores of  the
United States. In the 34 years since, there have been only four.

And nobody, in his view, has beaten the odds more often than the 14-million
residents of Florida.

"Florida is the luckiest state," he said. "It is a sitting duck."

Tampa Bay has been sheltered from most of the hurricanes that did reach
Florida, generally escaping with glancing blows since it took a direct hit  from
a major hurricane in 1921.

It gets battered less often than the Atlantic coast, which is most  vulnerable
to tropical storms riding westerly trade winds across the ocean.

Now the bad news: Hurricane forecasters see Tampa Bay as one of the worst
places to be in the event of a direct hit from a major hurricane.

They say the gentle slope of the continental shelf in the Tampa Bay and  Fort
Myers regions would increase the "storm surge," a temporary rise in the  ocean
level that can reach 20 feet or more.

That would be high enough to cover any beach town built on the barrier  islands
of Pinellas County.

Gulf of Mexico hurricanes also tend to be slow-moving storms, lasting an
average of 10 hours at hurricane strength.

Worse, they're hard to predict, because hurricanes entering the gulf  typically
curve as they collide with prevailing westerly winds from the  continent.

"One of the problems with the Tampa Bay area is you have more forecast  errors,"

 said National Hurricane Center director Robert Sheets. "You have to  catch it
on the curve."

Gray predicts only the number of hurricanes that will form each year, not  where
they will land.

By his own account, his 11-year record consists of two "busts," two  "marginal"
predictions and seven "darned good" years. A detailed chart  comparing his
forecasts to actual storms since 1984 shows that on average he  is off by about
one hurricane and two tropical storms per year.

Before offering his 1995 predictions, Gray cited the admonition of Arago, a
19th century French physicist: "Never, no matter what may be the progress of
science, will honest scientific men who have regard for their reputations
venture to predict the weather."

As usual, he disregarded Arago's advice.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; Bill Gray; Bill Gray, (ran T ET)

                    Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 224 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                      June 1, 1995, Thursday, City Edition

New voice to warn of hurricane danger

BYLINE: SUSAN CLARY

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 925 words



For the past generation, only two men have been director of the National
Hurricane Center, the calming voice of authority during storms that can  destroy
property and devastate lives.

But as the 1995 hurricane season begins today, a new name joins the list.

Longtime meteorologist Bob Burpee, 53, was nominated Wednesday as the  hurricane
center's new director. He will replace Bob Sheets, the eight-year  veteran whose
poised updates during Hurricane Andrew in 1992 made him a  household name for
many Floridians.

"I've known Bob (Burpee) for nearly 30 years, and he'll be a very good  director
there," said Dr. William M. Gray, one of the world's leading  hurricane
researchers and a professor at Colorado State University. "He is  very
knowledgeable about things, he has flown into storms, he is a good theory
person and he has been a meteorologist all his life."

U.S. Commerce Secretary Ron Brown held a news conference Wednesday in Miami  to
announce Burpee's nomination, but the forecaster won't officially begin his  new
job for several weeks. The nomination must be approved by the Office of
Personnel Management, which will review his qualifications.

Jerry Jarrell, who has served as acting director since Sheets retired in  April
and was a finalist for the job, will return to his position as the  center's
deputy director.

"I will go back to doing that and helping the new boss establish  himself,"
Jarrell said. "This has been a short period of time for me, and we  haven't had
any hurricanes."

Burpee has spent the past decade working for the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration in Miami. He worked as a supervisory meteorologist
and is now the director for the Hurricane Research Division.

Burpee graduated from Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of  Technology,
where he received a master's degree and a doctorate. His resume  also includes
stints as an assistant professor at the University of Illinois  and a visiting
professor at MIT.

He has some battle experience, too. Burpee's home in Coral Gables suffered
thousands of dollars in damage when Andrew struck.

As director, he will be responsible for gauging the tricky movement of
hurricanes and tropical storms, and serving as chief public spokesman for the
center, like Sheets and his predecessor Neil Frank.

"There may be a little bit of a learning curve for him, but I suspect he  will
be a terrific director," Gray said. "It's always hard for anyone to  come along
and take over. Bob Sheets worked to fill Neil Frank's shoes and he  did it, and
Neil Frank did the same thing when he started."

After the announcement of Burpee's promotion, the staff of the National
Hurricane Center celebrated the dedication of its new building, a
state-of-the-art facility at Florida International University near Miami.

"We have more control over here, and we can withstand hazardous weather
conditions," said Dr. Richard Pasch, hurricane specialist. "It's a very  strong
building."

The building, which houses all the center's weather and communications
equipment, was built to withstand 125 mph winds. Before the building was
completed last month, five hurricane forecasters and a staff of 40 worked out
of rented office space in downtown Coral Gables.

When Hurricane Andrew hit the center, it lost rooftop radar, air  conditioning
and a radio network to broadcast local advisories. Pieces of the  radar dome
landed in a nearby hotel swimming pool.

"Our new center was built to withstand a hurricane with lots of concrete  and
steel. It looks a little like a bunker," Jarrell said. "We hope it is a  bunker
because we expect to ride out a hurricane in it."

New supercomputers with sophisticated programs can better predict where  storms
are going based on changing climates. This year, the center will be  trying a
new computer program that may help it better forecast changes in a  storm's
strength, something officials have been unable to do well in the past.

Next year, the hurricane center should get a new hurricane hunter jet that  will
be able to travel farther than the current prop plane, giving forecasters
better information on the currents that steer storms toward land.

"It's a revolution in technology," hurricane forecaster Lixion Avila  said.

The hurricane center will need to be prepared. Gray, who officially  predicts
the number of hurricanes each season, said he expects 10 tropical  storms in the
Atlantic this summer and fall. Six will become hurricanes, he  says, and two
will be intense hurricanes, carrying winds greater than 110 mph.

- Information from Times wires was used in this report.

'94 hurricane season

Tropical Storm Alberto and Hurricane Gordon were the deadliest storms of the
season; Gordon caused most of its damage as a tropical storm.

Tropical Storm Alberto: 30 deaths

Hurricane Gordon: 552 killed

Tropical Storm Debbie: 9 killed

Odds of a hurricane strike

Key West                 1 in 7

Miami                    1 in 7

Palm Beach               1 in 10

Pensacola                1 in 10

Fort Myers               1 in 12

Apalachicola-St. Marks   1 in 15

Melbourne-Vero Beach     1 in 20

Tampa-St. Petersburg     1 in 20

Daytona Beach            1 in 40

Jacksonville             1 in 50

Source: Orlando Sentinel, National Hurricane Center

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: COLOR MAP, Knight-Ridder Tribune; hurricane tracking in the Atlantic
Ocean, locating Tropical Storm Beryl, Tropical Storm Alberto, Hurricane Gordon,
Tropical Storm Debbie, Hurricane Chris, Hurricane Florence and Tropical Storm
Ernesto

                    Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 225 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             August 27, 2017 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Disastrous US hurricanes since 2000. Could Harvey top them?

BYLINE:  Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 596 words


Hurricane Harvey could be on par with 2005's Hurricane Katrina in terms of
economic impact in Texas and beyond, according to University of Miami senior
hurricane researcher Brian McNoldy. "The Houston area and Corpus Christi are
going to be a mess for a long time," he said Friday. Here are some of the most
damaging hurricanes to hit the U.S. since 2000. Figures have not been adjusted
for inflation:

KATRINA

Katrina crossed the tip of Florida and then swept into the Gulf of Mexico and
over Louisiana and Mississippi, causing more than 1,800 deaths and an estimated
$108 billion in damage and becoming the costliest hurricane in U.S. history,
according to the National Hurricane Center. Most of the fatalities occurred in
Louisiana, where thousands of homes and businesses in New Orleans were destroyed
by strong wind and flooding. Mississippi, Florida, Georgia and Alabama also
reported deaths in the 2005 hurricane, which left about 3 million people without
power, some for weeks at a time.

SANDY

The pounding wind and storm surges of Sandy, dubbed a "superstorm" because it
was extratropical by the time it made landfall, devastated the coastlines of New
York and New Jersey in late October 2012, damaging at least 650,000 homes and
causing about 8.5 million power outages, according to the Hurricane Center. U.S.
officials preliminarily tallied at least $50 billion in damage, though some
sources cite around $75 billion. There were at least 147 deaths directly tied to
storm conditions, as well as a number of indirect fatalities linked to
hypothermia, carbon monoxide poisoning and falling trees during the cleanup
effort, the center said. Repairs to homes and infrastructure continue today.

IKE

Ike's storm surges raised water levels across nearly the entire U.S. Gulf Coast
when it hit in 2008, causing almost $30 billion in damage, most of it in Texas,
Louisiana and Arkansas. At least 20 people were killed, according to the
Hurricane Center. Waves battered the coasts of Texas and Louisiana, and almost 3
million people in those states lost power. Wind uprooted trees, and a number of
homes were damaged.

WILMA

Coming near the end of 2005's extraordinary hurricane season, Wilma caused 98
percent of South Florida to lose electricity, with experts at the Hurricane
Center attributing widespread damage in the state to its large core. Trees were
downed, windows shattered, roofs torn up and crops lost. All told, the U.S.
reported more than $21 billion in damage, as well as five deaths.

IVAN

Ivan's 10- to 15-foot storm surge in 2004 caused as much as a quarter-mile of an
interstate bridge to collapse in Florida, which along with Alabama was among the
hardest-hit states, according to the Hurricane Center. Thousands of homes were
damaged or destroyed. Debris piled up after the storm stretched for more than
three-quarters of a mile and was as tall as seven stories. Almost 2 million
people experienced power outages. Ivan killed 25 people and caused more than $18
billion in damage, according to the center.

RITA

Rita, one of the strongest hurricanes of the record-breaking 2005 season,
prompted one of the largest-scale evacuations in U.S. history, with more than 2
million people estimated to have fled the Texas coast, according to the
Hurricane Center. Coming just weeks after Katrina, Rita's wind and rain caused
$12 billion in damage and killed 62 people, including many nursing home
residents whose bus caught fire as they fled the storm, the center said. Nearly
every structure in some coastal areas of southwestern Louisiana was destroyed,
some entirely swept away.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  FILE - In this Oct. 26, 2005, file photo, members of the Louisiana
Recovery Authority tour New Orleans' Lower 9th Ward, largely destroyed when the
levee broke at the Industrial Canal during Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita,
in New Orleans. According to University of Miami senior hurricane researcher
Brian McNoldy, the economic impact of Hurricane Harvey in August 2017 could be
on par with 2005's Hurricane Katrina, the costliest hurricane in U.S. history,
even among other devastating hurricanes that have hit the U.S. since 2000. (AP
Photo/Robert F. Bukaty, File)  FILE - In this Feb. 25, 2013, file photo, the sun
rises behind the Jet Star Roller Coaster, sitting in the ocean after part of the
Funtown Pier was destroyed during Superstorm Sandy, in Seaside Heights, N.J.
According to University of Miami senior hurricane researcher Brian McNoldy, the
economic impact of Hurricane Harvey in August 2017 could be on par with 2005's
Hurricane Katrina, the costliest hurricane in U.S. history, even among other
devastating hurricanes that have hit the U.S. since 2000. (AP Photo/Mel Evans,
File)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 226 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           September 19, 2017 Tuesday
                                 FIRST EDITION

Hurricane Maria grows, threatens storm-battered Caribbean

BYLINE:  Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 226 words


SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico - Hurricane Maria grew into a dangerous Category 5 storm
Monday as it barreled toward a potentially devastating collision with islands in
the eastern Caribbean.

The storm's eye was expected to pass near Dominica later in the day on a path
that would take it close to islands already wrecked by Hurricane Irma and then
on toward a possible direct strike on Puerto Rico on Wednesday.

"This storm promises to be catastrophic for our island," said Ernesto Morales
with the U.S. National Weather Service in San Juan.

The U.S. territory imposed rationing of basic supplies including water, milk,
baby formula, canned food, batteries and flashlights.

The U.S. National Hurricane Center said Maria had maximum sustained winds of 160
mph Monday evening.

Hurricane warnings were posted for the U.S. and British Virgin Islands, Puerto
Rico, Guadeloupe, Dominica, St. Kitts, Nevis, Montserrat and Martinique.

A tropical storm warning was issued for Antigua and Barbuda, Saba, St.
Eustatius, St. Martin, St. Lucia and Anguilla.

Forecasters said storm surge could raise water levels by 6 to 9 feet near the
storm's center.

The storm was predicted to bring 10 to 15 inches of rain across the islands.

In the Pacific, Tropical Storm Norma's threat to Mexico's Los Cabos resort area
eased as forecasters said it was moving away from shore and expected to weaken.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Men board up buildings ahead of Hurricane Maria in Sainte-Anne on the
French Caribbean island of Guadeloupe, Monday, Sept. 18, 2017. Hurricane Maria
grew into a Category 3 storm on Monday as it barreled toward a potentially
devastating collision with islands in the eastern Caribbean. (AP Photo/Dominique
Chomereau-Lamotte)  Men remove a boat from the water ahead of Hurricane Maria in
the Galbas area of Sainte-Anne on the French Caribbean island of Guadeloupe,
early Monday, Sept. 18, 2017. Hurricane Maria grew into a Category 3 storm on
Monday as it barreled toward a potentially devastating collision with islands in
the eastern Caribbean. (AP Photo/Dominique Chomereau-Lamotte)  This Sunday,
Sept. 17, 2017, GOES East satellite image provided by NASA taken at 7:45 p.m
EDT, shows Hurricane Maria as it approaches the Lesser Antilles. Maria swiftly
grew into a hurricane Sunday, and forecasters said it was expected to become
much stronger over the coming hours following a path that would take it near
many of the islands wrecked by Hurricane Irma and then on toward Puerto Rico,
the Dominican Republic and Haiti. (NASA via AP)  Men remove boats from the water
ahead of Hurricane Maria in the Galbas area of Sainte-Anne on the French
Caribbean island of Guadeloupe, early Monday, Sept. 18, 2017. Hurricane Maria
grew into a Category 3 storm on Monday as it barreled toward a potentially
devastating collision with islands in the eastern Caribbean. (AP Photo/Dominique
Chomereau-Lamotte)  A man pulls in a boat ahead of Hurricane Maria in the Galbas
area of Sainte-Anne on the French Caribbean island of Guadeloupe, early Monday,
Sept. 18, 2017. Hurricane Maria grew into a Category 3 storm on Monday as it
barreled toward a potentially devastating collision with islands in the eastern
Caribbean. (AP Photo/Dominique Chomereau-Lamotte)  This Sept. 14, 2017 photo
provided by Guillermo Houwer on Saturday, Sept. 16, shows some damaged boats at
the Virgin Gorda Yacht Harbour in the aftermath of Hurricane Irma on Virgin
Gorda, in the British Virgin Islands. (Guillermo Houwer via AP)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 227 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                           The Florala News (Alabama)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                  June 4, 2014

Hurricane preparedness tips offered by Red Cross

BYLINE: The Florala News staff

LENGTH: 518  words


The American Red Cross urges Alabama residents and communities across the
country to ready for the hurricane storm season which began on June 1.

The Red Cross offers reminders of safety steps that people can take before
tropical storms or hurricanes threaten. The Atlantic and Caribbean Hurricane
season began June 1 and runs through November 30.

"Preparedness is critical when it comes to life-threatening disasters such as
hurricanes," said Chris Osborne, Communications Officer, American Red Cross
Alabama Region. "It's important that families and individuals make time to build
an emergency kit, create an evacuation plan, and download the Red Cross
Hurricane App to help make it through the next storm safely.

A 2013 survey by the American Red Cross and The Weather Channel found that few
Americans living in coastal counties have taken necessary action to prepare for
severe tropical storms and hurricanes. Only about half of those surveyed have an
evacuation plan or a plan for communicating with family members if they are
separated. Nearly a third of people did not have an emergency kit with supplies.

Even communities far inland from the coast can experience hurricanes depending
on the course of the storm, often with the threat of powerful winds and
widespread flooding. In addition, strong rip currents even at large distances
from the storm can threaten those at the beach many miles away.

PREPARE BEFORE THE STORM - Hurricanes are powerful and dangerous storms. They
can bring heavy rains that cause major flooding, destructive winds that down
power lines, uproot trees and damage homes, and storm surges that travel several
miles inland destroying everything in its path.

As hurricane season approaches, it is important to know the difference between
the threat levels.

A Hurricane Watch is when conditions are a threat within 48 hours. It's then
time to review your hurricane plans. Get ready to act if a warning is issued,
and stay informed.

A Hurricane Warning is when conditions are expected within 36 hours. It's then
time to complete your storm preparations and leave the area if directed to do so
by authorities.

Now is the time for families and individual to build an emergency kit and create
an evacuation plan.

DOWNLOAD THE HURRICANE APP - The free Red Cross Hurricane App puts real time
information on hurricane safety at your fingertips. This app, which has more
than 970,000 downloads, is a must have for anyone who lives in an area where a
hurricane may strike or has loved ones who do. Features of the Hurricane App
include information on Red Cross shelters and a toolkit with a flashlight,
strobe light and alarm. The one-touch "I'm Safe" button lets someone instantly
tell family and friends they are okay. People who are traveling or have loved
ones in hurricane-prone areas can also use the app to receive weather alerts.

The Hurricane App can be found in the Apple App Store and the Google Play Store
for Android by searching for American Red Cross. Learn more about all of the Red
Cross mobile apps at redcross.org/mobileapps. Learn more about hurricane
preparedness at redcross.org.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Community

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FLR

                      Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                        Copyright 2014 The Florala News


                          FOCUS - 228 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                      DNA

                            October 26, 2015 Monday

7 deadliest hurricanes of all time

BYLINE: dna Web Team

LENGTH: 698  words


Destructive weather fronts have hit both the Pacific and Gulf coasts of Mexico
over the years.

On Friday, The National Hurricane Centre said Hurricane Patricia currently
lashing western Mexico strengthened into one of the most powerful storms in
history, forcing resort hotels to evacuate tourists and residents to stockpile
supplies.

Patricia became a tropical storm in the Pacific on Thursday, strengthened
rapidly as it closed in on the coast. Meteorological authorities compared it to
Typhoon Haiyan, which killed over 6,300 people in the Philippines in 2013.
Destructive weather fronts have hit both the Pacific and Gulf coasts of Mexico
over the years. While initial reports confirmed that damage has been less than
expected, President Enrique Pena Nieto urged Mexicans to take precautions,
warning that the storm could still cause catastrophic damage and posed a serious
risk.

Here's a list of the seven deadliest hurricanes of all time:

Hurricane Andrew: In August 1992, a category 5 hurricane Andrew struck the
United States causing major damage in South Florida, Bahamas and Louisiana.  In
Miami (Florida) alone, over 25,000 houses were destroyed and another 100,000
were severely damaged. 65 people lost their lives. In Louisiana, 152,000 people
were left without electricity, due to its hurricane-force winds. In the Bahamas,
the hurricane caused high tides, force winds and tornado, that caused damaged to
transport, agriculture and fishing sectors. Andrew caused extensive damage to
oil platforms in the Gulf of Mexico, before moving ashore. It led to $500
million in losses for oil companies while 11 insurance companies went bankrupt,
leaving 930,000 policy holders in South Florida without coverage. The hurricane
destroyed 63,000 homes and damaged over 101,000 others were damaged. Almost
175,000 people were left homeless.

Hurricane Ike: In 2008, Hurricane Ike became the third costliest Atlantic
hurricane, even though it was at only a Category 2 level. Ike's intensity and
abnormally large size caused severe damage to property and infrastructure. From
US coastal and inland areas to Cuba, the Bahamas, Turks and Caicos, the damaged
amounted to a total of at least $37.5 billion. The subsequent search and rescue
operation is one of the largest carried out in US history. Nearly 2000 people
from in Texas and Louisiana were rescued due to intensive flooding. The storm
killed at least 195 people.

Hurricane Mitch: In 1998, Mitch was the third major hurricane of the year. Mitch
struck Central America, reportedly killing 11,000 and leaving almost as many
missing. The hurricane left almost 2.7 million people, with 1.5 million in
Honduras alone. The total damage caused amounted to approximately $5 billion.

Hurricane Katrina: The deadliest hurricane in 2005 to rock the United States was
Katrina. It is considered one of the five deadliest hurricanes in US history.
The major areas affected by the hurricane include the Gulf coast from Florida to
Texas, New Orleans, Louisiana, and coastal areas such as Mississippi beachfront
towns. At least 1,245 people died in the hurricane. The total property damage
was estimated at $108 billion.

Hurricane Sandy: Sandy was a post-tropical cyclone that hit the Caribbean and
the US East Coast in 2012. The Category 2 storm was responsible for the death of
close to 285 people. It caused damage of over $70 billion. As it approached New
York City, which received the worst of the hurricane, climate experts called it
"Superstorm Sandy".

The Great Galveston Hurricane: The Hurricane of 1900, also known as the Great
Galveston Hurricane, hit Galveston in Texas on September 8, 1900. The death toll
caused by the hurricane was between 6000 to 12000 people. Official reports
estimate the death toll was close to 8000. The total estimated property damage
caused by the Category 4 storm is estimated at $104.3 billion (2010 USD).

The Labour Day Hurricane: In 1935, the storm today known as the Labour Day
Hurricane devastated the Florida Keys and destroyed the town of Islamorada. It
also hit parts of Georgia and North and South Carolina. The hurricane triggered
storm surges of 18-20 feet that swept over low-lying islands. It killed 423
people.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2015 Diligent Media Corporation Ltd., DNA (Daily News & Analysis),
                           distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 229 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                Richmond County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 20, 2011 Friday

Outlook for hurricane season shows high activity

BYLINE: Dawn Kurry, Richmond County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 602 words


May 20--The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has issued a
seasonal outlook which says the Atlantic basin is expected to see an
above-normal hurricane season this year.

NOAA has predicted that we could see 12 to 18 named storms, of which six to 10
could become hurricanes, including three to six major hurricanes. Named storms
are of winds 39 mph or higher. Hurricanes consist of winds 74 mph or higher. A
major hurricane has winds of 111 mph or higher, and ranks Category three, four
or five.

Each of these ranges has a 70 percent likelihood, and indicate that activity
will exceed the seasonal average of 11 named storms, six hurricanes and two
major hurricanes.

"The United States was fortunate last year. Winds steered most of the season's
tropical storms and all hurricanes away from our coastlines," said Jane
Lubchenco, Ph.D., under secretary of commerce for oceans and atmosphere and NOAA
administrator. "However we can't count on luck to get us through this season. We
need to be prepared, especially with this above-normal outlook."

"We need to be aware of it and as well prepared as we can," said Emergency
Management Director Frank McKay. "Hurricanes are bad because they interrupt
things, but we get more warning with a hurricane than we do with tornadoes."

NOAA's seasonal hurricane outlook does not predict where and when any of these
storms may hit. Landfall is dictated by weather patterns in place at the time
the storm approaches.

"You've got to think about where it comes from," said McKay. "If it comes off
the coast of Wilmington, it's not going to make a 90-degree turn and come toward
us. We need to watch those that come in between Myrtle Beach and Charleston.
That's when we need to look out."

A climate factor considered for this outlook is the continuing high weather
activity. Since 1995, the tropical multi-decadal signal has brought ocean and
atmospheric conditions conducive for development in sync, leading to more active
Atlantic hurricane seasons. Warm Atlantic Ocean water is another climate factor.
Sea surface temperatures where storms often develop and move across the Atlantic
are up to two degrees Fahrenheit warmer-than-average.

La Nina, which continues to weaken in the equatorial Pacific Ocean, is expected
to dissipate later this month or in June, but its impacts, such as reduced wind
shear, are expected to continue into the hurricane season.

"The tornadoes that devastated the South and the large amount of flooding we've
seen this spring should serve as a reminder that disasters can happen anytime
and anywhere. As we move into this hurricane season it's important to remember
that FEMA is just part of an emergency management team that includes the entire
federal family, state, local and tribal governments, the private sector and most
importantly the public," said FEMA Administrator Craig Fugate.

Next week is Hurricane Awareness Week and NOAA and the National Weather Service
will unveil new public videos and audio for public service announcements
featuring NOAA hurricane experts and the FEMA administrators, and are available
in both English and Spanish.

Staff Writer Dawn Kurry can be reached at (910) 997-3111 ex. 43, or by e-mail at
dkurry@heartlandpublications.com

To see more of the Richmond County Daily Journal, or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.yourdailyjournal.com. Copyright (c) 2011, Richmond
County Daily Journal, Rockingham, N.C. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune
Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by
McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20110520-RU-Outlook-for-hurricane-season-shows-high-activity-0520-20110520

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RU


                                 Copyright 2011


                          FOCUS - 230 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 11, 2017 Monday

Washington: Hurricane Irma may cause problems for East Coast energy
infrastructure

LENGTH: 475  words



Washington: U.S. Energy Information Administration has issued the following news
release:
Hurricane Irma, one of the largest hurricanes ever recorded in the Atlantic,
caused significant damage to the northeastern Caribbean and is currently
projected to make landfall this weekend. Current model forecasts project that
Hurricane Irma will then pass along or just offshore the east coast of Florida,
although the actual storm track could change from current projections. To help
analysts assess potential energy-related storm effects, EIA maintains an energy
disruptions map that displays energy infrastructure and real-time storm
information.


Hurricane Irma initially made landfall in the Caribbean as a Category 5
hurricane with sustained wind speeds of more than 185 miles per hour, which made
it the second-largest hurricane ever recorded and tied it with the 1935 Florida
Keys hurricane as the largest Atlantic hurricane to make landfall. In advance of
the storm, states of emergency were declared in the U.S. Virgin Islands, Puerto
Rico, and Florida. Thirty counties in Georgia are also under a state of
emergency, as are the states of North Carolina and South Carolina.
Significant power outages have already been reported in the U.S. Virgin Islands,
with the islands of St. Thomas and St. John reporting that all customers had
lost power. The Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority has reported more than one
million outages. As Hurricane Irma approaches Florida, high winds, flooding, and
storm surge have the potential to affect energy infrastructure such as power
plants as well as power transmission and distribution lines. Utilities in the
state are preparing for high levels of power outages, and officials in Florida
are making plans to shut down two nuclear power plants--Turkey Point and St.
Lucie--prior to the arrival of the storm.
The last major hurricane--those rated Category 3 or higher--to make landfall in
Florida was Hurricane Wilma in 2005. Hurricane Wilma caused widespread power
outages in the state. Florida Power and Light, the largest utility in the state,
reported more than three million customer outages. In 2016, Hurricane Matthew,
which did not make direct landfall in the state, caused more than one million
outages.
EIA's energy disruptions map displays key layers of energy infrastructure,
including oil refineries, power plants, and major electric transmission lines,
and real-time storm information from the National Weather Service. The web page
also contains links to the U.S. Department of Energy's Emergency Situation
Reports and other websites that provide updates on the effect of severe weather
on energy infrastructure. In addition, EIA's U.S. Electric System Operating Data
tool provides near real-time information on electricity demand and can show
areas where electricity service has been disrupted.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 231 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             October 6, 2014 Monday

Safe from storms? Think again;
October is notorious in Tampa Bay area's hurricane history

BYLINE: KEITH MORELLI; Tribune staff

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1653 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



HIGHLIGHT: October typically is a strong hurricane month, but some theorize a
periiod of hurricane intensity is drawing to a close, ushering in a kinder
gentler Cat. 1 storm.


With two-thirds of the 2014 hurricane season in the books without a single
threat to Florida - and not a whisper of a storm on the horizon - it's difficult
not to be lulled into a sense of complacency.

This quiet season is the ninth consecutive year the state has dodged a major
hurricane. So far.

Still, weather watchers warn: Don't let your guard down. October looms large in
hurricane lore.

The last hurricane to directly hit the Tampa Bay area was in October 1921. The
last major one to hit Florida was Hurricane Wilma in October 2005.

October, said Dennis Feltgen with the National Hurricane Center in Miami, can be
an active month for Florida.

It's impossible to say if a below-average first part of a season means Florida
will escape yet again the wrath of a major hurricane.

Can we write off October? Feltgen said. No.

The hurricane season, which lasts from June 1 through Nov. 30, tends to be
divided in two parts, Feltgen said.

From June through September, hurricanes tend to form anywhere in the Atlantic,
all the way to the coast of Africa.

In October and November, the Atlantic waters cool and wind shears increase,
decreasing the possibility of storm formation.

That means tropical storms and hurricanes have a better chance of forming in the
southern Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea, where the water is warmer and
conditions are favorable.

Once a tropical system forms there, he said, it heads north.

And what's in their way when they move north? Feltgen said. The state of
Florida.

Over the past couple of years, hurricane numbers have been on the decline, and
some meteorologists say the Atlantic is moving out of a 20-year era of hurricane
high-intensity.

Such eras tend to stretch between 10 and 30 years.

Over the past two decades, hurricane intensity has been, well, intense, with an
above-average number of tropical systems, storms, hurricanes and major
hurricanes each season.

But hurricanes have waned in recent years, as seasons have come and gone with
hardly a single threat to Florida.

Last year, only two Category 1 hurricanes emerged, and this year has been
relatively slow with four hurricanes, only one of which had sustained winds
greater than 110 mph. An average season offers up six hurricanes, three of them
major.

While the historical numbers bear out the theory that the Atlantic is entering a
quieter hurricane era, a lot more is involved, said Gerry Bell, lead hurricane
forecaster for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Looking at the number of hurricanes forming in the Atlantic from year to year,
there does appear to be a cycle, he said.

Based on conditions, certain climate patterns set up and produce more
hurricanes, he said. These patterns can last 25 to 40 years. The 1950s and '60s
were really active, while the period between 1970s to 1994 was inactive. Since
1994, we've seen high activity.

Twenty years have come and gone.

Is the Atlantic sliding into a quieter, gentler hurricane season? We couldn't
really say, Bell said.

But, the numbers point in that direction.

According to Weather Underground:

[diams]  Between 1974 and 1993, 103 hurricanes formed in the Atlantic Ocean,
with 32 major storms. Between 1994 and 2013, there were 149 hurricanes and 66
were classified as majors.

[diams]  In 1995, the first year of the high-intensity era, 11 hurricanes formed
in the Atlantic, five of which turned into major storms. In 2004, there were
nine hurricanes, six major; and in 2005, the most active season on record, 15
hurricanes formed with seven turning into major ones.

[diams]  A dozen hurricanes formed in 2010, with five majors, and 10 formed in
2012.

[diams] Last year, the Atlantic spawned no major hurricanes.

Most of the storms and hurricanes this year have formed, run their courses and
died over the cold open water of the North Atlantic.

Only one major hurricane, Edouard, formed in September and it was quickly
downgraded after only a few hours at hurricane strength.

Noted hurricane researchers in the Department of Atmospheric Science at Colorado
State University, predicted this week the rest of the 2014 season would include
maybe four hurricanes, with one major.

We expect that October-November will have below-average hurricane activity in
the Caribbean basin, said an advisory issued Tuesday from Colorado State
meteorologists. The basis for the conclusions include warm conditions in the
tropical Pacific (which is detrimental to Atlantic hurricanes), cool Caribbean
surface water temperatures and vertical wind shear throughout the Atlantic
basin.

It's those climatological conditions that have to be taken into account, said
Bell, with NOAA.

More hurricanes are produced when a warm Atlantic and a strong west African
monsoon season occur together, he said. This year, the Atlantic is cooler and
the western African monsoon season has suppressed the formation of hurricanes.
If that lasts, we could be entering a low-activity era. But it's too early to
say.

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

HURRICANES, Page 4

With two-thirds of the 2014 hurricane season in the books without a single
threat to Florida - and not a whisper of a storm on the horizon - it's difficult
not to be lulled into a sense of complacency.

This quiet season is the ninth consecutive year the state has dodged a major
hurricane. So far.

Still, weather watchers warn: Don't let your guard down. October looms large in
hurricane lore.

The last hurricane to directly hit the Tampa Bay area was in October 1921. The
last major one to hit Florida was Hurricane Wilma in October 2005.

October, said Dennis Feltgen with the National Hurricane Center in Miami, can be
an active month for Florida.

It's impossible to say if a below-average first part of a season means Florida
will escape yet again the wrath of a major hurricane.

Can we write off October? Feltgen said. No.

The hurricane season, which lasts from June 1 through Nov. 30, tends to be
divided in two parts, Feltgen said.

From June through September, hurricanes tend to form anywhere in the Atlantic,
all the way to the coast of Africa.

In October and November, the Atlantic waters cool and wind shears increase,
decreasing the possibility of storm formation.

That means tropical storms and hurricanes have a better chance of forming in the
southern Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea, where the water is warmer and
conditions are favorable.

Once a tropical system forms there, he said, it heads north.

And what's in their way when they move north? Feltgen said. The state of
Florida.

Over the past couple of years, hurricane numbers have been on the decline, and
some meteorologists say the Atlantic is moving out of a 20-year era of hurricane
high-intensity.

Such eras tend to stretch between 10 and 30 years.

Over the past two decades, hurricane intensity has been, well, intense, with an
above-average number of tropical systems, storms, hurricanes and major
hurricanes each season.

But hurricanes have waned in recent years, as seasons have come and gone with
hardly a single threat to Florida.

Last year, only two Category 1 hurricanes emerged, and this year has been
relatively slow with four hurricanes, only one of which had sustained winds
greater than 110 mph. An average season offers up six hurricanes, three of them
major.

While the historical numbers bear out the theory that the Atlantic is entering a
quieter hurricane era, a lot more is involved, said Gerry Bell, lead hurricane
forecaster for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Looking at the number of hurricanes forming in the Atlantic from year to year,
there does appear to be a cycle, he said.

Based on conditions, certain climate patterns set up and produce more
hurricanes, he said. These patterns can last 25 to 40 years. The 1950s and '60s
were really active, while the period between 1970s to 1994 was inactive. Since
1994, we've seen high activity.

Twenty years have come and gone.

Is the Atlantic sliding into a quieter, gentler hurricane season? We couldn't
really say, Bell said.

But, the numbers point in that direction.

According to Weather Underground:

[diams]  Between 1974 and 1993, 103 hurricanes formed in the Atlantic Ocean,
with 32 major storms. Between 1994 and 2013, there were 149 hurricanes and 66
were classified as majors.

[diams]  In 1995, the first year of the high-intensity era, 11 hurricanes formed
in the Atlantic, five of which turned into major storms. In 2004, there were
nine hurricanes, six major; and in 2005, the most active season on record, 15
hurricanes formed with seven turning into major ones.

[diams]  A dozen hurricanes formed in 2010, with five majors, and 10 formed in
2012.

[diams] Last year, the Atlantic spawned no major hurricanes.

Most of the storms and hurricanes this year have formed, run their courses and
died over the cold open water of the North Atlantic.

Only one major hurricane, Edouard, formed in September and it was quickly
downgraded after only a few hours at hurricane strength.

Noted hurricane researchers in the Department of Atmospheric Science at Colorado
State University, predicted this week the rest of the 2014 season would include
maybe four hurricanes, with one major.

We expect that October-November will have below-average hurricane activity in
the Caribbean basin, said an advisory issued Tuesday from Colorado State
meteorologists. The basis for the conclusions include warm conditions in the
tropical Pacific (which is detrimental to Atlantic hurricanes), cool Caribbean
surface water temperatures and vertical wind shear throughout the Atlantic
basin.

It's those climatological conditions that have to be taken into account, said
Bell, with NOAA.

More hurricanes are produced when a warm Atlantic and a strong west African
monsoon season occur together, he said. This year, the Atlantic is cooler and
the western African monsoon season has suppressed the formation of hurricanes.
If that lasts, we could be entering a low-activity era. But it's too early to
say.

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

Hurricanes

From Page 1

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 232 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             October 6, 2014 Monday

Safe from storms? Think again;
October is notorious in Tampa Bay area's hurricane history

BYLINE: KEITH MORELLI; Tribune staff

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 1653 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



HIGHLIGHT: October typically is a strong hurricane month, but some theorize a
periiod of hurricane intensity is drawing to a close, ushering in a kinder
gentler Cat. 1 storm.


With two-thirds of the 2014 hurricane season in the books without a single
threat to Florida - and not a whisper of a storm on the horizon - it's difficult
not to be lulled into a sense of complacency.

This quiet season is the ninth consecutive year the state has dodged a major
hurricane. So far.

Still, weather watchers warn: Don't let your guard down. October looms large in
hurricane lore.

The last hurricane to directly hit the Tampa Bay area was in October 1921. The
last major one to hit Florida was Hurricane Wilma in October 2005.

October, said Dennis Feltgen with the National Hurricane Center in Miami, can be
an active month for Florida.

It's impossible to say if a below-average first part of a season means Florida
will escape yet again the wrath of a major hurricane.

Can we write off October? Feltgen said. No.

The hurricane season, which lasts from June 1 through Nov. 30, tends to be
divided in two parts, Feltgen said.

From June through September, hurricanes tend to form anywhere in the Atlantic,
all the way to the coast of Africa.

In October and November, the Atlantic waters cool and wind shears increase,
decreasing the possibility of storm formation.

That means tropical storms and hurricanes have a better chance of forming in the
southern Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea, where the water is warmer and
conditions are favorable.

Once a tropical system forms there, he said, it heads north.

And what's in their way when they move north? Feltgen said. The state of
Florida.

Over the past couple of years, hurricane numbers have been on the decline, and
some meteorologists say the Atlantic is moving out of a 20-year era of hurricane
high-intensity.

Such eras tend to stretch between 10 and 30 years.

Over the past two decades, hurricane intensity has been, well, intense, with an
above-average number of tropical systems, storms, hurricanes and major
hurricanes each season.

But hurricanes have waned in recent years, as seasons have come and gone with
hardly a single threat to Florida.

Last year, only two Category 1 hurricanes emerged, and this year has been
relatively slow with four hurricanes, only one of which had sustained winds
greater than 110 mph. An average season offers up six hurricanes, three of them
major.

While the historical numbers bear out the theory that the Atlantic is entering a
quieter hurricane era, a lot more is involved, said Gerry Bell, lead hurricane
forecaster for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Looking at the number of hurricanes forming in the Atlantic from year to year,
there does appear to be a cycle, he said.

Based on conditions, certain climate patterns set up and produce more
hurricanes, he said. These patterns can last 25 to 40 years. The 1950s and '60s
were really active, while the period between 1970s to 1994 was inactive. Since
1994, we've seen high activity.

Twenty years have come and gone.

Is the Atlantic sliding into a quieter, gentler hurricane season? We couldn't
really say, Bell said.

But, the numbers point in that direction.

According to Weather Underground:

[diams]  Between 1974 and 1993, 103 hurricanes formed in the Atlantic Ocean,
with 32 major storms. Between 1994 and 2013, there were 149 hurricanes and 66
were classified as majors.

[diams]  In 1995, the first year of the high-intensity era, 11 hurricanes formed
in the Atlantic, five of which turned into major storms. In 2004, there were
nine hurricanes, six major; and in 2005, the most active season on record, 15
hurricanes formed with seven turning into major ones.

[diams]  A dozen hurricanes formed in 2010, with five majors, and 10 formed in
2012.

[diams] Last year, the Atlantic spawned no major hurricanes.

Most of the storms and hurricanes this year have formed, run their courses and
died over the cold open water of the North Atlantic.

Only one major hurricane, Edouard, formed in September and it was quickly
downgraded after only a few hours at hurricane strength.

Noted hurricane researchers in the Department of Atmospheric Science at Colorado
State University, predicted this week the rest of the 2014 season would include
maybe four hurricanes, with one major.

We expect that October-November will have below-average hurricane activity in
the Caribbean basin, said an advisory issued Tuesday from Colorado State
meteorologists. The basis for the conclusions include warm conditions in the
tropical Pacific (which is detrimental to Atlantic hurricanes), cool Caribbean
surface water temperatures and vertical wind shear throughout the Atlantic
basin.

It's those climatological conditions that have to be taken into account, said
Bell, with NOAA.

More hurricanes are produced when a warm Atlantic and a strong west African
monsoon season occur together, he said. This year, the Atlantic is cooler and
the western African monsoon season has suppressed the formation of hurricanes.
If that lasts, we could be entering a low-activity era. But it's too early to
say.

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

HURRICANES, Page 4

With two-thirds of the 2014 hurricane season in the books without a single
threat to Florida - and not a whisper of a storm on the horizon - it's difficult
not to be lulled into a sense of complacency.

This quiet season is the ninth consecutive year the state has dodged a major
hurricane. So far.

Still, weather watchers warn: Don't let your guard down. October looms large in
hurricane lore.

The last hurricane to directly hit the Tampa Bay area was in October 1921. The
last major one to hit Florida was Hurricane Wilma in October 2005.

October, said Dennis Feltgen with the National Hurricane Center in Miami, can be
an active month for Florida.

It's impossible to say if a below-average first part of a season means Florida
will escape yet again the wrath of a major hurricane.

Can we write off October? Feltgen said. No.

The hurricane season, which lasts from June 1 through Nov. 30, tends to be
divided in two parts, Feltgen said.

From June through September, hurricanes tend to form anywhere in the Atlantic,
all the way to the coast of Africa.

In October and November, the Atlantic waters cool and wind shears increase,
decreasing the possibility of storm formation.

That means tropical storms and hurricanes have a better chance of forming in the
southern Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea, where the water is warmer and
conditions are favorable.

Once a tropical system forms there, he said, it heads north.

And what's in their way when they move north? Feltgen said. The state of
Florida.

Over the past couple of years, hurricane numbers have been on the decline, and
some meteorologists say the Atlantic is moving out of a 20-year era of hurricane
high-intensity.

Such eras tend to stretch between 10 and 30 years.

Over the past two decades, hurricane intensity has been, well, intense, with an
above-average number of tropical systems, storms, hurricanes and major
hurricanes each season.

But hurricanes have waned in recent years, as seasons have come and gone with
hardly a single threat to Florida.

Last year, only two Category 1 hurricanes emerged, and this year has been
relatively slow with four hurricanes, only one of which had sustained winds
greater than 110 mph. An average season offers up six hurricanes, three of them
major.

While the historical numbers bear out the theory that the Atlantic is entering a
quieter hurricane era, a lot more is involved, said Gerry Bell, lead hurricane
forecaster for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Looking at the number of hurricanes forming in the Atlantic from year to year,
there does appear to be a cycle, he said.

Based on conditions, certain climate patterns set up and produce more
hurricanes, he said. These patterns can last 25 to 40 years. The 1950s and '60s
were really active, while the period between 1970s to 1994 was inactive. Since
1994, we've seen high activity.

Twenty years have come and gone.

Is the Atlantic sliding into a quieter, gentler hurricane season? We couldn't
really say, Bell said.

But, the numbers point in that direction.

According to Weather Underground:

[diams]  Between 1974 and 1993, 103 hurricanes formed in the Atlantic Ocean,
with 32 major storms. Between 1994 and 2013, there were 149 hurricanes and 66
were classified as majors.

[diams]  In 1995, the first year of the high-intensity era, 11 hurricanes formed
in the Atlantic, five of which turned into major storms. In 2004, there were
nine hurricanes, six major; and in 2005, the most active season on record, 15
hurricanes formed with seven turning into major ones.

[diams]  A dozen hurricanes formed in 2010, with five majors, and 10 formed in
2012.

[diams] Last year, the Atlantic spawned no major hurricanes.

Most of the storms and hurricanes this year have formed, run their courses and
died over the cold open water of the North Atlantic.

Only one major hurricane, Edouard, formed in September and it was quickly
downgraded after only a few hours at hurricane strength.

Noted hurricane researchers in the Department of Atmospheric Science at Colorado
State University, predicted this week the rest of the 2014 season would include
maybe four hurricanes, with one major.

We expect that October-November will have below-average hurricane activity in
the Caribbean basin, said an advisory issued Tuesday from Colorado State
meteorologists. The basis for the conclusions include warm conditions in the
tropical Pacific (which is detrimental to Atlantic hurricanes), cool Caribbean
surface water temperatures and vertical wind shear throughout the Atlantic
basin.

It's those climatological conditions that have to be taken into account, said
Bell, with NOAA.

More hurricanes are produced when a warm Atlantic and a strong west African
monsoon season occur together, he said. This year, the Atlantic is cooler and
the western African monsoon season has suppressed the formation of hurricanes.
If that lasts, we could be entering a low-activity era. But it's too early to
say.

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760

Hurricanes

From Page 1

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 233 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                    The Wilson Daily Times (North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 31, 2013 Friday

Readiness urged for 'active' hurricane season

BYLINE: Olivia Neeley, The Wilson Daily Times, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 749 words


May 31--Be ready and expect the unexpected. That's what officials continue to
stress when it comes to emergency weather situations. Saturday marks the
beginning of hurricane season, which lasts until Nov. 30.

Throughout this week, the National Weather Service has been promoting its
Hurricane Preparedness Week. Hazards from a hurricane include storm surge, heavy
rainfall, inland flooding and high winds. And it's important for families to
take precautions no matter where they live.

"Everybody needs a plan," said Gordon Deno, director of Wilson County Emergency
Management. "People need to be prepared for anything that happens."

Those plans include where to go, what to do and what to take if disaster
strikes. It's also vital for families to have an emergency supply kit.

"Folks should be able to take care of themselves for three days minimum," Deno
said.

Hurricane experts are predicting a more active Atlantic hurricane season this
year.

There is a 70 percent likelihood of 13 to 20 named storms, of which seven to 11
could become hurricanes (winds of 74 mph or higher), National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration officials said.

Three to six of those storms could become major hurricanes -- Category 3, 4 or 5
with winds of 111 mph or higher.

This is well above the seasonal average of 12 named storms, six hurricanes and
three major hurricanes, officials point out.

Deno said a lot of people don't prepare as they should. But they hope residents
will listen to the importance of being ready.

While Wilson County is not in danger of storm surge, officials say residents
could still feel the effects of a coastal hurricane. That depends on its path
and how wide the storm is, Deno said. Wilson is about 110 miles from the coast.
Hurricanes can bring torrential rains, which cause flooding.

"No part of the state is immune from a hurricane's impact," Gov. Pat McCrory
said in a statement Thursday. "Don't mistakenly believe that this is just a
coastal threat. These storms have the potential to devastate all parts of our
state."

Officials say it's extremely important for residents and businesses to have
evacuation plans.

In 2011, Hurricane Irene not only caused flooding along the Inner Banks, but it
also caused damage as far inland as Wilson, Johnston and Nash counties.

"Taking time now to prepare or update you emergency plans and kits can provide
peace of mind as well as give you the tools you need to survive the storm and
recover from it," McCrory said.

Deno said while tornado warnings are short, hurricane warnings give people even
more time to prepare.

"We know when hurricanes are coming," he said. "We are going to know five days
out. There is no excuse not to have gas in your car and food in the house."

Oftentimes, people say they know it's going to be a bad storm but that "it's not
going to happen around here," Deno said. Or if it does hit their town, it's not
going to impact their neighborhood.

"It might impact my neighborhood, but my house is going to be OK," Deno said for
example.

State officials said those who are "hurricane veterans" may mistakenly focus on
the storm category and dismiss the threat for lower-level storms. Storm category
refers to wind speed only, but the most dangerous threat is often storm surge
and flooding, according to state officials.

Hurricane Irene struck North Carolina's coast in 2011 as a Category 1, but the
system caused the worst flooding that many Inner Banks counties had seen in
nearly a century, state officials said.

Flood levels ranged more than 5 feet above ground in the communities of
Stonewall and Mesic. Not even Hurricane Floyd in 1999, which was the state's
costliest natural disaster, produced that much flooding for many inland
counties.

State officials say in addition to emergency plans and kits, residents should
review and update their homeowners and renters insurance policy and should make
sure it includes coverage for accidental damage, natural disasters and, if
necessary, flood insurance.

In October, Hurricane Sandy hit the East Coast, killing dozens of people.
Millions were left without power at the height of the storm. With damage from
North Carolina to Maine, Sandy was the second most expensive storm in history.
Hurricane Katrina tops the list.

"The more people that are prepared, the less we have to worry," Deno said.

olivia@wilsontimes.com -- 265-7879

___ (c)2013 The Wilson Daily Times (Wilson, N.C.) Visit The Wilson Daily Times
(Wilson, N.C.) at www.wilsontimes.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130531-ZW-Readiness-urged-for-active-hurricane-season-0531-20130531

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZW


                     Copyright 2013 The Wilson Daily Times


                          FOCUS - 234 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                             National Underwriter,
             Property & Casualty/Risk & Benefits Management Edition

                                 June 14, 1999

Stormy Weather Ahead For Hurricane Season

BYLINE: BY AMANDA LEVIN

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 659 words


With the Atlantic hurricane season officially having opened on June 1,
nationally known forecaster William Gray has predicted that 1999 could yield the
busiest storm activity since 1995.

Mr. Gray, a professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, Colo., who
predicts hurricane activity each year, said this season will include 14 named
storms, nine of which will become hurricanes and four of which will become
intense hurricanes.  This is the highest number of storms Mr. Gray has called
for since he first began his predictions in 1984.

"Evidence suggests that we have entered an extended period of enhanced major
hurricane activity," warned Mr. Gray.

The average season has 9.3 named storms, 5.8 hurricanes and 2.2 intense
hurricanes, according to Mr. Gray.

Mr. Gray bases his forecasts on a combination of past hurricane activity and
oceanic and atmospheric patterns three, six and nine months prior to the
upcoming season.

In terms of storm locations, Mr. Gray said that although there is no way to
predict "exactly" where a storm will strike, "evidence suggests that one or more
storms will strike the U.S. coastline." More specifically, he said "the
probability of a major storm hitting Florida and the Eastern coastline is about
four or five times greater than it was in the 1970 to 1994 period."

With regard to Mr. Gray's storm prediction record, only a quarter of his
predictions have not worked out, he noted.

However, "I have always been more right than wrong," Mr. Gray added.

In 1998 Mr. Gray predicted there would be 10 storms and six hurricanes --
falling short of the actual number.  Last year's season produced 14 tropical
storms, and 10 of those storms became hurricanes.

Mr. Gray's forecast for the 1999 hurricane season, issued on June 4, will be
updated for the fourth time on August 6.

But Mr. Gray has not cornered the market on hurricane forecasting.
Meteorologists Jill Hasling and John Freeman of the Houston-based Weather
Research Center, who also predict storms, said the upcoming season could produce
10 named storms with six reaching hurricane intensity.

Ms. Hasling and Mr. Freeman make their hurricane predictions based on the
correlation they believe exists between the sun's activity and storms.

"There is a 90 percent chance of a tropical storm or hurricane making landfall
along the Louisiana to Alabama coast during the upcoming season," said a report
that Ms. Hasling and Mr. Freeman issued earlier this year.  "This is the highest
risk of any of the coastlines from Texas through Maine."

After the Louisiana to Alabama coast, the next highest risk of a storm strike is
the West Coast of Florida with an 80 percent chance and the third highest is the
Texas coast with a 70 percent chance, according to the report.

Of course, "every section of the United States coastline has a chance of
experiencing a tropical storm or hurricane each year," the report noted.

The meteorologists further predicted that there could be storms as early as the
current month -- June has a 60 percent chance of a tropical storm or hurricane
-- or as late as November, a month which has a 30 percent chance of a storm
strike.

Additionally, there is an 80 percent chance of a Category 3 or greater hurricane
occurring somewhere in the Atlantic, the report said.

A major hurricane is a storm with maximum sustained winds greater than 110 miles
per hour, according to the Weather Research Center.

The center has been making these predictions since 1985 and makes only one
forecast per hurricane season.  Since then, the center has correctly predicted
the number of storms in a hurricane season four times.

Last year, the center predicted that the West Coast of Florida was at the
highest risk with a 90 percent chance of a storm strike.  The prediction proved
to be true with Hurricanes Earl and Mitch.  However, the overall outlook called
for eight storms and at the end of the season there were 14 in total.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Picture, Weather-related disasters, including storms, floods, droughts
and fires, caused at least $ 89 billion in economic losses worldwide during the
first 11 months of 1998, exceeding all such damages for the 1980s combined,
according to the Washington-based Wordwatch Institute.

                Copyright 1999 The National Underwriter Company


                          FOCUS - 235 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                     June 14, 1997, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

Hurricane warning: Researchers say climatic conditions point to an ominous new
phase of bigger, more frequent and more destructive storms in the North Atlantic

BYLINE: WILLIAM STEVENS; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

SECTION: SATREV; Pg. G9

LENGTH: 797 words


The East and Gulf Coasts of the United States may be entering a
long-anticipated, prolonged siege of more frequent and more destructive
hurricanes, forecasters say.

They predict that this summer, more hurricanes than normal will develop in the
tropical North Atlantic for the third straight year. This would make 1995-97 the
most active three-year period on record for the pinwheeling oceanic cyclones,
and the experts say that could be only the beginning.

The 1970s, 1980s and early 1990s were a time of relatively infrequent
hurricanes. Those years did have their big storms, including Hurricane Andrew in
1992, the costliest ever. But a new federal study attributes the trend of
escalating damage over that period to expanding population and exploding
development rather than more frequent or powerful storms.

Now the atmosphere and ocean appear to have entered a new and more ominous
hurricane phase. Some experts believe the turbulent stretch beginning two years
ago signifies a return to the 1940s, '50s and '60s, a period of high hurricane
activity in the U.S. If that is so, according to the new federal study, the cost
of damage wrought by hurricanes - already the most expensive natural disasters
in North America - could soar to new heights.

Scientists offer varying explanations for the increase in hurricane frequency.
One new study has found that sea-surface temperatures in 1995 were the highest
on record in the tropical North Atlantic. That year, 19 tropical storms and
hurricanes, double the 1946-1995 average, formed in the Atlantic. The authors of
the study concluded that warmer seas encouraged incipient hurricanes to develop
by infusing them with more energy. Temperatures in the region of hurricane
births, between 10 degrees and 20 degrees north latitude, have remained above
average since 1995.

Coincidentally or not, 1995 also saw the highest average global surface
temperatures on record, and some scientists say this raises the possibility that
global warming is contributing to the increased frequency of hurricanes. The
coincidence "is suggestive of some link to global warming, but that needs to be
proved," said Mark Saunders, chief author of the study. It is "just one of the
possibilities," he said.

Others, such as William Gray, an atmospheric scientist and hurricane expert at
Colorado State University, say that global warming is almost certainly not the
cause, noting that global warming has been slow, while the Atlantic sea-surface
temperature jumped in a matter of months.

It was Gray and his group of researchers who correctly predicted that 1995 would
be one of the most active seasons on record, although they underestimated 1996.
In April, the group forecast that 1997 would also bring more hurricanes than
average, including the more intense ones. These major storms are defined as
those with peak sustained winds of more than 176 km/h, and they account for 75
per cent of all hurricane damage. Lesser hurricanes have peak winds of at least
118 km/h.

The Colorado group's forecast applies to an area encompassing the Atlantic
Ocean, the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico. The forecasters do not attempt
to predict whether or where any of the hurricanes will strike land.

The forecasts are based on an array of predictive signs and atmospheric
phenomena that Gray has identified as determining hurricane activity. One is the
amount of rainfall in the Sahel region of western Africa, where the small areas
of low pressure that are the embryos of hurricanes first form. When the Sahel is
wetter, Gray found, more embryos form. This year, the Sahel is wet.

Another factor is the phenomenon known as El Nino, the huge pool of warm water
that develops every two to seven years in the eastern tropical Pacific. When it
is in place, high-level winds blowing from the west tend to shear off the tops
of developing hurricanes in the adjacent Atlantic, causing them to abort. The
Colorado group predicts that El Nino will not do so in time to affect the
hurricane picture.

Other elements include the behavior of stratospheric winds that circle the globe
high above the equator and weather features far remote from the Atlantic
hurricane belt - things, for example, like the temperature high above Singapore.
On balance, the forecasters say, the indicators point to higher-than-average
activity this year.

One of the most powerful indicators, according to the new study by Saunders and
Andrew Harris, climate scientists at University College London in Britain, is
the Atlantic sea-surface temperature. Their statistical analysis found that
while most of the relevant factors were indeed favorable for hurricane
development in the banner year of 1995, the dominating influence was the
unusually warm ocean.


LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphic/Diagram: New York Times News Service / Climate Factors

               Copyright 1997 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 236 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              November 29, 1999, Monday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

THE 1999 HURRICANE SEASON // Surge of storms avoids area

BYLINE: DAVID BALLINGRUD

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 926 words



However, other places weren't so lucky during a 1999 season that was more active
than most, with five major storms.

With Hurricane Lenny's unusual eastward journey through the Caribbean apparently
the last storm before Y2K (knock on wood), it's time to take stock of the 1999
season.

Once again, the Tampa Bay area can breathe a sigh of relief. Not so for other
areas, though.

"It was a big year for major hurricanes," said National Hurricane Center
specialist Jack Bevin. "We are still in a period of high activity for storms,
and that's probably going to continue for a few more years."

The season does not end until midnight Tuesday, and the hurricane center is
still writing its end-of-the-season report. But there's not much going on in the
Atlantic, Caribbean or Gulf of Mexico right now;  so for the record, here's how
1999 stands:

 There were 12 named storms; the hurricane center's long-term average is 10.

 There were eight hurricanes; the long-term average is six.

 Five of those eight hurricanes were major storms; the long-term average is two.

 Seventeen major disaster declarations were made in 14 states, the most ever for
a hurricane season. Thirteen of those were for Hurricane Floyd alone, more than
for any other event, according to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Floyd
also prompted the nation's biggest evacuation as it ranged up the East Coast.

The hurricane center, part of the National Weather Service, and William Gray,
the Colorado State University meteorologist whose predictions have become a
staple of storm preparation on the East Coast, both correctly forecast the busy
year.

But Gray gets credit for drawing attention to the fact that storm activity is in
a long period of high activity, according to Max Mayfield, the hurricane
center's deputy director.

"Bill Gray gets all the credit for saying we are heading back into a
multidecadal period of intense hurricanes," Mayfield said. "The hurricane is the
greatest natural disaster threat that the U.S. faces because of all the
development along the coastline."

In 1999, the most deadly tropical weather system in this part of the world did
not even reach storm status, Bevin said.

Tropical Depression No. 11 in October caused flooding in Mexico that killed 400
people. "It wasn't much for wind," Bevin said, "but it was a great rainmaker."

In this country, the year will be remembered most for Floyd, Harvey and Irene.
(Those who care about such things will remember that Lenny was guided eastward,
against the normal hurricane track, by westerly winds that usually stay at more
northerly latitudes.)

From Sept. 7 through Sept. 17, Floyd damaged or destroyed 12,000 homes in North
Carolina alone. It caused damage placed somewhere between $ 3-billion and $
6-billion. It killed 57 people: 56 in the United States and another in the
Bahamas.

A little closer to home, Tropical Storm Harvey gave the Tampa Bay area a scare.
Thousands of people went to bed Sept. 20 expecting to greet Harvey at sunrise.
Instead, just before midnight, the storm took a sharp right turn to the south,
finally coming ashore near Everglades City.

A month later, Hurricane Irene caused widespread flooding and power failures for
3-million people in Dade and Broward counties. Five people were killed when they
came in contact with submerged power lines.

When residents complained that the hurricane center should have sounded a louder
alarm about the dangers of flooding, forecasters responded with a plan to change
the way they rate hurricanes. They have proposed adding a scale that rates a
hurricane based on its rainfall and flood potential.

"It will allow us to more directly target the threat: rainfall, storm surge,
tornadoes, whatever," said outgoing center director Jerry Jarrell. Such a scale
would complement the widely known Saffir-Simpson scale, which rates hurricanes
in five categories determined solely by sustained winds.

The busy 1999 season was traceable in large part to La Nina, a name for cool
water in the far eastern Pacific Ocean, near the U.S. and South American
coastlines.

During the 2000 hurricane season, the world's oceans probably will be in a
neutral condition, as La Nina slowly is transformed into El Nino, said Bevin.
During El Nino, warm Pacific waters move closer to the continental United
States, inhibiting the development of Atlantic storms.

"At this point, it's just a guess." Bevin said, "But if we are in that neutral
state, we could expect an average year for storm activity."

A review of the named storms of the 1999 hurricane season

Here's a look at the named tropical storms and hurricanes tracked in the
Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico this year:

Storm                       Date            Highest sust.

                                        winds (mph)

1.  Tropical Storm Arlene  June  11-18       50

2.  Hurricane Bret         Aug.  18-23      120

3.  Hurricane Cindy        Aug.  19-31      120

4.  Hurricane Dennis       Aug.  24-Sept. 5  90

5.  Tropical Storm Emily   Aug.  24-28       55

6.  Hurricane Floyd        Sept.  7-17      135

7.  Hurricane Gert         Sept. 11-23      130

8.  Tropical Storm Harvey  Sept. 19-22       50

9.  Hurricane Irene        Oct.  13-19       80

10.  Hurricane Jose         Oct.  17-25       85

11.  Tropical Storm Katrina Oct.  28-Nov. 1   35

12.  Hurricane Lenny        Nov.  13-21      130


LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, Associated Press files; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Associated
Press, (2); COLOR MAP; Strong winds, which reached 80 mph, and rain from
Hurricane Irene in October caused Carlos Escobar's 28-foot boat to beach at
Watson Island in the southwest section of Miami.; Max Mayfield, deputy director
of the National Hurricane Center in Miami, looks forward to the end of a busy
hurricane season. (ran CITY & STATE, METRO & STATE); National Hurricane Center
director Jerry Jarrell talks with hurricane specialist Ed Rappaport in the
center's busy office.; Locates sites of hurricane trackings in the Atlantic
Ocean and Gulf of Mexico this year.

                    Copyright 1999 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 237 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 30, 2012 Tuesday

Profiting from a hurricane

BYLINE: PAUL WALDIE

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: INTERNATIONAL; INTERNATIONAL / HURRICANE SANDY /
INVESTING; Pg. B9

LENGTH: 370 words


Trust Wall Street to come up with a way to make money off hurricanes.

Weather derivatives have been around for decades, but futures contracts related
to hurricanes are fairly new. The Chicago-based CME Group, which manages the
world's largest commodities markets, came up with a hurricane index after the
epic hurricane season of 2005 - the year of Hurricane Katrina - caused an
estimated $79-billion (U.S.) in damages.

The index, known as CHI, uses data from the U.S. National Hurricane Center to
gauge a storm's potential damage. It differs from the commonly-used
Saffir-Simpson scale, which ranks hurricanes from 1 to 5 based on wind speed.
(Hurricane Sandy is a Category 1 hurricane.)

Today there are three basic types of hurricane contracts; "events," "seasonal"
and "maximum." Contracts based on "events" are tied to the total number of
hurricanes during a season. "Seasonal" contracts are based on the total CHI
points from all hurricanes in a season and "maximum" contracts are tied to the
highest CHI achieved.

Here's how a typical trade might work. A company seeking protection against a
severe hurricane might buy a "maximum" contract corresponding to a CHI point
range that would cause damage to the company's finances. If a hurricane at that
level occurs, the company receives $10,000 for each CHI contract purchased. If
the hurricane doesn't hit that level, the company gets nothing and the investor
who sold the contract keeps the premium.

The market for these contracts is relatively small, but it has been growing in
recent years as hedge funds and other investors look for alternatives to the
stock market.

"There's tons and tons of ways to [trade] it," said Jeff Hodgson of Chicago
Weather Brokerage LLC. Mr. Hodgson, who doesn't actively trade hurricane
futures, said one example of a possible trade would be an investor who takes a
long position on gasoline futures and goes short on hurricanes by selling a
contract - meaning the investor is betting a hurricane won't happen. If a
hurricane does happen at the CHI scale specified, the trader loses on that trade
but makes money on the gasoline trade, since gas prices typically go up after
storms as refineries are damaged and supplies cut.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2012 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 238 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                       June 1, 1992, Monday, City Edition

HURRICANE 92

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; HURRICANE GUIDE 92; Pg. 8X

LENGTH: 421 words



Ran CI, PT, HT
 The Hurricane Center in Miami is on the sixth floor of an office tower across
from the University of Miami. Thirty-four employees sit at desks, computer
terminals and weather screens in a 20,000-square-foot workplace.
 Gilbert, the storm of the century, hit the Yucatan Peninsula with 185-mph winds
in September 1988. There have been just three other Class 5 storms in this
century: an unnamed hurricane in 1935, Camille in 1969 and Allen in 1980.
 As with other devastating storms, Hurricane Gilbert, which devastated Jamaica
in 1988, and Hurricane Hugo, which battered South Carolina in 1989, have been
banished from the World Meteorological Association's list of Atlantic hurricane
names.
 Taking their cue from Hurricane Gilbert and the stepped-up activity of the 1988
hurricane season, the experts have noted that @ hurricane seasons seem to come
in 20-year cycles.
 Although the state was spared a major blow in 1969, the Florida Almanac says it
was a memorable year for hurricanes. It had a record number of advisories, 297;
the severest storm on record, Camile, which dumped 31 inches of rain in five
hours in the Virginias (1,000 year rain) and killed 259 people; the largest
number of advisories on a single storm, Inga, 72; the longest lived hurricane on
record, Inga again, 25 days; the first hurricane to cross its own path three
times, Kara; the first hurricane to move into the Gulf and die without bringing
at least galeforce winds to any coastline, Laurie.
 Seven named storms were recorded in 1973, three of them hurricanes. None
touched Florida. In 1974, seven storms formed, but none touched the U.S.
mainland.
 After an average of eight to 10 days of blowing, the typical hurricane dies
when it travels too far from the tropical latitudes of its birth or hits land,
which hinders the free flow of winds and does not offer the supply of moisture
needed to keep the storm going.
 Half of Florida's 20th century hurricanes made landfall between Sept. 1 and
Sept. 15. Elena, which Suncoast residents are unlikely to forget, was a Labor
Day weekend visitor in 1985.
 The lowest sea-level pressure ever recorded in the Western Hemisphere, 26.35
inches, was recorded at Long Key on Sept. 2, 1935, during the "Labor Day
Hurricane." The maximum winds in that storm were not recorded because equipment
was blown down before the peak of the storm was reached. However, engineers have
calculated that winds of 200 to 250 mph would have been required to cause damage
reported.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 239 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HURRICANE POTENTIAL STRESSED BY OFFICIALS

BYLINE: By LEO H. CARNEY

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 18, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1130 words


THE hurricanes that threaten New Jersey at this time of year carry an awesome
potential for destruction, but scientists and emergency and weather experts say
a hurricane rarely actually strikes the state.

Dr. Robert Sheets, assistant director of the National Hurricane Center in Coral
Gables, Fla., an arm of the National Weather Service, said only one hurricane,
in 1903, scored a ''direct hit'' on New Jersey. That was a relatively weak
storm, Dr. Sheets said, whose eye passed over the southern part of the state
without substantial harm.

Most of what state emergency management officials and local weather experts
remember as hurricanes were actually tail ends of hurricanes. They followed a
familiar pattern, glancing off the coast of southern states and heading north to
northeasterly out into the Atlantic.

''Most of our hurricanes in recent years have veered off to the northeast as
they track toward us,'' said Capt. Peter J. Martinasco, assistant director of
the state's Emergency Management Office in West Trenton.

Since 1903, only five hurricanes have reached New Jersey with any force - in
1924, 1944, 1960 (Donna), 1985 (Gloria) and, earlier this month, Charley.

Hurricanes that originate over tropical waters generally go east to west, and it
is unusual, experts say, for such storms to travel consistently up the East
Coast from south to north.

All of this is not to say that residents and vacationers along the state's 127
miles of Atlantic coastline, and in other areas, should not heed warnings,
especially the more urgent ''hurricane watches,'' that may be issued at this
time of year.

''There's no reason to believe,'' Dr. Sheets said in a telephone interview from
his office in Florida, that hurricanes ''will not occur and people ought not to
think that they are somehow protected from them.''

He and others gave the following information about hurricanes and climatic
dangers for New Jersey:

* Although the official hurricane season runs from June to November, most storms
occur after August. As of last week, New Jersey still had 70 percent of its
hurricane season remaining. This is the most dangerous ''incubation'' period for
tropical storms.

* Historically, when a hurricane passes north of 35 degrees North latitude (in
the middle of the Carolinas), it tends to dramatically increase its speed as it
approaches 40 degrees North (near Atlantic City). This could mean less of a
warning time for the metropolitan area because the storm could increase from 15
miles an hour to 40 to 60 miles an hour.

* The only practical experience officials have in evacuating people is in the
southern states, where 24 to 30 hours is needed to do the job successfully.
Shorter warning times for New Jersey - perhaps as few as 10 hours - and greater
populations to move, are causes for concern.

* Because only 25 percent of municipalities in the state have written emergency
plans for events such as hurricanes, not all shore municipalities are
well-versed in what to do in a hurricane.

Captain Martinasco emphasized that the absence of written emergency plans did
not necessarily mean a municipality was ill-prepared for a hurricane. Every
municipality has an appointed emergency management official, he said, but a
formalized and rehearsed plan would assure that officials were familiar with the
chain of command during a hurricane.

''We've been hurt more by northeasters in the past than by hurricanes,'' Captain
Martinasco said, recalling the storm of March 1962 that devastated Long Beach
Island, and the so-called March '84 storm that caused millions of dollars of
beach erosion and damage from floods.

Hurricanes, or tropical cyclones, develop as small disturbances in the
atmosphere over the tropical Atlantic. About 100 are recorded by meteorologists
each year, but only 10 percent actually evolve into tropical storms. And half of
these - five or six storms - become hurricanes (which go from category one, with
winds of 74 to 95 miles an hour, to category five, 155 miles an hour and up).
Most of the five or six hurricanes that develop each year hit Florida and the
most southern states.

On the other hand, northeasters originate off Canada or New England and travel
directly toward New Jersey.

Hurricanes are relatively compact and short-lived, with the lighest winds at
their edges and the strongest at the wall of the eye. In northeasters, there is
no gradient of winds; they can be constant and last for two or three days.

''The big difference,'' Dr. Sheets said, ''is that the duration of the
northeaster is longer and the storm covers a much larger area. There is the
potential for devastation over a long period in a northeast storm, but the
hurricane is capable of more concentrated devastation in a shorter time.''

Northeasters such as the one that hit Long Beach Island in 1962 can combine with
other storms and wash toward shore with sustained speeds of 50 to 75 miles an
hour. This ''surge'' effect creates extremely high tides.

When the storm abates, the surge that had been pushed inland can retreat toward
the ocean, creating a massive backwash on its way out.

If a hurricane or northeaster arrives at high tide or at peak seasonal high
tides such as those in the late winter and spring, their destructiveness can be
magnified.

While every emergency management official in each municipality is not rigorously
rehearsed with a written plan, Captain Martinasco said, ''they all pretty much
know what to do'' and there are backup systems to avoid potential chaos.

For example the Emergency Management Office places its own representative at
each county emergency management center.

The county centers receive information directly from the state Emergency
Management Office's underground communications bunker, at State Police
Headquarters in West Trenton. Essentially, that information involves teletype
and computer service information from the National Weather Service.

The emergency representatives at the county offices have police-band radios and
a system of amateur radio communications to back them up if telephones are
knocked out.

At the bunker, Captain Martinasco said, as many as 75 people can be assembled,
including the Governor and his cabinet and officials of state and Federal
agencies that regulate things such as banking, prisons and coastal matters,
coordinate efforts such as transferring money from banks to safer ground,
evacuating prisoners and evacuating barrier islands.

Time and time again, when discussing hurricane warnings, local, state and
Federal officials expressed fear that the statistical improbability of a direct
hurricane hit - and especially the last two ''false alarms'' involving Gloria
and Charley - could cause residents to become lax when the time comes to
retreat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 240 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Star News (Wilmington, NC)

                            April 15, 2006 Saturday

'Gray: 'new era' of storms

BYLINE: Gareth McGrath, Staff Writer

SECTION: FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1A, 4A

LENGTH: 662 words

DATELINE: ORLANDO, FLA.


To famed hurricane forecaster William Gray, the theory is full of hot air.

But to a slew of other scientists and environmentalists, human-induced global
warming is already impacting the world's weather - including the frequency and
intensity of hurricanes.

While meteorologists and researchers of all stripes agree that the world's
oceans are warmer and that the Atlantic Basin is in a period of increased
tropical storm activity, there's a raging debate about the cause.

But to residents of hurricane-prone areas, the science behind the increased
activity isn't important because it only takes one hurricane showing up on your
front porch to make it a bad hurricane season.

The news, however, isn't good on that front for Southeastern North Carolina
either.

Gray is predicting that the chance of a hurricane making landfall along the East
Coast in 2006 is 64 percent - more than twice last century's 31 percent average.

The Colorado State University meteorologist is also forecasting 17 named storms
and nine hurricanes for the upcoming season, five of which will develop into
major Category 3 or stronger storms.

The prediction continues a trend of above-average storm activity in the
Atlantic.

"The last 11 years we've been in a new era," Gray said.

He said that between 1970 and 1994 the Atlantic Basin saw 13 hurricanes.

But there have been 45 hurricanes since then, and Gray and other meteorologists
generally agree that this period of increased hurricane activity will continue
for at least another decade.

Coastal areas, including North Carolina, are already seeing impacts from the
stormy forecast as insurance companies raise rates and pull back from offering
coverage as they reassess their exposure in hurricane-prone areas.

The insurance industry paid out $22.2 billion on 2.1 million claims in 2004 and
a whopping $60.5 billion on 3.2 million claims from last year's hurricane
season, marked by the devastating one-two punch of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita
in the Gulf.

"We're really looking at how long we can sustain those kinds of financial
losses," said Bill Bailey, managing director of the Hurricane Insurance
Information Center.

Federal and state officials also are beefing up building standards and limiting
development in vulnerable areas to make coastal communities more storm tolerant.

So is global warming a culprit for the surge in storm activity?

During a debate Friday, Florida State University climatologist Jim O'Brien said
a review of 150 years of landfalling hurricanes in the United States shows no
change in storm intensity.

But Judith Curry, a researcher with the Georgia Institute of Technology, said
there's "substantial evidence" that the recent up tick in hurricane activity and
strength can't be explained by natural phenomenon.

About the only fact the two scientists agreed on is that more data is needed to
fully answer the question, since the ocean environment is such a complex system.

Gray, a self-declared climate-change skeptic, said he agrees on at least one
point with the global warming believers.

"I don't have any disagreement that the globe has warmed in the last 30 years,"
Gray said. "That's true.

"But it's impossible to numerically predict the future."

He said there's no way that models that can't predict the weather two weeks out
can tell us what's going to happen climatically decades from now.

"If the future is anywhere near the past, then it won't keep going," Gray said,
adding that he fully expects global temperatures in 20 years to be below today's
levels.

But his forecast offers little immediate comfort for coastal residents.

"I'm afraid it's shaping up to be another rough year," Gray said.


FASTEN YOUR SEATBELTS

Famed hurricane prognosticator William Gray's 2006 hurricane forecast, which has
an 86 percent accuracy rate over the last seven years, is predicting another
rough tropical storm season. Seasonal averages are in parentheses.

NAMED STORMS: 17 (10.6)

HURRICANES: 9 (6.2)

MAJOR HURRICANES

(Category. 3 or stronger): 5 (2.3)



LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2006 Star-News, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 241 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 2, 2017 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Hurricane Irma Looms, but It's Too Early to Predict Landfall

BYLINE: By CHRISTINE HAUSER

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Express; Pg.

LENGTH: 417 words


A week after Hurricane Harvey made landfall in Texas, another powerful storm
system is looming. But forecasters say it is too early to determine where
Hurricane Irma, a Category 3 storm with 115-mile-per-hour winds that was moving
west in the Atlantic Ocean early on Friday, would have any impact on land, if at
all.

''Right now it is more than 2,500 miles away from the U.S. mainland, or at least
seven to 10 days away,'' Dennis Feltgen, a meteorologist at the National
Hurricane Center in Miami, said in a telephone interview on Friday.

''Everybody breathe,'' he said. ''We are O.K.''

The hurricane center said early on Friday that Irma was more than 800 miles west
of the Cabo Verde Islands, and was expected to move west over the next few days
-- a typical weather pattern of storms in tradewinds off the coast of Africa.

The prospect of a new hurricane making landfall so soon after Harvey drenched
entire cities with record rainfall and flooding may fill Americans with dread.
An enormous aid effort is still underway, trying to help entire communities
recover.

But when a hurricane is more than five days away, the reliability of tracking
models diminishes, which means that weather forecasters advise being more
watchful of Hurricane Irma than fearful.

''It gets people's attention, sure,'' Mr. Feltgen said. ''It is a major
hurricane. But whether it threatens any part of the Caribbean islands, or
Bahamas, or the U.S. mainland, we do not have a path on it. It is far too early
to determine.''

In June, when the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced the
start of hurricane season, there were predictions of as many as five major
hurricanes.

Harvey, the first to hit, has been called a 500-year flood, but that term may be
misleading, because it means that there is a one-in-500 chance of such a flood
occurring in a single year, and not that one such flood will occur every 500
years. So a similar storm may not be as far off as you might think.

The idea of consecutive blows to coastal American communities has precedent. On
Aug. 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina made landfall near the Louisiana-Mississippi
border as a Category 3 storm, followed by Hurricane Rita on Sept. 25, which hit
the Texas-Louisiana border as a Category 5 storm.

As for Hurricane Irma, Mr. Feltgen said only time would tell.

''We have just got to see how things shape up,'' he said. ''But early to the
middle part of next week, we will have a better idea what impacts, if any, will
be felt.''




URL: https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/01/us/hurricane-irma.html

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 242 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 24, 2015 Saturday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Record storm strikes Mexico

BYLINE: Todd C. Frankel;Jason Samenow;Chris Mooney

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1030 words


Hurricane Patricia, packing the strongest hurricane winds ever recorded,
smashed Friday evening into Mexico's southwestern coast, a region best known for
its beaches and the resort city of Puerto Vallarta.

In the tense hours before the storm landed with 160-mph winds, schools closed
and temporary shelters opened from Puerto Vallarta to Manzanillo along the
Pacific Coast. Ships were ordered to return to port, and airports were
shuttered.

People were plunged into darkness, too, as Mexico's state-run electric utility
announced that it was cutting power ahead of landfall as a precaution. The storm
came ashore about 55 miles west-northwest of Manzanillo, a commercial seaport.

With the Category 5 storm bearing down, social media filled with video snippets
of foamy surf and empty beaches being lashed by high winds. A live TV broadcast
in Mexico showed a reporter struggling to stay on her feet as the storm landed,
with two men helping prop her up. Early reports of damage were fleeting, with
several hours of dangerous weather still to come.

Tens of thousands of U.S. citizens, many of them vacationers, were  hunkering
down or had evacuated, according to the State Department.

Patricia was described as "potentially catastrophic" by the U.S. National
Hurricane Center, which measured top wind speeds at 200 mph using its Hurricane
Hunter plane, which took measurements within the fierce storm as it neared
Mexico. That speed approached what many scientists consider the theoretical
limits of a hurricane's power.

Later, the hurricane center said it appeared that the storm had weakened
somewhat while off the coast, to winds of 190 mph and then 160 mph.

At its peak, Patricia's strength was off the charts at 8.3 on the 8.0 Dvorak
storm intensity scale. Anything at 7.0 or above on the Dvorak scale is a
Category 5 storm.

In addition to winds strong enough to strip bark from a tree, the hurricane
packed the potential for an "extremely dangerous storm surge" and rainfall that
could reach 20 inches in some places, the hurricane center said.

Forecasters noted that the destruction could be contained by the fact that the
storm's strongest winds were in a narrow band around its center, extending just
five or 10 miles. Heavy rainfall was expected to be more widespread - 8 to 12
inches along the coast, with more in isolated spots - in the Mexican states of
Nayarit, Jalisco, Michoacan and Guerrero, leading to worries of flash floods and
mudslides.

The hurricane is expected to weaken over the mountains of Mexico and could be a
small tropical storm by Sunday.

In Acaponeta, Mexico, retired schoolteacher Enrique Jimenez Lopez sat tight with
his family in his home 15 miles from the beach as they awaited the storm Friday
evening. He had bought candles, as instructed by local authorities, in
preparation for losing power. But, he said, people did not seem panicked or even
overly worried about the fearsome storm.

"We know there are people in the street," he said. "People just aren't aware."

The scene was calm, too, at a Red Cross shelter set up in an auditorium in
Puetro Vallarta, where nearly 90 people waited for the storm.

"We have prepared a hot dinner - it's not cold," said Ali Nunez, a Red Cross
worker, to illustrate the relaxed nature of  emergency preparations. "I think
people are a bit surprised about what they've heard about the hurricane."

Patricia began taking shape late Wednesday, morphing with historic speed from a
series of thunderstorms into an unprecedented hurricane. In little over a day,
it went from a Category 1 hurricane to a Category 4, and soon hit the top of the
scale.

Hurricane records are a little cloudy because similar storms in the western
Pacific - called cyclones and typhoons - are not as closely monitored. But it
appears that Patricia is a record-setter at 200 mph. In 2013, Super Typhoon
Haiyan hit the Philippines with peak winds estimated at 195 mph.

Patricia is certainly tops in North America or the Caribbean, the domain of the
National Hurricane Center, besting the  record of 190 mph winds from Hurricane
Allen, which hit the Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico in 1980.

Mexico is no stranger to hurricanes. In September 2014, Hurricane Odile smashed
into  the Baja California peninsula, causing several deaths, damaging hotels and
cutting off water and electricity to tens of thousands of people.

A year earlier, Hurricane Ingrid and Tropical Storm Manuel socked Mexico's gulf
and Pacific coasts, causing flooding and landslides. At least 34 people died.

Patricia is the ninth storm to reach Category 4 or 5 in the northeast Pacific
Ocean this year, beating the record of eight in 1997, according to Phillip
Klotzbach, a meteorologist at Colorado State University.

The ingredients for a superstorm like Patricia are present. This year, there is
a strong El NiÃ±o weather pattern, the periodic warming in sea surface
temperature. That generally leads to hyperactive hurricane activity in the
Eastern Pacific basin, Kerry Emanuel, an MIT hurricane expert, said by e-mail.

Pinning a single hurricane to a long-term trend such as global warming is more
difficult, but record-setting hurricanes are consistent with predictions by
climate researchers. Rising ocean temperatures should strengthen these storms.
But the issue is beset by data-related difficulties, since storm measurement
techniques are continually improving and highly variable.

The oceans heating up because of climate change will have consequences, said
Michael Mann, a climate researcher at Penn State University. "Hurricane
Patricia, and her unprecedented 200 mile-per-hour sustained winds, appears to be
one of them now, unfortunately."

todd.frankel@washpost.com

jason.samenow@washpost.com

chris.mooney@washpost.com

Gabriela Martinez in Mexico City and Niraj Chokshi in Washington contributed to
this report.

A RECORD-BREAKER

The National Hurricane Center said Hurricane Patricia's winds reached 200 mph,
the strongest on record, but weakened before the storm made landfall.

Hurricane Linda, 1997

185 mph

Northeast Pacific

Hurricane Wilma, 1995

185 mph

Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico

Hurricane Gilbert, 1988

185 mph

Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico

Hurricane Allen, 1980

190 mph

Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2015 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 243 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                      October 23, 2015 Friday 5:35 PM GMT

US Hurricanes: Top 10 deadliest storms in American history

BYLINE: By Valerie Edwards

SECTION: NEW ARTICLES

LENGTH: 1202 words


Hurricane Patricia has broken the record for the strongest hurricane ever
recorded in the Americas at 200mph with a barometric pressure of 880 millibars -
the lowest ever recorded for any tropical cyclone globally for over 30 years.
The US has seen some of the deadliest storms in history. Here are the top 10
deadliest hurricanes and tropical cyclones in US history by death toll:

RankNameYearCategoryDeaths

1. Great Galveston Hurricane in Texas

                     Death Toll: 8,000

Category: 4

Year: 1900

On September 8, 1900, a Category 4 hurricane tore through Galveston, Texas,
killing an estimated 8,000 people. At the time of the hurricane, Galveston was
filled with vacationers. The U.S. Weather Bureau issued warnings telling people
to move to higher ground; however, those advisories were ignored by many
vacationers and residents.

A 15-foot storm surge flooded the city, which was then situated at less than
nine feet above sea level and numerous homes and buildings were destroyed. The
hurricane remains the worst weather-related disaster in U.S. history in terms of
loss of life.

2. Lake Okeechobee, Florida (also known as San Felipe Segundo hurricane)

                     Death Toll: 2,500

Category: 4

Year: 1928

Early on September 17, 1928, the storm made landfall near West Palm Beach,
Florida with winds of 145mph. In the city, more than 1,711 homes were destroyed,
but impact was severest around Lake Okeechobee. The storm surge caused water to
pour out of the southern edge of the lake, flooding hundreds of square miles as
high as 20 feet (6.1 m) above ground.

At least 2,500 people drowned, while damage was estimated at $25 million.

3.Cheniere Caminada, Louisiana

                     Death Toll: Estimated 2,000

Category: 4

Year: 1893

On October 1, 1893, the village of Caminadaville was wiped out by a massive
hurricane. Many victims died when the buildings in which they were taking
shelter collapsed; 76 people reportedly perished in a single home.

The 1893 storm killed as many as 2,000 people across the Gulf Coast, making it
one of the deadliest hurricanes to strike the United States.

4.Sea Islands Hurricane (South Carolina and Georgia)

                     Death Toll: Estimated 2,000

Category: 3

Year: 1893

On August 27, 1893, a Category 3 hurricane struck the southeast coast of the
United States in Savannah, Georgia. At landfall, the hurricane had winds of 120
miles per hour and a storm surge of 16 feet.

The low-lying Sea Islands of Georgia and South Carolina were hit hard and
between 20,000 and 30,000 people were left homeless as a result. Beaufort, South
Carolina, located on Port Royal Island, suffered heavy damage.

5.Hurricane Katrina (Hit Gulf Coast and New Orleans)

                     Death Toll: 1,833

Category: 3

Year: 2005

An estimated 1,833 people died in the hurricane and the flooding that followed
in late August 2005, and millions of others were left homeless along the Gulf
Coast and in New Orleans.

Katrina was the most destructive storms to strike the United States and the
costliest storm in U.S. history, causing $108 billion in damage, according to
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

It ranks sixth overall in strength of recorded Atlantic hurricanes. It was also
a very large storm; at its peak, maximum winds stretched 25 to 30 nautical miles
(46 to 55 kilometers) and its extremely wide swath of hurricane force winds
extended at least 75 nautical miles (138 km) to the east from the center.

6.Savannah Hurricane (Georgia and South Carolina)

                     Death Toll: 700

Category: 2

Year: 1881

The Savannah hurricane of August 27, 1881 was the deadliest hurricane that was
not a Cat 3 or more. Several barrier islands were completely submerged by the
storm surge.

7.Hurricane Audrey (Southwestern Louisiana and Texas)

                     Death Toll: 416

Category: 4

Year: 1957

Audrey was first detected over the southwestern Gulf of Mexico on June 24. It
moved slowly northward as it became a tropical storm and a hurricane the next
day. A faster northward motion brought the center to the coast near the
Texas-Louisiana border on June 27.

The main impact was from 8 to 12 ft storm surges that penetrated as far inland
as 25 miles over portions of low-lying southwestern Louisiana. These surges were
responsible for the vast majority of deaths from Audrey. Damage in the United
States was estimated at $150 million.

8.Great Labor Day Hurricane (Florida Keys)

                     Death Toll: 408

Category: 5

Year: 1935

On September 2, 1935, Labor Day, the hurricane made landfall as a Category 5
storm, crossing the Florida Keys between Key West and Miami, FL. As it made
landfall, the hurricane delivered maximum sustained winds of approximately 185
mph.

The 1935 Labor Day hurricane was the strongest storm at time of landfall in U.S.
history and also the first Category 5 storm to strike the U.S. in the 20th
century (followed by Hurricane Camille in 1969 and Hurricane Andrew in 1992).

9.Last Island, Louisiana

                     Death Toll: 400

Category: 4

Year: 1856

The hurricane had a great impact on coastal Louisiana. The city of New Orleans
was inundated with more than 13 inches of rain. Last Island, a popular resort
destination at the time, was completely decimated by the hurricane. As a result
of the hurricane, Last Island was fragmented into a small island chain, known
today as L'Îsles Dernières (Last Islands).

At the time, storm prediction and identification was not advanced enough to give
the island's residents much warning. Although people noted signs of an advancing
storm, by the time they realized its magnitude, it was too late. The hurricane's
storm surge destroyed all 100 homes on the island.

10.Miami Hurricane (FL/MS/AL/Pensacola)

                     Death Toll: 372

Category: 4

Year: 1926

On September 18, 1926 the Great Miami Hurricane caused destruction across the
Florida coast.<em class="bold" />Boats of all sizes were brought onto the city
streets. The waterfront was flooded and many buildings were completely
destroyed. Others lost their roofs, and many of Miami's prestigious oceanfront
hotels were filled with sand. Casualties from the hurricane are estimated at
372.

<em class="bold" />

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2015 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 244 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        Florida Keys Keynoter (Marathon)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 1, 2010 Wednesday

Hurricane season ends quietly for Keys

BYLINE: Sean Kinney, Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 389 words


Dec. 01--Although the Florida Keys and mainland United States received virtually
no impact from tropical weather this hurricane season, the six-month season that
ended Tuesday was among the most active ever recorded.

The season produced 19 named storms, 12 hurricanes and five major hurricanes of
Category 3 or above, defined by sustained winds between 111 and 130 mph,
according to the National Hurricane Center.

An average season would see 11 named storms, six hurricanes and two major
hurricanes, according to the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration, parent agency of the hurricane center.

This was the third busiest year on record, tied with 1887 and 1995. And with 12
actual hurricanes, the 2010 season ties 1969 for second most hurricanes.

The National Hurricane Center has characterized the past season as a "gentle
giant."

The annual hurricane season forecasts, which provide an overall count minus the
specifics of landfall and impacts, are "meaningless," according to Andrew
Devanas, science and operations officer for the National Weather Service's Key
West office.

"Don't pay attention to those forecast numbers," he said. "They're meaningless.
You need to prepare each and every season the same way. You could have a very
quiet season and get hit with a major hurricane or, as we just saw, you can have
an above-average season and not get impacted.

"There's no correlation between the forecast and whether the Florida Keys get
impacted. Sometimes I think the public takes the wrong message away from the
seasonal forecasts."

He noted that this season was "above average," and "we haven't had any large or
threatening storm systems since 2005."

Devanas, with eight years at his post in the Southernmost City, was referencing
the series of storms, including the devastating Hurricane Wilma, that rocked the
Keys five years ago.

"Beginning next season," he said, "prepare the exact same way you do every other
year. Preparedness takes away about 90 percent of the worry and anxiety."

To see more of the Keynoter, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.keysnet.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Florida Keys Keynoter, Marathon
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20101201-FK-Hurricane-season-ends-quietly-for-Keys-1201-20101201

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FK


                      Copyright 2010 Florida Keys Keynoter


                          FOCUS - 245 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            November 30, 2015 Monday

Why hurricane season is getting longer;
El Niño has helped set records in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans this year but
to varying degrees.

BYLINE: Michael D. Regan Staff

SECTION: Science

LENGTH: 493 words


While the overall number of hurricanes has dropped in recent years, the 2015
season started earlier and will finish later.

Hurricane season in the Pacific and Atlantic oceans is generally said to run
from June 1 to Nov. 30.

Yet hurricane Ana touched down on the shores of South Carolina in early May,
preceding the start of the traditional hurricane season by nearly a month.

Last week, hurricane Sandra set a record for being the latest major hurricane in
the Eastern Pacific Ocean, with wind speeds up to 144 m.p.h., though the storm
was downgraded to a tropical storm by the time it touched down on Mexico's west
coast.

The six-month period marking hurricane season is based on historical averages.
It may be too early to tell if this year signifies a change in the unofficial
hurricane season, but Jim Kossin, a NOAA researcher, said data collected since
2008 may show it may be increasing slightly.

"The evidence here certainly points toward that trend seems fairly real," he
told Climate Central.

El Niño warming in the Pacific has certainly been a factor on the number of
hurricanes overall. While the Atlantic Ocean has seen a decrease in hurricanes
this year, more occurred in the Pacific.

In the Pacific, 24 tropical storms and 15 hurricanes were documented, while
hurricane Patricia broke records with winds of 200 m.p.h., according to National
Geographic.

In August, the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) Climate
Prediction Center indicated the number of Atlantic hurricanes in 2015 was below
normal.

One reason for the disparity hurricane season is the El Niño weather pattern,
which is warming the waters of the Pacific Ocean and creating cooler than usual
temperatures in the Atlantic.

"This extra bump in temperature, when combined with the long-term warming of the
planet due to human-caused emissions of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide,
makes it virtually certain that 2015 will be Earth's second, consecutive,
warmest year on record," Jeff Masters, of Weather Underground, told National
Georgraphic.

El Niño tamps down wind shears in the Pacific and intensifies them in the
Atlantic. This difference changes air pressure created stronger trade winds,
making it less likely for a hurricane or tropical storm to form.

"As hurricanes develop from thunderstorms, they need to grow tall in the
atmosphere as heat and moisture is concentrated in the middle of the storm,"
said Angela Fritz, of The Washington Post. "If winds are too strong at the upper
levels, it can tear a young storm apart, or even prevent it from developing in
the first place."

Coastal regions in the US have not seen a major hurricane touch down since 2012
while the pattern has decreased overall since 2005.

This development is unique because it marks the first nine-year period since the
1850's that a Category 3 storm has not struck US shores, according to a NASA
study released this year.

Mr. Masters said the conditions are likely to stretch into 2016.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2015 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 246 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            October 8, 2016 Saturday

Hurricane Matthew: Why are birds flying in the eye of the storm?;
Hurricane Matthew: Meteorologists tracking the hurricane on radar spotted birds
flying in the eye of the storm, traveling along as it moves up the US east
coast.

BYLINE: Zhai Yun Tan Staff

SECTION: Science

LENGTH: 769 words


When birds get stuck in the strong winds of a hurricane, their strategy is often
to ride it out within the eye of the hurricane, the calmest spot in the chaos.

As hurricane Matthew travels north along the US east coast, meteorologists
studying the radar images spotted bright red spots in the center of the storm's
swirling winds Friday, identifying them as trapped birds.

"Those are seagulls and birds that are flying inside the eye of the storm trying
to escape the strongest part of the storm which is in the north and
north-eastern center of it," meteorologist Glenn Burns told WSB-TV in Atlanta,
as reported by USA Today.

According to the Weather Channel, birds were also spotted in September when
hurricane Hermine hit Florida, and in 2014 when hurricane Arthur landed in North
Carolina. Kenn Kaufman, a National Audubon Society field editor, described in a
2011 article that the birds probably got pulled into the hurricane's "wild
wind," and when they come to the calm eye, they choose to stay until the winds
die rather than fighting it again.

But most of the time, the birds migrate in the fall before the hurricanes hit to
avoid running into hurricanes, although their timing may sometimes coincide with
bad weather.

"Presumably a bird tends to take off when the wind is favorable, just after the
passage of a low-pressure system," Kaufman wrote. "If they take off when
conditions are good, there's a chance that they're not going to run into a
hurricane."

Bird watchers, however, have sometimes braved the dangerous storms just to
glimpse these birds who get blown out of their habitat when traveling with a
hurricane. As Charles Kennedy, president of the South Alabama Birding
Association told NPR in 2005, hurricanes "offers some opportunities to see birds
in unusual places that you might not see."

"A bird that actually would get caught in the eye wall, in the 150-mile-an-hour
wind, would probably get blown to death shortly, but that doesn't really happen
much because birds are fairly smart about things like this," Kennedy told NPR.
"They've been riding out hurricanes for centuries, but anyway, as soon as they
can, they're going to head back to the coast."

Hurricanes can still be deadly for birds. In an interview with National
Geographic in 2012, regarding the aftermath of hurricane Sandy, Center for
Conservation Biology Director Bryan Watts said such storms can cause long-term
habitat destruction.

"If you remember Hurricane Hugo in the 1980s, it had a huge impact on habitat in
North Carolina. It pretty much decimated red-cockaded woodpecker habitat [a
species that depends on old-growth forests] in the Francis Marion National
Forest," Mr. Watts said. "Some of the groups we'd expect to be most affected are
ones that depend on coastal habitats, such as piping plovers, Wilson's plovers,
least terns, etc."

According to the National Wildlife Federation, hurricane Hugo wiped out 60
percent of 500 groups of birds and 87 percent of trees where the birds lived
were destroyed. Some other consequences, as reported by eNature, might just be
that the birds will be weakened by hurricanes or end up in inhospitable places
when they escape the hurricane.

For those birds caught in hurricane Matthew, there is good news: the storm has
been downgraded to a Category 1 storm with winds range from 74 to 95 mph. The
center of the hurricane is about 20 miles south-southeast of Charleston, S.C.,
and the maximum sustained winds have fallen to 85 mph. The forecasted track of
the storm, as of Saturday morning, is to continue north before turning east
early Sunday, and southward on Monday and Tuesday, but to stay well off the
Florida coast.

According to reporting by The New York Times, while the hurricane hasn't land
onshore, it has brought heavy rains and flooding in Georgia and South Carolina
on Saturday morning. Up to 1 million customers in Florida, 250,000 in Georgia
,and about 200,000 in South Carolina are without electricity.

Florida officials blamed the storm for at least five deaths, ranging from
accidents with fallen trees to carbon monoxide poisoning.

Some zoos in affected states took early steps to help the animals shelter in
place. The St. Augustine Alligator Farm Zoological Park in Florida shared on
Facebook pictures of storks kept in public restrooms and other animals in
various cages indoors.

"Every bird and mammal is housed safely indoors, all venomous snakes are double
contained (at least), tortoises and wee crocs are in various tubs and the storks
are hanging out in the public restrooms! We love our animals and staff. Take
care everyone and be careful," the zoo staff wrote.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2016 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 247 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             June 1, 2006 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricane season begins today. Is everyone ready?;
Nine months after Hurricane Katrina blasted the Gulf Coast, the U.S.
government's chief tropical weatherman doubts it.

BYLINE: Patrick O'Driscoll, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1804 words


Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami, says people
have to wake up.

"People who get hit by a couple of hurricanes still tend to chalk it up to bad
luck or a fluke and don't think it can happen again," he says.

State and local governments along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts are heeding the
alarm of last year's record onslaught and forecasts of another worse-than-normal
hurricane season this year. Mock disaster drills from the Northeast to Texas
have tested local and regional response. States and cities have revamped
evacuation plans and set up websites to encourage residents to prepare and store
extra provisions. The Federal Emergency Management Agency, roundly criticized
for its slow response to Katrina, has tripled its stock of relief supplies.

Flood barriers in New Orleans are mostly back to pre-Katrina strength after more
than $700 million in repairs. But that doesn't mean they could withstand another
big hurricane. Other major metro areas along the coasts -- Houston, Miami,
Tampa-St. Petersburg, even New York City -- are taking fresh steps to try to
avoid having a hurricane nail them the way Katrina crippled New Orleans.

Despite gales of pre-season publicity, Mayfield says many people along the USA's
hurricane coasts are not poised for the next tropical storm, let alone for a
monster like 2005's Katrina. The Census Bureau says more than 34.6 million
people live in the most at-risk coastal zones, from the Carolinas to Texas.
That's more than triple the population there in 1950.

Mayfield, who has barnstormed hurricane country for weeks to preach the gospel
of readiness, sees trouble in a recent poll of coastal residents in 12 Atlantic
and Gulf states. The survey of 1,100 people by Mason-Dixon Polling & Research
found that more than half don't feel vulnerable to hurricanes, and three in five
have no family disaster plan.

The poll, released in mid-May by the National Hurricane Survival Initiative, a
public-private partnership that includes the hurricane center, also found that
more than two-thirds of the respondents have no hurricane survival kit. And half
erroneously believe that masking tape makes windows shatterproof in a storm.
Thirteen percent say they wouldn't evacuate, even if ordered to leave.

"The folks there in Mississippi and Louisiana who made a conscious decision not
to evacuate (in Katrina) were not just tempting fate, they were playing Russian
roulette," Mayfield says.

He says he was heartened by the unprecedented turnout of media for the center's
five-stop "hurricane awareness" tour this spring along the Gulf Coast. But news
coverage "is all for nothing if we can't translate that into individuals taking
personal responsibility and developing their own hurricane plan."

One reason for apathy may be timing. Although hurricane season starts today,
June and July rarely record a tropical storm more than once every other year,
according to records dating to 1886. The heart of hurricane season normally is
mid-August through October. The official end is Nov. 30. Last year's record
assault brought two named storms in June and five in July. There also have been
tropical storms in the last two Decembers.

16 storms forecast this year

This year's forecast is for up to 16 tropical storms, eight to 10 of them
hurricanes and as many as six of them major, meaning a Category 3 or higher with
winds of at least 111 mph. But when and where will the storms occur, and will
any of them strike the USA?

"Right now no one knows exactly what areas of the coast, or which states or
locations," Mayfield told a Senate panel last week. "Could it be Florida again?
Maybe. How about New England or New York City? That's possible. ... The bottom
line is that all coastal states from Texas to Maine are vulnerable."

Most vulnerable this year is the battered Gulf Coast. An estimated 110,000
people who lost their homes to Katrina, Rita and Wilma now live in 39,000
government trailers. The temporary quarters are no match for a strong storm, let
alone any hurricane, Mayfield says. These people must be ready to leave --
quickly.

"I can identify very well with those folks," Mayfield says. His home in a Miami
suburb was damaged by Hurricane Andrew in 1992, forcing him to live in a trailer
for more than six months.

Whenever the first storm of 2006 arrives, it will be named Alberto, from one of
several alphabetical lists that rotate each year. Last year's list of names ran
out, so the hurricane center had to use Greek letters to complete the record
tally of 28 named storms, 15 of which were hurricanes.

Preparedness exercises this spring added more names of fake hurricanes: "Alicia"
in New Orleans' evacuation test; "Zoey" in Florida's statewide drill; "Eunice"
in Texas; and "Xena" in a two-week exercise at the U.S. Northern Command, the
military branch of the nation's homeland defense. Even the White House joined in
last week with "Boudreaux," an imaginary Category 5 storm blasting New Orleans
again in a tabletop test for the president's Cabinet.

Besides holding disaster drills, states and agencies such as the Red Cross
continue to stress self-preparedness. They say residents should be ready to
subsist on their own for 72 hours after a storm.

Tax holidays, websites and ads

Florida, the most hurricane-prone state, last week unveiled its "Get a Plan!"
campaign of broadcast ads and billboards and a new website to help families and
businesses prepare for storms. One broadcast spot plays 911 calls from people
who didn't evacuate before Hurricane Ivan in 2004. They were unreachable by
rescuers because the danger was too great.

Florida also is holding a 12-day holiday from paying state sales tax on
purchases of hurricane supplies, ending today.

North Carolina, second to Florida in hurricane strikes, also launched a website
in May to help residents prepare for natural disasters. "Our main concern is
that there are so many people moving into North Carolina from other places that
maybe have not been through a hurricane," says Renee Hoffman of the Department
of Crime Control and Public Safety.

Texas has overhauled evacuation plans after dozens of people died in the
gridlocked exodus of more than 2 million people from Houston and Galveston last
September as Hurricane Rita approached.

The plans include quicker re-supplying of gas stations along evacuation routes.
Rest stops will have more water, ice and medical stations, says Rachael Novier
of the governor's office. A contractor has guaranteed to provide 1,100 buses for
evacuation. A pre-storm registry using the state's "211" phone information line
aims to identify ahead of time any elderly, sick or other people who need a ride
out.

Another key change in Texas: It will be OK to evacuate with pets. Past bans on
animals in shelters deterred some residents from fleeing dangerous storms. "One
way that we are sure people move to safety is to say, come on and bring your
dog," Novier says.

It could happen in NYC

Emergency managers in New York City, which would have to evacuate up to 2.5
million people in a major hurricane, say Katrina caught people's attention. "New
Yorkers who normally are complacent are starting to take hurricanes seriously,"
says Jarrod Bernstein of the Office of Emergency Management. It now features
hurricane advice prominently on its website.

"Take Rockaway peninsula," Bernstein says, referring to the city neighborhood
most exposed to an Atlantic hurricane. "We go out there every year to talk about
hurricanes, and they're like, 'No way we're leaving.' This year it's, 'You know
what? If the man says it's time to go, we're going to go.'"

He says emergency planners debriefed 1,000 New York fire, rescue and police
employees who went to the Gulf Coast in Katrina's aftermath to revise the city's
hurricane plan. Next week, they'll stage a tabletop exercise, then a live field
drill in mid-July with buses and several hundred people at one of the city's 65
evacuation centers.

"Katrina only brought it into sharper focus," Bernstein says. "We need to make
that decision to evacuate early. We know that is going to be an unpopular
decision if it's 70 degrees and balmy. ... While the probability of a Category 4
storm for New York City is low, it only has to happen once."

Forecasters are beefing up with more staff and better tools. The hurricane
center has hired four more tropical storm specialists -- to predict storm
movement and behavior -- for a total of 10.

Among the data they draw on are a dozen computer forecast models. An upgrade
this year to one of them will zero in on the "loop current," an extra-warm
ribbon of water in the Gulf of Mexico. That current was responsible in part for
the rapid strengthening of both Katrina and Rita as they approached the coast.

The hurricane center also will post new color-coded contour maps on its website
that predict the range of wind speeds at landfall for a tropical storm days
before it hits. The maps can help coastal communities in the wide zone of a
possible strike to better gauge how strong the storm will be.

In the Florida Keys, the National Weather Service has completed a $5.1 million
office built to withstand a Category 5 storm.

"I feel so strongly that the battle against the hurricane is won now, outside
the hurricane season," says Mayfield, 57, who has traveled so much this spring
to conferences, interviews, hearings and meetings that he caught bronchitis.
"You just can't afford to wait for the hurricane to come knocking on your door
before you get prepared."

Man on a mission

Last week was a typical blur. On May 22 in Miami, Mayfield announced the
hurricane season forecast. Then he flew to Texas to meet with emergency managers
prepping for the season. The next day, he did news interviews, spoke at a Texas
hurricane conference and then flew to Washington to testify on Capitol Hill.
Last Thursday brought more meetings, a lunch speech, a huddle with Florida's
congressional delegation and a briefing on new weather satellites. He flew home
to Miami that night.

He's at it again this week. Wednesday, he went to the Florida Keys for two
hurricane workshops and a TV show. Today, Mayfield is scheduled for TV
interviews.

"I've worked my whole career to prevent a large loss of life like what happened
in Katrina. If there's anything good that can come out of the last hurricane
season, I hope it's the motivation to create that culture of preparedness."
Online readiness

Some hurricane-related federal and state websites:

National Hurricane Center: www.nhc.noaa.gov

Federal Emergency Management Agency: www.fema.gov

Ala.: ema.alabama.gov

Fla.: www.floridadisaster.org

Ga.: www.gema.state.ga.us

La.: www.ohsep.louisiana.gov/hurricanerelated/

hurricaneindex.htm

Miss.: www.msema.org/

stayalert.htm

N.C.: www.readyNC.org

New York City: www.nyc.gov/html/oem

S.C.: www.scemd.org

Texas: www.txdps.state.tx.us/dem/pages/index.htm

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Research by Chris Fruitrich and Bob Swanson, graphic by
Dave Merrill, USA TODAY, Sources: AIR Worldwide
The Weather Channel
Department of Atmospheric Science, Colorado State University
National Hurricane Center
N.Y. Office of Emergency Management
Army Corps of Engineers (Maps, bar graphs)
PHOTO, Color, NOAA via AP
PHOTO, B/W, Roberto Schmidt, AFP/Getty Images
PHOTO, B/W, Al Diaz, AP

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COVER STORY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 248 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                          September 5, 2007 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

'07's Category 5 storms 2 for the record books

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 367 words


The first two hurricanes in the Atlantic this season reached the highest level,
Category 5, the first time that has happened since record-keeping began in 1851.

Hurricane experts say conditions in the Atlantic were ripe for back-to-back
powerful storms although so far this year the hurricane season is average.

"It's very unusual to have two land-falling Category 5 hurricanes in one
season," Weather Channel hurricane expert Steve Lyons said. "I'm not sure if
this is a sign of things to come or if we were just unlucky."

Felix hit Nicaragua on Tuesday as a Category 5, with winds of 160 mph. Hurricane
Dean was a Category 5 storm when it hit Mexico on Aug. 21. A Category 5
hurricane has a wind speed of more than 155 mph.

"Both Felix and Dean got into the Caribbean Sea and encountered very low wind
shear and very warm sea-surface temperatures, which are both key ingredients for
hurricane intensification," according to Dennis Feltgen of the National
Hurricane Center.

Hurricane Henriette also made landfall Tuesday from the Pacific Ocean, hitting
western Mexico. That is the first time two hurricanes from separate oceans hit
North America on the same day, according to records from the National Hurricane
Center.

This year, there have been six named storms and two hurricanes in the Atlantic.
Typically two hurricanes will form by Aug. 30 and six named storms form by Sept.
12, according to the National Hurricane Center.

There have been 31 Category 5 hurricanes since record-keeping began. Eight of
them occurred in the past four years.

Felix's rapid intensification over the steamy Caribbean waters was remarkable,
Feltgen said. He said it went from tropical-depression strength of 35 mph Friday
to a Category 5 hurricane 51 hours later, with winds up to 165 mph.

Weather Underground meteorologist Jeff Masters said this was the second-fastest
Atlantic storm to intensify from a tropical depression to a Category 5.
Hurricane Ethel, which hit Mississippi in 1960, intensified faster.

Meanwhile, Colorado State University forecasters lowered their seasonal forecast
Tuesday. It now predicts 15 named storms, of which seven will become hurricanes.
They originally predicted 17 storms and nine hurricanes.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Adrienne Lewis, USA TODAY, Source: National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (Bar graph)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 249 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             August 23, 2010 Monday
                                 FIRST EDITION

Danielle forecast to be hurricane midweek

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 475 words


Tropical Storm Danielle formed Sunday afternoon in the far eastern Atlantic, the
fourth named storm of the 2010 season, according to the National Hurricane
Center.

As of late Sunday, the storm's sustained winds were 40 mph. It was about 3,000
miles southeast of Miami.

The hurricane center predicted that Danielle will become the Atlantic's second
hurricane of the season by Wednesday. Its potential effect on the USA is
uncertain.

Regardless of what Danielle does, the Atlantic hurricane season, which includes
the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea, is entering the traditional peak period in
what is still predicted to be a very active year for tropical storms and
hurricanes.

"There are signs that the Atlantic is acting like it should in August and
September," says Rick Knabb, a meteorologist and tropical program manager at the
Weather Channel. "We're seeing more activity than we did earlier in the season."

Danielle also could be the start of what AccuWeather hurricane expert Joe
Bastardi calls "an upcoming frenzy of storms, days with two or three storms on
the chart."

Knabb says tropical waves are starting to move from Africa into the Atlantic
with more regularity. "Tropical waves are the seedlings for the hurricanes that
move across the Atlantic," he says.

In a typical year, about 60-70 tropical waves form off the West African coast,
but only a small fraction become hurricanes, reports Dennis Feltgen, a
meteorologist for the hurricane center. This is the prime time of year for
storms to develop from those waves because of the warm ocean water and absence
of strong wind shear that can shred even the strongest hurricane.

Most major hurricanes that have struck the USA have come after mid-August, Knabb
says. Historically, he adds, the U.S. coastline is most at risk in August and
September.

Officials in Florida, the most hurricane-prone state in the nation, stress
preparedness.

"It only takes one storm to cause a loss of lives and devastating property
damage," says Lauren McKeague of the Florida Division of Emergency Management.
"Hurricane Andrew was a catastrophic Category 5 storm that came during a year
when it was a lower-than-average season."

Before Sunday, there had been three named storms: Hurricane Alex and tropical
storms Bonnie and Colin. Hurricane Alex lashed the southern Texas and
northeastern Mexican coasts in June.

Predictions by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration are for 14 to
20 named storms, of which eight to 12 would become hurricanes. A forecasting
team from Colorado State University predicted 18 storms. In a typical season, 10
tropical storms form, of which six become hurricanes.

AccuWeather says the main reasons for the active season include warm weather
along the East Coast, a La Nioa trend that is producing weaker winds in the
upper atmosphere and warm water temperatures in the tropics.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Eric Gay, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 250 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            September 9, 2013 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricane season not living up to forecasts

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY,

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 452 words


The preseason predictions were all dire, using words like "extremely active" and
"above-normal" to describe the forecast for the 2013 Atlantic hurricane season.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) predicted that seven
to 11 hurricanes would form, while AccuWeather predicted eight.

The season so far has been a welcome if unexpected dud, with not a single
hurricane yet through the first week of September. (A typical full June-November
hurricane season, based on weather records that go back to 1950, has seven
hurricanes.)

In fact, the season is about to enter record territory for its unusual lack of
hurricanes.

"If the first hurricane of 2013 forms after 8 a.m. on Sept. 11, it would set a
record for the latest 'first' hurricane to arrive in the satellite era (1967 and
later)," said Dennis Feltgen, spokesman with the National Hurricane Center in
Miami. He said the current record holder is 2002's Gustav, which formed on Sept.
11 of that year.

So, what's happened to all of the expected hurricanes this year?

Several tropical storms -- of which there have been seven so far -- dissipated
when they ran into dry air and wind shear, Feltgen said, and did not affect the
USA. Wind shear -- strong winds that roar from different directions at various
levels of the atmosphere -- can tear apart developing hurricanes.

Strong winds blowing west off of the Sahara Desert have helped bring dry, dusty
air into the Atlantic Ocean this summer, which can tend to decrease hurricane
formation, AccuWeather said.

A tropical storm becomes a hurricane when its sustained winds reach 74 mph or
greater.

"Several tropical waves coming across the tropical Atlantic in recent weeks have
run into the same environmental issues and have failed to develop any further,"
Feltgen said. Tropical waves are small weather disturbances that spin off
Africa's western coast, which sometimes can strengthen into tropical storms and
eventually hurricanes.

"Even though dry air has backed off a little in recent days, strong westerly
winds aloft continue to interrupt tropical development for almost every budding
system," according to AccuWeather hurricane expert Dan Kottlowski.

Experts warned against complacency.

"We are only at the midpoint of the six-month hurricane season, and have just
entered the peak of the hurricane season (mid-August through late October),"
Feltgen said. "It is a mistake to believe that the second half of the season
would resemble the first half."

As of Sunday afternoon, the hurricane center was monitoring two tropical
disturbances in the Atlantic, one of which may develop into the season's first
hurricane by week's end. However, even if it does form, it's not forecast to
affect the USA.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo TOM SPADER, ASBURY PARK (N.J.) PRESS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 251 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           September 1, 2015 Tuesday
                                 FIRST EDITION

Hurricanes roam, roar in Pacific, Atlantic; U.S. safe

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 327 words


The tropics are heating up as the typical peak of hurricane season begins.

Three hurricanes roared Monday in the Pacific Ocean. A fourth hurricane churned
far out in the Atlantic. It's the most powerful hurricane season in the central
Pacific since 1994, according to Colorado State University hurricane expert Phil
Klotzbach.

Late August and early September are the typical peak of hurricane season.

None of these storms was  forecast to strike the USA.

All three Pacific hurricanes reached Category 4 strength Sunday -- something
that's never been seen before, the National Hurricane Center said.

Hurricane Ignacio weakened Monday to a Category 2 storm with winds of 105 mph.
It's likely to pass northeast of Hawaii through Wednesday, the National Weather
Service said. It was located Monday 460 miles east of Honolulu, moving to the
northwest at 10 mph.

Massive 12- to 20-foot waves could crash against the northeastern shores of the
islands, possibly damaging coastal homes and roads. Away from the shore, periods
of breezy, wet weather were  likely, and heavy rain was  possible as the storm
passes.

Forecasters said the storm should become a Category 1 hurricane by Tuesday and
weaken into a tropical storm by midweek as it encounters southwesterly winds.
Hurricane warnings were  in effect for the waters around Hawaii, but none for
land areas.

The other two hurricanes in the Pacific, Kilo and Jimena, were  still  Category
4 storms with winds of at least 130 mph, but they were  not forecast to hit
land.

The hurricanes are fueled by El Niño, a periodic natural warming of water in the
central Pacific.

"An El Niño year usually means above-average activity in the Pacific, and this
year is no exception," hurricane center spokesman Dennis Feltgen said.

In the Atlantic, Hurricane Fred pounded the Cape Verde Islands with wind and
rain Monday, the hurricane center said. The Cape Verde islands are an
independent nation a few hundred miles west of the coast of Africa.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Caleb Jones, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 252 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           November 30, 2017 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Destructive hurricane season over;
2017 ranks as the worst ever, setting records for cost, rainfall, winds and more

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 810 words


The 2017 Atlantic hurricane season -- by some measures the worst on record --
officially comes to a merciful close Thursday after leaving a path of death and
destruction in the U.S. and the Caribbean.

Monster storms like Harvey, Irma and Maria killed dozens, perhaps hundreds of
people and caused more than $206 billion in economic impact -- a toll that will
largely fall on individuals and the government to pay, according to one estimate
from Enki Operations.

Those three names will certainly be retired by the National Hurricane Center due
to their ferocity and impact in Texas, Florida, Dominica, Puerto Rico and the
U.S. Virgin Islands.

If that $206 billion estimate holds, it would be the costliest hurricane season
in U.S. history, even topping the disastrous 2005 season, which featured
Katrina. Final cost estimates from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration -- the official tally from the federal government -- won't be
available until early in 2018.

Of the total, insurance covered roughly 30%, said disaster research scientist
Chuck Watson of Enki Operations. That  is well within insurance companies'
capacity to pay, meaning premiums are unlikely to skyrocket, he said.

The remaining cost will be paid by individuals, who may have little or no
insurance, and the government, in the form of loans or grants. Coupled with the
disastrous wildfires in California, federal disaster relief money will have to
come from somewhere and that could eventually mean changes in spending
priorities or higher taxes, Watson said.

The  losses:  $114 billion from Hurricane Harvey, $60 billion from Hurricane
Irma and $32 billion from Hurricane Maria, according to Enki Operations.

The season was a shock to the system after several relatively quiet years. The
prevailing weather pattern this year was quite a bit different from the past
decade during the USA's major landfalling hurricane drought, according to
Colorado State University meteorologist Phil Klotzbach. "The storms this year
were forced further west by a pretty strong subtropical high that prevented
recurvature" out to sea, he said.

September was the true behemoth, the  most powerful month ever recorded in the
Atlantic in  hurricane intensity.

In a statistic known as "Accumulated Cyclone Energy" (ACE), Hurricanes Irma,
Katia, Jose, Lee and Maria that month generated the largest amount of energy for
any month on record, according to Klotzbach.

ACE is calculated by adding each tropical storm or hurricane's wind speed
through its life cycle. Long-lived, intense hurricanes have high counts (Irma's
ACE measured 67.5), while short-lived, weak tropical storms have lower values
(Katia came in at 6.1), according to Weather.com.

Both Irma and Maria soared to Category 5 strength, the top of the Saffir-Simpson
scale of hurricane intensity. Irma's landfall on Barbuda and Maria's  on
Dominica makes 2017 only the second season on record to feature two hurricanes
that hit at Category 5 strength.

Other records from the season included the 60.58 inches of rain that fell near
Nederland, Texas, during Harvey. This broke the record for the greatest rainfall
amount ever recorded in the contiguous 48 states from a single storm, WeatherBug
reported.

Meanwhile, Irma was the strongest storm on record in the Atlantic (excluding the
Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico) with maximum winds of 185 mph. And Maria was the
worst natural disaster in Puerto Rico's history.

The 2017 Atlantic hurricane season was also the first season on record (since
records began in 1851) to have two Category 4 hurricanes make continental U.S.
landfall in the same year (Harvey and Irma), according to Klotzbach.

Though the official end of the season is Thursday, rare December tropical storms
and hurricanes do  occur. Since  1851, only six hurricanes have been recorded
after Nov. 30, NOAA said.

As for preseason forecasts, NOAA said 2017 would see five to nine Atlantic
hurricanes (10 formed) while Colorado State predicted six.

Meteorologist Steve Bowen of global reinsurance firm Aon Benfield said that
"regardless of where the final seasonal totals end up from a financial
standpoint, 2017 will long be remembered as one of the costliest and most
devastating hurricane seasons ever experienced in this country. The hope is that
the season will provide many learned lessons to improve awareness and risk
mitigation for when the next big storm arrives."

"If 2017 taught us anything, it's that the question is never 'if' the United
States will endure a significant hurricane event; it's 'when' and 'where' the
landfall will occur and 'how' we will be prepared," Bowen said.

Economic toll of hurricanes since 1871

2017   $206.6

1893   $185.6

2005   $151.4

1928   $97.7

1960   $91.8

2012   $77.9

1969   $75.1

1947   $70.4

1954   $64.2

1945   $63.0

NOTE Calculations were made as if the storm hit in 2017.

SOURCE Enki Holdings, LLC; JISC, Inc.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Henrietta Wildsmith/USA TODAY Network, GRAPHIC, JIM SERGENT/USA
TODAY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2017 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 253 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                           September 1, 2015 Tuesday

Hurricanes roam, roar in Pacific, Atlantic;
None of the storms forecast to hit USA

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: ; Pg. Z3

LENGTH: 348 words


canes A satellite (Kilo image , Ignacio shows and three Jimena hurri ) - Sunday
spinning . They in the all Paci reached fic Ocean Category on 4.

The tropics are heating up as the typical peak of hurricane season begins.

Three hurricanes roared Monday in the Pacific Ocean. A fourth hurricane churned
far out in the Atlantic. It's the most powerful hurricane season in the central
Pacific since 1994, according to Colorado State University hurricane expert Phil
Klotzbach.

Late August and early September are the typical peak of hurricane season.

None of these storms is forecast to strike the USA.

All three Pacific hurricanes reached Category 4 strength Sunday - something
that's never been seen before, the National Hurricane Center said.

Hurricane Ignacio weakened Monday to a Category 2 storm with winds of 105 mph.
It's likely to pass northeast of Hawaii through Wednesday, the National Weather
Service said. It was located Monday 460 miles east of Honolulu, moving to the
northwest at 10 mph.

Massive 12-20-feet waves could crash against the northeastern shores of the
islands, possibly damaging coastal homes and roads. Away from the shore, periods
of breezy, wet weather are likely, and heavy rain is possible as the storm
passes.

Forecasters said the storm should become a Category 1 hurricane by Tuesday and
weaken into a tropical storm by midweek as it encounters southwesterly winds.
Hurricane warnings are in effect for the waters around Hawaii, but none for land
areas.

The other two hurricanes in the Pacific, Kilo and Jimena, are still Category 4
storms with winds of at least 130 mph, but they are not forecast to hit land.

The hurricanes are fueled by El Niño, a periodic natural warming of water in the
central Pacific.

"An El Niño year usually means above-average activity in the Pacific, and this
year is no exception," hurricane center spokesman Dennis Feltgen said.

In the Atlantic, Hurricane Fred pounded the Cape Verde Islands with wind and
rain Monday, the hurricane center said. The Cape Verde islands are an
independent nation a few hundred miles west of the coast of Africa.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 254 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                             May 28, 2016 Saturday

Near-normal Atlantic hurricane season on tap

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: ; Pg. Z1

LENGTH: 250 words


FILE PHOTO BY NOAA VIA AP Hurricane Wilma in October 2005 was the last major
hurricane to hit the USA.

SUITLAND, MD. The federal government predicts a near-normal 2016 hurricane
season for the Atlantic Basin, with four to eight hurricanes expected to form.

Overall, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecasts 10 to 16
named tropical storms will develop in the region, which includes the Atlantic,
the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico, the agency said Friday. The season
officially begins Wednesday and runs through Nov. 30.

Of the hurricanes, one to four could be major, with wind speeds of 111 mph or
higher and rated as Category 3, 4 or 5 on the Saffir-Simpson Scale of Hurricane
Intensity. An average season typically spawns six hurricanes and peaks in August
and September. A tropical storm contains wind speeds of 39 mph or higher and
becomes a hurricane when winds reach 74 mph.

Tropical Storm Bonnie is likely to form off the Southeast coast Friday or
Saturday, the National Hurricane Center said. Alex, an unusual January hurricane
that spun out at sea, was the first storm of 2016.

AccuWeather and The Weather Channel, two of the largest private weather
forecasting companies, both predicted 14 named tropical storms will form, with
eight becoming hurricanes. Colorado State University meteorologists last month
predicted 12 tropical storms, five of them hurricanes.

After Bonnie, the next few named storms of the Atlantic hurricane season will be
Colin, Danielle, Earl and Fiona.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 255 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                    Jacksonville Journal-Courier (Illinois)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 22, 2012 Saturday

Everyday People: His job? Winging it into eye of storm

BYLINE: Greg Olson, Jacksonville Journal-Courier, Ill.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 500 words


Sept. 22--A retired Navy pilot can vividly recall Hurricane Camille, one of the
strongest hurricanes to hit the United States in the 20th century.

"I flew into Hurricane Camille in 1969," said Al Marsh of South Jacksonville, a
Navy hurricane hunter in the 1960s. "It was the granddaddy of all hurricanes."

As a hurricane hunter, Marsh and members of his squadron flew into the ocean
storms to determine where the center of pressure, temperature and wind were in
the hurricane's eye.

"As you're going into the hurricane, the National Hurricane Center wants to know
where the 50-knot and maximum winds were encountered and what the maximum winds
were," Marsh said. "The penetrations of the hurricane were scheduled every six
hours by the Hurricane Center."

Hurricane Camille was the second of three catastrophic Category 5 hurricanes to
make landfall in the United States during the 20th century, the others being
1935's Labor Day hurricane and 1992's Hurricane Andrew.

"During Camille, half of my crew became sick and the other half was frightened,"
Marsh said. "I flew the last hurricane penetration flight before Camille came
ashore near Biloxi, Miss."

Marsh and his crew, which numbered between 15 and 19 men, flew in a four-engine
Lockheed Constellation.

"As a hurricane pilot, you must memorize your instruments as they will be
vibrating one way and you will be moving the other way in the turbulence," he
said.

The veteran pilot said Navy hurricane hunter planes flew into the hurricanes at
500 to 1,000 feet so pilots could see the water and maintain constant bearings
into the hurricane's eye.

Camille is known as one of the most powerful hurricanes to hit the United
States. The National Weather Service considers it the only Atlantic hurricane to
have made landfall with sustained winds around 200 mph, though top speeds are
unclear because the storm destroyed the equipment used to measure wind speed in
the area.

Marsh, a 29-year Navy veteran, was a hurricane hunter for six years in the
1960s, piloting planes into more than 100 tropical storms and hurricanes in the
Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea.

"Due to training, you become confident to make hurricane eye reconnaissance,"
Marsh said. "I had complete trust in members of my crew and their capabilities.
We had confidence in one another."

Marsh retired in 1980 with the rank of commander. During his service, he was
awarded the Air Medal for flying weather reconnaissance and wrote the Navy's
first aircraft procedural manual for hurricane penetration.

Today, 83-year-old Marsh flies small planes from the Jacksonville Municipal
Airport and the McAllen, Texas, airport, near where he and his wife, Beverly,
spend their winters.

"They are leisure flights for me today," said Marsh, who has logged more than
7,000 hours piloting military and civilian planes.

___ (c)2012 the Jacksonville Journal-Courier (Jacksonville, Ill.) Visit the
Jacksonville Journal-Courier (Jacksonville, Ill.) at www.myjournalcourier.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20120922-JJ-Everyday-People-His-job-Winging-it-into-eye-of-storm-0922-20120922

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JJ


                  Copyright 2012 Jacksonville Journal-Courier


                          FOCUS - 256 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             July 31, 2014 Thursday

Storm season, Part Two

BYLINE: ZAC ANDERSON

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 633 words


WEATHER: New activity is reminder that busiest months are at hand

Storm activity in the tropics is stirring back to life this week, a reminder
that peak hurricane season is approaching.

Forecasters say a low pressure system in the southern Atlantic has a good chance
of becoming the second named storm of the season. The system could reach Puerto
Rico by Saturday as Tropical Storm Bertha, but should steer clear of Florida. It
is not expected to intensify beyond a tropical storm or weak hurricane.

A quiet stretch of tropical cyclone activity through most of July is not
unusual. Peak hurricane season is mid-August through mid-October.

An average hurricane season produces 12 named storms, including six hurricanes
and three major hurricanes. Roughly 80 percent of that activity typically occurs
in the three-month stretch from August through October, when forecasters turn
their attention to tropical disturbances coming off the coast of Africa, rather
than the Gulf of Mexico or the Caribbean.

The average date for the second named storm of the year to form is Aug. 1,
making this season on pace with historical norms.

Forecasters are predicting an average- to below-average hurricane season. The
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecast eight to 13 named
storms, with three to six reaching hurricane strength and one to two becoming
major hurricanes.

Climate patterns continue to favor fewer storms this year than some of the busy
hurricane seasons of the last decade, said Jeff Masters, a meteorologist with
Weather Underground.

While a strong El Nino climate system -- which brings winds east from the
Pacific into the Atlantic, knocking down hurricane development -- seems less
likely to form as predicted, Masters said other factors are limiting tropical
cyclone activity.

The high pressure typically found over the northern Atlantic is larger and more
intense than usual. That is pushing dry, sinking air into the southern Atlantic
where hurricanes form.

Tropical systems feed on moisture, so dry air can severely limit storm
development. And high pressure suppresses thunderstorm activity.

"If you have things pushing down on you from above, you're going to have a
harder time making updrafts in your thunderstorms," Masters said.

AccuWeather meteorologist Dan Kottlowski said the climate patterns in the
Atlantic mirror those in place last year, which saw the fewest number of
hurricanes in three decades.

"The surface high that's in place over the Atlantic looks similar to what we had
last year, and that was one of the reasons we didn't have a very active season,"
Kottlowski said.

Hurricane forecasters were way off in their predictions last year. Many called
for an above-average season. Those predictions have been adjusted downward this
year.

"I think we'll see below-average activity for the number of hurricanes and
intense hurricanes just because there's so much dry, sinking air," Masters said.

The first tropical system of the season, Hurricane Arthur, made landfall along
North Carolina's outer banks July 3 as a Category 2 storm with 100 mph winds.
Arthur continued north, bringing strong winds and rain to the coast of New
England. The hurricane was a nuisance during the busy holiday weekend, but
little damage was reported.

The next system could be different, though. Kottlowski stressed that even slow
hurricane seasons can produce monster storms.

"No matter how the climatic pattern is setting up, there are always exceptions
to the rule," he said.

The low-pressure system in the Atlantic was 1,000 miles east of the southern
Winward islands Wednesday afternoon. Forecasters with the National Hurricane
Center gave the system a 50 percent chance of developing in a tropical
depression within 48 hours.

MAP: Factors in peak season that influence hurricane develop- ment. 4A

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 257 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             April 15, 2016 Friday

The first forecast: 12 named storms | 'Average' season includes 50 percent
chance of a hurricane hitting the US coast

BYLINE: Harold Bubil

SECTION: A; FL News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 683 words


HURRICANE SEASON

Average can still be dangerous.

That's the message from Phil Klotzbach as he released his first predictions for
the 2016 hurricane season.

Klotzbach, of Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project, expects
the storm season to be "average," he told an audience at the National Tropical
Weather Conference in South Padre Island, Texas, Thursday morning.

"As is the case with all hurricane seasons," said Klotzbach, "coastal residents
are reminded that it only takes one hurricane making landfall to make it an
active season for them. They should prepare the same for every season,
regardless of how much activity is predicted."

With one storm in the books already - the oddly timed

Hurricane Alex in January - Klotzbach, now lead author of the widely followed
reports pioneered by the semi-retired Dr. William Gray, expects 12 more storms
this year. Five of them will be hurricanes, he predicts, two of them "major"
storms of Category 3, 4 or 5 intensity on the Saffir-Simpson Scale.

Warning of the uncertainties surrounding a forecast made in April, Klotzbach
said the chances of a major hurricane hitting the U.S. coast are 50 percent. The
long-term average is 52 percent.

Last season was unusually quiet, at least along the U.S. coastline, because the
exceptionally strong El Nino - the pool of warm water in the eastern Pacific
Ocean - created wind shear in the Atlantic Ocean that chopped the tops off of
hurricanes before they could progress across the ocean.

Klotzbach said shear is created by lower level winds from east and upper levels
from west that "disrupt the vortex" of a hurricane. It is "unable to get the
pressure drop that you need for these storms to grow."

This year could be different. The Climate Prediction Center says there is a 65
percent chance of La Nina conditions in the eastern Pacific at the peak of
hurricane season in late summer, and that could mean less wind shear and a less
stable atmosphere in the tropical Atlantic, and more storms this year than last.
La Nina is the cooling of water in the equatorial Pacific, a condition that
tends to reduce wind shear where hurricanes form in the Atlantic, making it more
favorable for storms.

But climate science is full of checks, balances and uncertainties. La Nina, if
it does form, could be offset by "quite cold" water in the north Atlantic,
Klotzbach wrote in his report. The cold Atlantic water conditions would "tend to
force atmospheric conditions that are less conducive for Atlantic hurricane
formation and intensification. There is higher pressure in the upper
atmosphere."

So, La Nina - good for hurricanes. A cold North Atlantic Ocean - bad for
hurricanes. Result: An average year, perhaps.

"Everyone should realize that it is impossible to precisely predict this
season's hurricane activity in early April," Klotzbach said, noting the public's
curiosity for such predictions. "A lot can change with the atmosphere and the
ocean.

"Our forecasts are based on the premise that those global oceanic and
atmospheric conditions which preceded comparatively active or inactive hurricane
seasons in the past provide meaningful information about similar trends in
future seasons.

"Statistical schemes ... will fail in some years. But the probability of
landfall for any one location along the coast is very low."

No hurricane has struck Florida since 2005, which was the second of consecutive
bad seasons that battered the state, extending an unprecedented streak to 10
years without a hurricane making landfall in Florida.

Colorado State, and other weather prediction services, will issue updated
predictions in coming months.

Hurricane season officially starts June 1 and runs through Nov. 30, with August,
September and October being the peak months for activity. Look for the
Herald-Tribune's 2016 Hurricane Guide on May 29.

Another forecaster, the private service AccuWeather, has predicted a slightly
above-average season, with 14 named storms. But the service noted that the
Atlantic cold water could be a "wild card" affecting the number.

Federal forecasters will issue their prediction next month.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Hurricane Alex seen from the International Space Station in January.
NASA PHOTO VIA AP Phil Klotzbach

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 258 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                              April 7, 2017 Friday

Fewer hurricanes forecast for 2017 | Scientists predict 11 named storms, two of
them major | Scientists predict 11 named storms, two of them major

BYLINE: Elizabeth Djinis

SECTION: A; FL News; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 675 words


HURRICANE SEASON

Here's some welcome news for most Floridians: the upcoming hurricane season
could be slightly below average.

In fact, we could see as few as four hurricanes.

An early forecast from scientists at Colorado State University's Tropical
Meteorology Project concluded that a weak or moderate El Niño is likely by the
height of the Atlantic hurricane season, along with cooling temperatures in the
tropical Atlantic and the North Atlantic Ocean. An El Niño weather pattern
generally results in fewer hurricanes in the Atlantic basin, as it increases
wind shear - strong winds that can break up hurricanes as they're forming.

These factors prompted scientists to forecast 11 named storms - four of them
intensifying into hurricanes, including two that are major hurricanes with winds
topping 110 mph.

"If you have El Niño, it kind of drives the bus," said Philip Klotzbach, the
co-author on the report. "If you don't have El Niño, then you have to start
looking at other factors."

Still, Klotzbach warned that an El Niño pattern is not a guarantee that
Floridians will emerge from the hurricane season unscathed. In fact, Category 5
Hurricane Andrew struck in an El Niño year, which Klotzbach said partially
occurred because the storm began in the deep tropics.

"You can still certainly have a major hurricane in the deep tropics in an El
Niño year, but odds are reduced," Klotzbach said.

On average, there are 12 named storms, defined as systems with sustained winds
between 39 mph and 73 mph, with 6.5 of them becoming hurricanes, two of them
major, meaning a Category 3, 4 or 5 storm.

There is a 42 percent probability of at least one major hurricane making
landfall on the U.S. coast this season, compared with the average of 52 percent.
But there is a 24 percent chance of a major hurricane hitting the Gulf Coast, 6
percent more than the last century's average of 30 percent, according to the
report.

Although experts always caution that early forecasts can turn out to be
inaccurate, the CSU report, co-penned this year by Klotzbach and Michael Bell in
the school's Atmospheric Science department, has a fairly high
correct-early-prediction rate of 80 percent: 28 out of 35 of the anticipated
below or above average seasons have developed as predicted, the report said.

The private weather forecasting service AccuWeather released its early forecast
Wednesday and also predicted a below average season with slightly differing
numbers, anticipating 10 named storms, five hurricanes and three major
hurricanes. AccuWeather factored the El Niño into those reports, combined with
warmer temperatures in the Pacific Ocean.

Last year's hurricane season ended the record 10-year period without a hurricane
making landfall in Florida, with Hurricane Hermine striking north Florida in
early September. Hurricane Matthew didn't land in Florida, but caused
significant damage as it skirted the state's east coast in early October. In
total, 2016 saw 15 named storms, including seven hurricanes, three of them
major.

Matthew and Hermine also caused considerable economic damage for the state at
around $1.6 billion, reported in December 2016. That amount was the highest for
natural disasters since the 2004 and 2005 hurricane seasons, according to
Division of Energy Management Director Bryan Koon.

Last year was fairly consistent, if a little bit higher, with Klotzbach's
predictions for the season. The early 2016 forecast projected 12 named storms,
five of which would be hurricanes. Of those five, two would be major storms. He
also noted a 50 percent chance of a major hurricane hitting the U.S. coast.

Hurricane season begins June 1 and continues through Nov. 30. The months of
August, September and October generally see the highest hurricane activity.

Despite the below-average prediction, experts urged residents to remember that
even a single hurricane can have a large impact.

"It takes only one storm near you to make this an active season," Bell said in a
press release.

Federal forecasters will issue their prediction for the coming season next
month.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A satellite image released by the NOAA shows Hurricane Rita in 2005.
[NOAA/The New York Times]

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 259 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 Travel Weekly

                               September 17, 2004

Ready for any weather?;
Are you a fair weather agent or can you ride out a tough storm, asks Lisa James

BYLINE: dennis

SECTION: Workplace; Pg. 58

LENGTH: 1028 words


Over the past few weeks, thousands of holidaymakers have been stranded, or had
their holidays postponed because of severe storms in the Caribbean and Florida.

It's been a nightmare for travel agents and operators, but surely everyone knows
this time of the year is the hurricane season... don't they?

Knowing the best time to suggest when your client should travel to a particular
destination is crucial.

How much do you know about natural phenomena such as hurricanes, earthquakes,
monsoons and landslides - and how can you help your clients to avoid them? Try
our quiz to find out.

1. Okay, let's start with an easy one. What are the names of the two most recent
hurricanes to wreak havoc on the Caribbean?

a) Hurricane Frances and Hurricane Ivan

b) Hurricane George and Hurricane Frances

c) Hurricane Charlie and Hurricane Mitch

2. Jamaica, the Cayman Islands and the Florida Keys all got a battering in the
latest hurricane, but which tiny Caribbean island was the first to be hit?

a) St John

b) Grenada

c) Martinique

3. What is the name of the hurricane following Ivan? Why is it so-called?

4. Generally, when is the hurricane season in the Caribbean?

a) September

b) June-November

c) August-October

5. There are many tropical storms in the Caribbean, but only a few are ferocious
enough to be termed hurricanes. What makes a normal tropical storm a hurricane?

6. Hurricane Ivan has caused devastation, but which is the worst hurricane on
record?

a) Hurricane Mitch

b) Hurricane Isabel

c) Hurricane Gilbert

7. If your client wanted to go to the Caribbean during hurricane season but
wanted to avoid being caught up in a tropical storm, where would you suggest
they went?

a) British Virgin Islands

b) Grand Cayman

c) Aruba

8. People talk about the hurricane's 'eye of the storm'. It's the bit in the
middle, and generally it isÉ

a) the most ferocious bit

b) the calmest bit

c) the wettest bit

9. Let's move on from the Caribbean and look at what can happen in some other
regions. Experts believe the world's largest volcano, the 13,677ft high Mauna
Loa, could erupt soon. In which part of the world is Mauna Loa?

a) Equador

b) Mexico

c) Hawaii

10. Which of these volcanoes is NOT in Italy?

a) Mount of Olives

b) Mount Vesuvius

c) Mount Etna

11. The former ancient city of Pompeii is now a major archaeological attraction
after it was totally engulfed in volcanic lava in 79AD. The site makes a popular
excursion on cruise ship itineraries that call at which port?

a) Barcelona

b) Naples

c) Bodrum

12. Which is the odd one out and why?

a) tornado

b) hurricane

c) cyclone

d) typhoon

13. A tsunami is what?

a) a tidal wave

b) an earthquake

c) an avalanche

14. Australian bushfires make the headlines each year, killing wildlife and
destroying thousands of hectares of land. During which months of the year does
the Sydney and New South Wales region generally experience bushfires?

a) June-August

b) September-November

c) December-February

d) March-May

15. What's the name of the upmarket, tented accommodation at Uluru (Ayers Rock)
that has recently reopened after being totally destroyed in a bush fire last
year?

a) Fahrenheit 911

b) Longitude 131

c) Ayers Rock Resort

16. As part of the rebuild, the owners spent £125,000 on what system to help
prevent a similar thing happen again?

a) a new sprinkler system

b) firedoors

c) its own fire station

17. When is India's monsoon season?

a) July-September

b) October-December

c) January-March

d) April-June

18. Cyclones mainly affect which coast of India, causing high winds, rain and
possible tidal waves?

a) north

b) south

c) east

d) west

19. Natural disasters don't just happen overseas. In August, flash floods
devastated an English coastal village, which is a big tourist attraction. What
is its name?

a) Horncastle

b) Boscastle

c) Elephant and Castle

20. In which county is the village?

a) Cornwall

b) Somerset

c) Devon

1. a) Hurricane Frances and Hurricane Ivan.

2. b) Grenada.

3. Hurricane Jeanne. Each year, hurricanes are named in alphabetical order,
starting with A at the beginning of the year. In between Frances and Ivan this
month, Gaston and Hermine have swept though with no publicity because they were
much smaller.

4. b) The hurricane season officially runs from June 1-November 30, although
September is peak time.

5. A tropical storm has to reach wind speeds of 73mph or force 12 on the
Beaufort Scale to be classed a hurricane.

6. Hurricane Gilbert in 1988, which devastated Jamaica, Cayman, Martinique and
parts of Mexico, killing 318 people.

7. c) Aruba. This island is outside the hurricane belt.

8. b) the calmest bit.

9. c) Hawaii.

10. a) Mount of Olives.

11. b) Naples.

12. a) tornado. Cyclone and typhoon are the names given to hurricanes in
different parts of the world.

13. a) tidal wave.

14. c) December-February.

15. b) Longitude 131.

16. a) a new sprinkler system.

17. a) July-September.

18. c) Cyclones affect mainly the east coast of India.

19. b) Boscastle.

20. c) Cornwall.

Training

Tourism New Zealand is hosting four days' of agent training next month. Kiwi
Link 2004 will be in Manchester from October 4-5 and in London on October 7-8.
For details call 0870 752 3999.

The Cyprus Tourism Organisation will be on the road this month with hotels and
airlines that serve the destination to give agents a chance to improve their
knowledge of the island. The event is in Manchester on September 27, Birmingham
on September 28, St Albans on September 29 and Gatwick on September 30. Call
020-7596 8800.

The Truly Independent Professional Travel Organisation starts a 19-date autumn
roadshow at York Racecourse on September 21. At each event, agents will be able
to meet TIPTO member companies before dinner and entertainment. To book call
01484 345014.

Maison de la France is teaming up with industry partners for six roadshows next
month. The first are in London, Birmingham and Manchester from October 5-7. To
attend, contact 0870 7238 238.

Seminars

Toward Europe is hosting a tour operator discussion on the future of the
industry at the Grange Strathmore Hotel in London on September 21, to be
followed by a gala dinner. Attendance is free. Contact 020-7691 3938.

Noticeboard appears every fortnight. Please fax details of educationals,
seminars and concessions to Jane Archer on 01483 281339.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright  2004 Reed Business Information Ltd.
                              All rights reserved


                          FOCUS - 260 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday
                                  Main Edition

2006 HURRICANE FORECAST;
STORM WARNING;
All signs point to a season distressingly like last year's as part of a savage
cycle that may intensify

BYLINE: MIKE TONER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1027 words


The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on Monday predicted another
hyperactive hurricane season this year --- the 10th in the past 12 years --- and
warned that the trend of more powerful storms could persist for the next decade
or longer.

Forecasters said warmer ocean temperatures and favorable wind patterns in the
tropics had set the stage for a "very active" hurricane season beginning June 1
and lasting until Nov. 30.

After a record 2005 capped by Hurricane Katrina, the agency this year expects 13
to 16 named storms, eight to 10 hurricanes, and up to six intense hurricanes
during that period --- activity that is about 50 percent greater than normal.

The 2006 outlook is a bit milder than what forecasters predicted last year for
the 2005 season, only to discover that they had underestimated nature's fury.
There were a record 28 tropical cyclones in the the Atlantic basin including
Katrina, which devastated coastal areas of Louisiana and Mississippi that are
still struggling to rebuild.

Two independent sources are predicting even higher levels of hurricane activity
than NOAA anticipates. Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project,
which has issued outlooks for the last 20 years, is calling for 17 named storms
and nine hurricanes. Weather 2000, a New York-based private forecasting service
for industry, has predicted 15-22 named storms and up to 13 hurricanes.

Over the past 40 years, the Atlantic basin has averaged six hurricanes per
season. While the seasonal outlooks don't attempt to say where the storms might
make landfall, NOAA scientists say that statistically, there is a "real
possibility" that two to four storms will strike the U.S. coast.

National Hurricane Center Director Max Mayfield noted that "all it takes is one
hurricane over your home to make it a bad year."

$200 billion year

Last year proved to be not only a bad year, but a long one.

The 28 tropical cyclones included Wilma, the strongest hurricane ever recorded,
and late-blooming Tropical Storm Zeta, which didn't expire until January 2006.

The four major hurricanes that pounded the U.S. coast --- Dennis, Katrina, Rita
and Wilma --- did an estimated $200 billion in damage and caused more than 1,500
deaths. Many areas of the Gulf states, including the nation's offshore oil and
gas industry, are still recovering.

"The infrastructure in Mississippi and Louisiana is very weak," said David
Paulison, acting director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, who
acknowledged that the government's disaster recovery efforts "did not work very
well last year."

Paulison said the agency was better prepared now to deal with the logistical
problems FEMA faced last year, but he warned that with tens of thousands of
hurricane victims now living in temporary housing along the coast, even a
moderate hurricane could trigger new evacuations.

Emergency management officials from Florida, Louisiana and Mississippi said
increased vulnerability meant residents must assume responsibility for their
safety, from stocking food and other supplies to having a family evacuation
plan.

Despite back-to-back seasons of destructive storms, however, an opinion survey
for the hurricane center last week shows that 56 percent of the people living
along the Gulf and Atlantic coasts do not feel vulnerable and 83 percent have
not strengthened their homes.

"Katrina was a national wakeup call, but it seems too many residents are still
asleep," said Mayfield.

NOAA says it has been busy preparing for a busy season. With its budget
increased 50 percent to $300 million, the agency has added four new forecasters
at the National Hurricane Center, a new hurricane hunter plane, a new operations
center for satellite feeds, and links to European meteorological satellites to
monitor disturbances off the coast of Africa.

Conditions already ripe

Gerry Bell of NOAA's Climate Prediction Center said conditions in the Atlantic
basin were already setting the stage for a busy hurricane season.

Bell said ocean temperatures, which provide much of the energy for hurricane
growth, were already well above normal. Unusually high surface temperatures in
the Gulf of Mexico in August and September were blamed for rapid intensification
of Katrina and Wilma as they approached land.

Bell said it also appeared that prevailing winds in the Atlantic basin were
favorable for low wind sheer, a pattern that enables tropical storms, once
formed, to intensify.

NOAA officials said they believed the current flurry of hurricane activity,
which began in 1995, was the result of a cycle that comes in 20- to 30-year
intervals.

"We're only 11 years into that cycle, so we may see this kind of activity for
the next 10 or 20 years," NOAA Administrator Conrad Lautenbacher said. He said
the agency was still studying the possibility that the trend might be linked to
global warming.

Other researchers used the 2006 outlook to reiterate research that they say
shows a clear link to global warming.

Georgia Tech climate researcher Peter Webster, who touched off a firestorm last
year when he blamed climate change for a worldwide increase in hurricane
intensity, said Monday it appeared that the trend toward warmer ocean
temperatures may also be lengthening the hurricane season.

Although the official hurricane season lasts six months, most storms occur in
September and October. But Webster says his unpublished research shows that
early and late-season storms have been more common in recent decades. Last year,
in fact, there were four named storms --- Gamma, Delta, Epilson and Zeta ---
that occurred in November, December and January

"Since 1915, the number of days in the hurricane season has increased by about
5.5 days per decade," Webster said. "That means the season is effectively 50 to
60 days longer."

Kerry Emanuel, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology climate researcher, says
variations in short-term weather patterns will still help produce "quiet years"
from time to time.

But he says there is a correlation between the decades-long increase in sea
surface temperatures and the overall level of hurricane activity, one that
computer models suggest will grow stronger as the Earth warms.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Aerial view of a hurricane
Photo: MARK ELIAS / Bloomberg NewsA worker at Florida Power and Light's main
supply distribution center in West Palm Beach on Monday positions pallets of
electrical transformers the utility has stockpiled to replace units that fail
during emergencies such as hurricanes.
Photo: J. PAT CARTER / Associated PressNational Hurricane Center Director Max
Mayfield lamented the lack of public preparedness revealed in a survey last
week. "Katrina was a national wakeup call, but it seems too many residents are
still asleep," he said Monday.
Graphic: HURRICANE PREDICTIONS AND OCCURRENCES BY
YEAR...................2002.....2003....2004....2005Named
stormsPredicted..........7-10....11-15....12-15...18-21Actual.............12....
..14.......15......28HurricanesPredicted..........4-6.....6-9......6-8.....9-11A
ctual.............4.......7........9.......15Major
hurricanesPredicted..........1-3.....2-4......2-4.....5-7Actual.............2...
....3........6.......7
Graphic: JEROME THOMPSON / StaffFAVORABLE CONDITIONS High water temperatures
provide much of the energy for hurricane growth, and in some areas they are
already above normal. Also, Atlantic basin wind conditions aloft and at the
water's surface are favorable for low wind sheer, which offers better conditions
for hurricanes to form. Degrees in Fahrenheit above average, April 2006Map shows
where hurricane conditions form and regions where temperatures are .45, .9, 1.35
and 1.8 degrees above average.Source: NOAA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 261 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                              May 31, 2009 Sunday
                                  Main Edition

Hurricane season starts

BYLINE: Staff and news services

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 613 words


Five years have passed since the beginning of the record-setting hurricane
season of 2005, which climaxed with the devastation of New Orleans by Hurricane
Katrina. No storm season since --- not even last year's, with Hurricane Ike's
catastrophic strike on the Texas coast --- has compared.

It began in early June with the landfall of relatively mild Hurricane Arlene on
the Florida Panhandle, and continued into January with Hurricane Zeta, the
second-latest-forming storm on record. The 28 named storms --- the most for any
season --- included seven major hurricanes, among them Hurricane Wilma, the most
powerful tropical cyclone ever measured.

The season's intensity was unforeseen by forecasters and defied rules about
numbers, strength, location and conditions for storms. It casts a pall of
uncertainty as yet another June 1-Nov. 30 hurricane season begins Monday.

The predictions

Getting a jump on the official season, a tropical depression formed off the East
Coast last week. The early storm notwithstanding, forecasters for the National
Weather Service are calling for an average hurricane season, with nine to 14
named storms, including tropical storms, and up to three major hurricanes, any
of which may or may not hit the U.S. coast. The other major American hurricane
forecasting center, at Colorado State University, is calling for 12 named storms
and two major hurricanes. The agencies' predictions have proven accurate when
averaged over periods of several years. But there's always the chance of a
mold-breaking season like 2005's --- and 2006's, which was as unexpectedly mild
as the previous year's was violent.

Get ready

It's not time to strip the supermarket shelves of milk and bread. In fact, most
hurricane seasons don't really get cranked up until at least August. But some
simple preparations can save time later and provide some peace of mind. Consider
assembling a survival kit containing items like those listed at www.ready.gov, a
new federal hurricane preparation Web site. Examine your home and yard for
potential hazards, like clogged storm drains and large tree limbs overhanging
the roof or powerlines.

Think about where you would take shelter if a storm were to leave your home
temporarily uninhabitable. And as the hurricane season progresses, pay attention
to weather warnings so you are ready to take action when --- and if --- a threat
comes.

Why we should care

It's almost 300 miles from Atlanta to the Florida Panhandle, a historic magnet
for hurricanes. That may seem like a long way, but it's no more than the width
of an average hurricane. Longtime metro Atlantans recall the harrowing early
morning hours of Oct. 5, 1995, when fast-moving Hurricane Opal struck the city
with unexpected fury after coming ashore at Pensacola, Fla. Marietta was
drenched with nearly 9 inches of rain, and winds clocked at close to 80 mph
downed thousands of trees and utility lines, leaving some residents without
power for weeks afterward. Schools were closed, roads were swept away by floods
and there was even a report of a giraffe being blown over at Zoo Atlanta.

A hurricane's ragged remnant can also wreak havoc. Metro Atlanta took a one-two
punch in September 2004 from the aftermath of Hurricane Frances, followed a few
weeks later by the storm system that survived Hurricane Ivan's landfall. Packing
extraordinary amounts of rain, Ivan's ghost howled through the North Georgia
mountains, then settled over a lonely river valley in North Carolina, where it
spawned a flood that swept away five people in the hamlet of Peeks Creek ---
among them relatives of a local family who had fled there from Florida for
safety.

Sunday A-Section Editor Bill Steiden

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2009 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 262 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                 The Daily News (Jacksonville, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 4, 2009 Tuesday

The worst is yet to come

BYLINE: Suzanne Ulbrich, The Daily News, Jacksonville, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 870 words


Aug. 4--Though the Atlantic has been without a named storm to date, North
Carolina's hurricane history indicates it is way too soon in the season to
breathe a sigh of relief, said Sarah Jamison.

Jamison, a duty forecaster with the National Weather Service in Newport, said
the forecast climate prediction center predicts a 50-percent chance of it being
a "normal hurricane season." She feels North Carolina's hurricane history, with
August, September and October being peak hurricane months, is a better indicator
and folks should not become complacent.

"Hurricane Alex in 2004 on Aug. 3 was a very active year and it didn't get
started until August," she said.

From 1851 to 2005, North Carolina has been hit by 47 hurricanes, 12 of which
were major.

"Though we see more hurricanes in September than August, if we get a storm in
August, it tends to be on the stronger side," Jamison said. "September is our
peak month in North Carolina, but August and October have a lot of activity as
well -- and chances of having a hurricane in August is twice as much as compared
to October."

Even with El Nino and the fact that the Atlantic basin has not gone this far
into hurricane season without a named storm in five years, Jamison said
Hurricanes Bonnie and Bob should be reminders to North Carolinians to not be
dismissive of what, at first, may appear to be a mild season.

"In spite of El Nino, Bonnie, Aug. 12 1998, and Bob, Aug. 19, 1991, should be
reminders that we can still get strong hurricanes in North Carolina," she said.
"Both occurred in years with El Nino."

She said El Nino enhances wind shear over the tropical Atlantic.

"Wind shear and hurricanes don't like each other," she said.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has been monitoring wind
shear over the tropical Atlantic since hurricane season started June 1.

"There has been a fair amount of wind shear -- it is a huge player when we talk
about hurricanes," she said. "With water temperature, sea surface temperature
running a bit above normal -- sometimes the results of El Nino, in general, it
does tend to suppress hurricane activity but it doesn't completely suppress it.
I'm happy to see El Nino, but I still have my hurricane preparedness kit in my
car, I don't take anything for granted."

The Onslow County Chapter of the American Red Cross began in earnest in May
putting together nurse kits, shelter kits and disaster kits, said Joy Branham,
its director.

"That way by August -- the time we know we really, really need to be prepared
because it's the beginning of our most active hurricane season -- we're more
than ready," she said.

Branham emphasized the importance of having disaster plans, not only for
hurricane season, but year-round.

"To me it's about so much more than hurricane preparation -- to me it's about
disaster preparation," she said. "It's not just the threat of hurricanes that
should prompt people to get prepared -- there is always a threat of any one of
various types of disasters can occur, so it's better to err on the side of being
prepared."

Branham advises reviewing or putting together a disaster plan and kit that
includes a contact list and evacuation plan. Have adequate cash on hand, a full
tank of gas and a disaster kit for at-home use as well as away-from-home use.

"Even at my house we have disaster kits and backpacks for me and my dog -- pets
are a valuable part of the family so you have to prepare for them too," she
said. "I have a go kit which is a kit in the closet I can pick up and go with
minutes warning."

"Remember, she added, "all it takes is one bad storm."

Contact Suzanne Ulrich at 910-219-8454 or sulbrich@freedomenc.com

Be prepared

During hurricane season, which runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, emergency officials
recommend each household have a family emergency plan in place and supply kit
assembled.

Other suggestions to keep your family as safe as possible include:

* Know your evacuation routes and locate your local emergency shelters.

* Don't get caught by surprise. There is not enough time to think of everything
you need to do when a hurricane gets close.

* As a hurricane moves closer to your area, begin monitoring the weather reports
every hour.

* Listen for hurricane watches and warnings.

* Put fuel in all vehicles and withdraw some cash from the bank. Gas stations
and banks may be closed after a hurricane.

* If authorities ask you to evacuate, do so promptly.

* If you evacuate, be alert to flooded or washed-out roads. Just a few inches of
water can float a car.

* Keep a photo ID that shows your home address. This may become important when
asking a police officer or National Guard member for permission to reenter your
neighborhood.

For more information or ideas on how to create a disaster kit, visit
www.redcross.org and ReadyNC.org.

Source: ReadyNC.gov

To see more of The Daily News, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.jacksonvilledailynews.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Daily News,
Jacksonville, N.C. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090804-JN-The-worst-is-yet-to-come-0804

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JN


                         Copyright 2009 The Daily News


                          FOCUS - 263 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 4, 2016 Tuesday

Caribbean Hurricane Matthew - Fact Sheet #1

LENGTH: 1986  words

DATELINE: New York



  Washington, DC: USAID has issued the followingA news release



 Highlights



     Hurricane Matthew is the strongest hurricane to impact the Caribbean since
2007.



     Host country governments, UN agencies, and NGOs begin preparedness
activities in advance of the storm.



     USAID/OFDA activates regional DART with staff in The Bahamas, Haiti, and
Jamaica.]\
 Key Developments



 Map: Projected Impacts of Hurricane Matthew - October 4, 2016



 Map: Projected Impacts of Hurricane Matthew - October 4, 2016 file icon(pdf -
436k)



 Numbers At A Glance

 145 mph

 Sustained Wind Speed of Hurricane Matthew

 10-15 feet

 Potential Storm Surge in The Bahamas

 7-10 feet

 Potential Storm Surge Haiti's Southern Coast

 15-25 inches

 Anticipated Rainfall in Southern Haiti and Southwestern Dominican Republic,
with Isolated Higher Amounts

 Humanitarian Funding



 For the Hurricane Matthew Response

 in FY 2017

 USAID/OFDA     $500,000

 USAID/FFP     $1,000,000

 TOTAL     $1,500,000



 Caribbean Hurricane Matthew Fact Sheet #1 - October 4, 2016



 Caribbean Hurricane Matthew Fact Sheet #1 - October 4, 2016 file icon(pdf -
204k)



 Hurricane Matthew--a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Scale, with
sustained winds of 145 miles per hour as of 2:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time
(EDT) on October 4--made landfall over Haiti on October 4. The National
Hurricane Center (NHC) anticipates that Hurricane Matthew will remain a powerful
hurricane through at least October 5, with hurricane conditions likely to
continue impacting Haiti, as well as parts of Cuba and most islands of The
Bahamas, in the coming days. The storm will bring heavy rainfall, strong wind,
and dangerous storm surge to affected countries, possibly resulting in
life-threatening flash floods and mudslides, according to the NHC.
 USAID pre-positioned staff and relief commodities and began coordinating with
humanitarian stakeholders on potential needs and response efforts in advance of
the storm's impacts. The U.S. Government (USG) has declared disasters due to the
effects of Hurricane Matthew in The Bahamas, Haiti, and Jamaica. USAID/OFDA and
USAID/FFP are providing assistance to non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
UN partners to respond to hurricane-related humanitarian needs, with an initial
$1.5 million in FY 2017 funding committed. USAID/OFDA also plans to airlift
relief commodities from its warehouses as soon as weather conditions permit.



 On October 3, USAID activated a regional Disaster Assistance Response Team
(DART) with staff based in The Bahamas, Haiti, and Jamaica; a Washington,
D.C.-based Response Management Team (RMT) is supporting DART operations.

 HAITI



 Hurricane Matthew made landfall near Les Anglais, Haiti, around 6:00 a.m. local
time--or 7:00 a.m. EDT--on October 4, according to the NHC. Early reports
indicate Hurricane Matthew is resulting in significant damage, including heavy
wind damage and extensive flooding, in southern Haiti. The casualty figure is
not yet known. Media sources note that the hurricane has destroyed houses and
agricultural land and caused livestock deaths. While the storm moves northward,
the NHC reported that hurricane conditions continued to affect parts of Haiti at
2:00 p.m. EDT.



 The Government of Haiti (GoH) Directorate of Civil Protection (DPC) activated
the national emergency operations center (EOC) on October 1, according to the
Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA). The GoH had established
1,300 emergency shelters, capable of accommodating 340,000 people, and had begun
evacuations of high-risk areas as of October 2, media report. The GoH Ministry
of Public Works and Transportation also pre-positioned supplies in southern
departments to help clear transportation routes following the hurricane's
passage.



 On October 2, U.S. Ambassador to Haiti Peter F. Mulrean issued a disaster
declaration in response to the anticipated effects of Hurricane Matthew.
USAID/OFDA is providing an initial $300,000 for immediate relief efforts,
including $150,000 to the American Red Cross (AmCross) to support the Haitian
Red Cross on logistics, emergency relief item distribution, and support to
evacuation shelter management operations in departments affected by Hurricane
Matthew. USAID/OFDA is also providing $150,000 to Catholic Relief Services (CRS)
to support distributions of emergency relief items, including shelter materials,
as well as emergency evacuation shelter management operations in Grand'Anse and
Sud departments.



 In advance of the storm, USAID/OFDA pre-positioned emergency relief items
sufficient for 8,000 households in five warehouses in Haiti. DART personnel plan
to coordinate airlifts of additional emergency relief items--including 40,000
blankets, 20,000 kitchen sets, 20,000 hygiene kits, and 3,500 rolls of plastic
sheeting--from USAID/OFDA warehouses in Miami, Florida, and Pisa, Italy, to
Haiti as soon as weather conditions permit.



 USAID/FFP committed $1 million to NGO partner CARE to address immediate
hurricane-related needs. CARE--with consortium members the UN World Food Program
(WFP), Action Contre Le Faim, and World Vision--implements the multi-year,
USAID-funded Kore Lavi program, which supports GoH social protection efforts by
implementing a safety net program to assist 89,000 people per month with food
vouchers. The additional $1 million in USAID/FFP funding will support CARE to
distribute food vouchers, cash transfers, food rations, and meals for
populations in shelters in hurricane-affected areas.



 In addition, USAID/FFP is supporting WFP to redirect existing funding--provided
by USAID/FFP in FY 2016--toward the hurricane response. WFP reports current
pre-positioned food supplies in Haiti sufficient to support 300,000 people for
one month.



 A UN Disaster Assessment and Coordination (UNDAC) team is supporting
assessments and communication in Haiti, with a planned aerial reconnaissance
mission to assess the storm's impacts on October 5, according to the UN Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). In addition, OCHA reports
that NGO World Vision has pre-positioned emergency supplies sufficient for
15,000 households, with plans to mobilize additional relief items as needed.



 USAID/OFDA is supporting a three-person Americas Support Team (AST) to provide
communications support to the UNDAC team. USAID/OFDA plans to support the AST in
Haiti for at least two weeks, depending on need.

 JAMAICA



 The Government of Jamaica (GoJ) reported activating the national EOC, as well
as more than 150 emergency evacuation shelters--housing more than 3,500
people--throughout the country as of October 3 in preparation for the storm's
impacts.



 On October 3, the projected path of the hurricane shifted eastward. The GoJ
subsequently downgraded the national alert from a hurricane warning to a
tropical storm warning--indicating expected tropical storm conditions to impact
the country. The UN reported flooding in parts of southeastern Jamaica due to
Hurricane Matthew as of October 4. GoJ authorities reported minimal damage in
Jamaica's southern parishes resulting from strong winds. National EOC operations
scaled down to a monitoring phase, according to the GoJ.



 On October 2, U.S. Chargé d'Affaires, a.i., Eric Khant issued a disaster
declaration for the anticipated effects of Hurricane Matthew in Jamaica.
USAID/OFDA is responding with $100,000 through the Jamaica Red Cross (JRC) to
support the distribution of relief commodities. DART staff in Jamaica plan to
conduct rapid assessments--in coordination with GoJ officials, JRC, and other
donor and UN organizations--in eastern Jamaica.

 THE BAHAMAS



 As of 2:00 p.m. EDT on October 4, the NHC anticipated that Hurricane Matthew
would move near or over parts of southeastern and central Bahamas between
October 4 and 5, approaching northwestern Bahamas later on October 5. The NHC
reports that The Bahamas will likely receive 8-12 inches of rainfall, with
isolated amounts up to 15 inches, and possible storm surge of 10-15 feet.



 The Government of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas (GCoB) had pre-positioned
food and water, opened shelters, disseminated public alerts, and activated the
national EOC, as well as EOCs in central and southern islands, as of October 3,
according to USAID/OFDA staff in the country. Despite preparedness efforts, the
GCoB anticipates requirements for additional relief commodities and other
humanitarian assistance to address hurricane-related needs.



 On October 4, U.S. Chargé d'Affaires, a.i., Lisa A. Johnson issued a disaster
declaration in response to the anticipated effects of Hurricane Matthew in The
Bahamas. In response, USAID/OFDA is providing an initial $100,000 to the Bahamas
Red Cross (BRC) to respond to the anticipated needs of hurricane-affected
populations. USAID/OFDA also has DART staff in the country supporting the GCoB
and other relief actors to identify needs and coordinate response efforts.

 OTHER COUNTRIES LIKELY TO EXPERIENCE HURRICANE EFFECTS



 The NHC anticipated that Hurricane Matthew could result in hurricane conditions
in eastern Cuba and tropical storm conditions in Turks and Caicos on October 4.
Tropical storm conditions continued to affect the Dominican Republic as of 2:00
p.m. EDT. Rainfall will likely result in life-threatening flash floods and
mudslides in eastern Cuba and southwestern Dominican Republic, according to the
NHC, while Cuba's southern coast may experience storm surge of 7-11 feet.



 The Government of Cuba (GoC) had begun clearing drainage ditches and
pre-positioning food supplies and construction materials as of October 2,
according to OCHA. The Office of the UN Resident Coordinator in Cuba reported
that heavy storm surge began affecting Cuba's southern shores on October 3. The
GoC had evacuated approximately 317,000 people as of October 3, the UN reports.



 According to the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), authorities in the Dominican
Republic placed armed forces on standby, began evacuation procedures, and
prepared 800 evacuation shelters in advance of the hurricane.



 As of October 4, the governments of Cuba and the Dominican Republic have not
requested international assistance.

 OTHER HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE



 UN agencies, international NGOs, and donors continue to monitor the impacts of
Hurricane Matthew and ensure response readiness. Humanitarian organizations
pre-positioned staff and emergency relief commodities in countries likely to
experience significant hurricane effects. In addition, multiple humanitarian
agencies maintain supplies in the UN Humanitarian Response Depot in Panama and
are prepared to distribute these supplies to hurricane-affected populations,
according to OCHA.



 On October 4, the European Commission announced an initial commitment of
[#x20ac]255,000--approximately $286,300--to address urgent shelter, health, and
water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) needs resulting from the hurricane in
Haiti.

 CONTEXT



 Hurricane Matthew is the strongest hurricane to affect the Caribbean since
2007, making landfall in Haiti on October 3 as a Category 4 storm on the
Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale before moving toward Cuba and The Bahamas.
Hurricane Matthew also brought tropical storm conditions to the Dominican
Republic and Jamaica.



 On October 2, U.S. Ambassador to Haiti Peter F. Mulrean and U.S. Chargé
d'Affaires, a.i., for Jamaica Eric Khant issued disaster declarations in
response to the anticipated effects of Hurricane Matthew in Haiti and Jamaica,
respectively. U.S. Chargé d'Affaires, a.i., Lisa A. Johnson issued a disaster
declaration in response to the anticipated effects of Hurricane Matthew in The
Bahamas on October 3.



 USAID activated a regional DART on October 3 with staff in The Bahamas, Haiti,
and Jamaica. In addition, USAID stood up a Washington, D.C.-based RMT to
coordinate the regional humanitarian response.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com a

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 264 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           October 5, 2016 Wednesday

Caribbean Hurricane Matthew - Fact Sheet #1

LENGTH: 1989  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington, DC: American Planning Association has issued the following news
release



 Highlights



     Hurricane Matthew is the strongest hurricane to impact the Caribbean since
2007.



     Host country governments, UN agencies, and NGOs begin preparedness
activities in advance of the storm.



     USAID/OFDA activates regional DART with staff in The Bahamas, Haiti, and
Jamaica.





 Key Developments



 Map: Projected Impacts of Hurricane Matthew - October 4, 2016



 Map: Projected Impacts of Hurricane Matthew - October 4, 2016 file icon(pdf -
436k)

 Numbers At A Glance

 145 mph

 Sustained Wind Speed of Hurricane Matthew

 10-15 feet

 Potential Storm Surge in The Bahamas

 7-10 feet

 Potential Storm Surge Haiti's Southern Coast

 15-25 inches

 Anticipated Rainfall in Southern Haiti and Southwestern Dominican Republic,
with Isolated Higher Amounts

 Humanitarian Funding



 For the Hurricane Matthew Response

 in FY 2017

 USAID/OFDA     $500,000

 USAID/FFP     $1,000,000

 TOTAL     $1,500,000



 Caribbean Hurricane Matthew Fact Sheet #1 - October 4, 2016



 Caribbean Hurricane Matthew Fact Sheet #1 - October 4, 2016 file icon(pdf -
204k)



 Hurricane Matthew--a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Scale, with
sustained winds of 145 miles per hour as of 2:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time
(EDT) on October 4--made landfall over Haiti on October 4. The National
Hurricane Center (NHC) anticipates that Hurricane Matthew will remain a powerful
hurricane through at least October 5, with hurricane conditions likely to
continue impacting Haiti, as well as parts of Cuba and most islands of The
Bahamas, in the coming days. The storm will bring heavy rainfall, strong wind,
and dangerous storm surge to affected countries, possibly resulting in
life-threatening flash floods and mudslides, according to the NHC.



 USAID pre-positioned staff and relief commodities and began coordinating with
humanitarian stakeholders on potential needs and response efforts in advance of
the storm's impacts. The U.S. Government (USG) has declared disasters due to the
effects of Hurricane Matthew in The Bahamas, Haiti, and Jamaica. USAID/OFDA and
USAID/FFP are providing assistance to non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
UN partners to respond to hurricane-related humanitarian needs, with an initial
$1.5 million in FY 2017 funding committed. USAID/OFDA also plans to airlift
relief commodities from its warehouses as soon as weather conditions permit.



 On October 3, USAID activated a regional Disaster Assistance Response Team
(DART) with staff based in The Bahamas, Haiti, and Jamaica; a Washington,
D.C.-based Response Management Team (RMT) is supporting DART operations.

 HAITI



 Hurricane Matthew made landfall near Les Anglais, Haiti, around 6:00 a.m. local
time--or 7:00 a.m. EDT--on October 4, according to the NHC. Early reports
indicate Hurricane Matthew is resulting in significant damage, including heavy
wind damage and extensive flooding, in southern Haiti. The casualty figure is
not yet known. Media sources note that the hurricane has destroyed houses and
agricultural land and caused livestock deaths. While the storm moves northward,
the NHC reported that hurricane conditions continued to affect parts of Haiti at
2:00 p.m. EDT.



 The Government of Haiti (GoH) Directorate of Civil Protection (DPC) activated
the national emergency operations center (EOC) on October 1, according to the
Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA). The GoH had established
1,300 emergency shelters, capable of accommodating 340,000 people, and had begun
evacuations of high-risk areas as of October 2, media report. The GoH Ministry
of Public Works and Transportation also pre-positioned supplies in southern
departments to help clear transportation routes following the hurricane's
passage.



 On October 2, U.S. Ambassador to Haiti Peter F. Mulrean issued a disaster
declaration in response to the anticipated effects of Hurricane Matthew.
USAID/OFDA is providing an initial $300,000 for immediate relief efforts,
including $150,000 to the American Red Cross (AmCross) to support the Haitian
Red Cross on logistics, emergency relief item distribution, and support to
evacuation shelter management operations in departments affected by Hurricane
Matthew. USAID/OFDA is also providing $150,000 to Catholic Relief Services (CRS)
to support distributions of emergency relief items, including shelter materials,
as well as emergency evacuation shelter management operations in Grand'Anse and
Sud departments.



 In advance of the storm, USAID/OFDA pre-positioned emergency relief items
sufficient for 8,000 households in five warehouses in Haiti. DART personnel plan
to coordinate airlifts of additional emergency relief items--including 40,000
blankets, 20,000 kitchen sets, 20,000 hygiene kits, and 3,500 rolls of plastic
sheeting--from USAID/OFDA warehouses in Miami, Florida, and Pisa, Italy, to
Haiti as soon as weather conditions permit.



 USAID/FFP committed $1 million to NGO partner CARE to address immediate
hurricane-related needs. CARE--with consortium members the UN World Food Program
(WFP), Action Contre Le Faim, and World Vision--implements the multi-year,
USAID-funded Kore Lavi program, which supports GoH social protection efforts by
implementing a safety net program to assist 89,000 people per month with food
vouchers. The additional $1 million in USAID/FFP funding will support CARE to
distribute food vouchers, cash transfers, food rations, and meals for
populations in shelters in hurricane-affected areas.



 In addition, USAID/FFP is supporting WFP to redirect existing funding--provided
by USAID/FFP in FY 2016--toward the hurricane response. WFP reports current
pre-positioned food supplies in Haiti sufficient to support 300,000 people for
one month.



 A UN Disaster Assessment and Coordination (UNDAC) team is supporting
assessments and communication in Haiti, with a planned aerial reconnaissance
mission to assess the storm's impacts on October 5, according to the UN Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). In addition, OCHA reports
that NGO World Vision has pre-positioned emergency supplies sufficient for
15,000 households, with plans to mobilize additional relief items as needed.



 USAID/OFDA is supporting a three-person Americas Support Team (AST) to provide
communications support to the UNDAC team. USAID/OFDA plans to support the AST in
Haiti for at least two weeks, depending on need.

 JAMAICA



 The Government of Jamaica (GoJ) reported activating the national EOC, as well
as more than 150 emergency evacuation shelters--housing more than 3,500
people--throughout the country as of October 3 in preparation for the storm's
impacts.



 On October 3, the projected path of the hurricane shifted eastward. The GoJ
subsequently downgraded the national alert from a hurricane warning to a
tropical storm warning--indicating expected tropical storm conditions to impact
the country. The UN reported flooding in parts of southeastern Jamaica due to
Hurricane Matthew as of October 4. GoJ authorities reported minimal damage in
Jamaica's southern parishes resulting from strong winds. National EOC operations
scaled down to a monitoring phase, according to the GoJ.



 On October 2, U.S. Chargé d'Affaires, a.i., Eric Khant issued a disaster
declaration for the anticipated effects of Hurricane Matthew in Jamaica.
USAID/OFDA is responding with $100,000 through the Jamaica Red Cross (JRC) to
support the distribution of relief commodities. DART staff in Jamaica plan to
conduct rapid assessments--in coordination with GoJ officials, JRC, and other
donor and UN organizations--in eastern Jamaica.

 THE BAHAMAS



 As of 2:00 p.m. EDT on October 4, the NHC anticipated that Hurricane Matthew
would move near or over parts of southeastern and central Bahamas between
October 4 and 5, approaching northwestern Bahamas later on October 5. The NHC
reports that The Bahamas will likely receive 8-12 inches of rainfall, with
isolated amounts up to 15 inches, and possible storm surge of 10-15 feet.



 The Government of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas (GCoB) had pre-positioned
food and water, opened shelters, disseminated public alerts, and activated the
national EOC, as well as EOCs in central and southern islands, as of October 3,
according to USAID/OFDA staff in the country. Despite preparedness efforts, the
GCoB anticipates requirements for additional relief commodities and other
humanitarian assistance to address hurricane-related needs.



 On October 4, U.S. Chargé d'Affaires, a.i., Lisa A. Johnson issued a disaster
declaration in response to the anticipated effects of Hurricane Matthew in The
Bahamas. In response, USAID/OFDA is providing an initial $100,000 to the Bahamas
Red Cross (BRC) to respond to the anticipated needs of hurricane-affected
populations. USAID/OFDA also has DART staff in the country supporting the GCoB
and other relief actors to identify needs and coordinate response efforts.

 OTHER COUNTRIES LIKELY TO EXPERIENCE HURRICANE EFFECTS



 The NHC anticipated that Hurricane Matthew could result in hurricane conditions
in eastern Cuba and tropical storm conditions in Turks and Caicos on October 4.
Tropical storm conditions continued to affect the Dominican Republic as of 2:00
p.m. EDT. Rainfall will likely result in life-threatening flash floods and
mudslides in eastern Cuba and southwestern Dominican Republic, according to the
NHC, while Cuba's southern coast may experience storm surge of 7-11 feet.



 The Government of Cuba (GoC) had begun clearing drainage ditches and
pre-positioning food supplies and construction materials as of October 2,
according to OCHA. The Office of the UN Resident Coordinator in Cuba reported
that heavy storm surge began affecting Cuba's southern shores on October 3. The
GoC had evacuated approximately 317,000 people as of October 3, the UN reports.



 According to the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), authorities in the Dominican
Republic placed armed forces on standby, began evacuation procedures, and
prepared 800 evacuation shelters in advance of the hurricane.



 As of October 4, the governments of Cuba and the Dominican Republic have not
requested international assistance.

 OTHER HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE



 UN agencies, international NGOs, and donors continue to monitor the impacts of
Hurricane Matthew and ensure response readiness. Humanitarian organizations
pre-positioned staff and emergency relief commodities in countries likely to
experience significant hurricane effects. In addition, multiple humanitarian
agencies maintain supplies in the UN Humanitarian Response Depot in Panama and
are prepared to distribute these supplies to hurricane-affected populations,
according to OCHA.



 On October 4, the European Commission announced an initial commitment of
[#x20ac]255,000--approximately $286,300--to address urgent shelter, health, and
water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) needs resulting from the hurricane in
Haiti.

 CONTEXT



 Hurricane Matthew is the strongest hurricane to affect the Caribbean since
2007, making landfall in Haiti on October 3 as a Category 4 storm on the
Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale before moving toward Cuba and The Bahamas.
Hurricane Matthew also brought tropical storm conditions to the Dominican
Republic and Jamaica.



 On October 2, U.S. Ambassador to Haiti Peter F. Mulrean and U.S. Chargé
d'Affaires, a.i., for Jamaica Eric Khant issued disaster declarations in
response to the anticipated effects of Hurricane Matthew in Haiti and Jamaica,
respectively. U.S. Chargé d'Affaires, a.i., Lisa A. Johnson issued a disaster
declaration in response to the anticipated effects of Hurricane Matthew in The
Bahamas on October 3.



 USAID activated a regional DART on October 3 with staff in The Bahamas, Haiti,
and Jamaica. In addition, USAID stood up a Washington, D.C.-based RMT to
coordinate the regional humanitarian response.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 265 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                            April 4, 2007 Wednesday

Cdn. storm watcher questions U.S. hurricane forecast; N.S.-based Hurricane
Centre says it's too early to worry about dire warnings that predict up to 17
named storms this season

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 528  words


A Canadian storm watcher says it's too early to start battening down the
hatches, but U.S. forecasters are warning of a very active hurricane season on
the Atlantic seaboard this year with as many as 17 named storms.

Researchers at Colorado State University released their forecast yesterday for
the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season, predicting about a dozen tropical storms and
as many as five major hurricanes, including at least one that will make landfall
on the U.S. East Coast.

Peter Bowyer at the Canadian Hurricane Centre in Dartmouth, N.S., said people
living in Atlantic Canada should not be alarmed by the dire, early warnings.

Bowyer said predictions for the last two years from U.S. forecasters were not
accurate.

In 2005, American hurricane watchers seriously underestimated the season, which
turned out to be the most destructive on record.

Last year, they overestimated the season, predicting major events that never
materialized.

"It's a hard business," said Bowyer.

"I don't think the average person is shocked to hear that it's a challenge
forecasting what it will be like months from now when we all know that
forecasting weather over the next couple of hours can be a big challenge."

Bowyer said a more accurate forecast will come in mid-May when the U.S.-based
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration releases its forecast for
the coming storm season.

The Atlantic hurricane season, which runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, averages 9.6
named storms, of which 5.9 are hurricanes and 2.3 intense hurricanes.

The 2005 season set a record with 28 named storms, 15 of them hurricanes. Four
of those hurricanes hit the U.S. coast, the worst among them Katrina, which
devastated New Orleans and levelled parts of the Gulf Coast region.

There were nine named Atlantic storms in 2006, of which five were hurricanes,
two of them major, in what was considered a "near normal" season. But none of
the hurricanes hit the U.S. or Canadian coasts.

Still, the Colorado hurricane team is sticking with its worrisome prediction.

"We are calling for a very active hurricane season this year, but not as active
as the 2004 and 2005 seasons," said Phil Klotzbach.

"Based on our latest forecast, the probability of a major hurricane making
landfall along the U.S. coastline is 74 per cent compared with the last-century
average of 52 per cent."

The North American east coast has been locked in an active storm period for the
past decade, and while these trends are normally cyclical, no one knows when, or
if, the active period will end.

While there is no scientific proof that global warming and the build-up of
greenhouse gases in the environment is breeding more hurricanes, some
meteorologists believe it could be contributing to the unusual power of the big
storms, like Katrina.

The Colorado team said the ingredients are right for tumultuous weather in 2007,
including continued warm tropical and North Atlantic sea-surface temperatures as
well as neutral or weak La Nina conditions.

La Nina refers to a pattern of cold surface temperatures in the eastern Pacific
Ocean. The east-to-west winds of La Nina tend to be more favourable for
producing hurricanes in the Atlantic.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 266 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                            August 14, 2007 Tuesday

Weather experts predict busy hurricane season; 16 tropical storms expected this
year, of which nine will become full-blown hurricanes

BYLINE: Charles Perry Weather

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 482  words


With the peak period for tropical storms in the Atlantic close at hand, experts
are holding firm to their predictions of an active hurricane season this year.

However, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration did amend its
forecast in the past few days to be slightly lower than their original
projections of tropical storm activity for 2007.

They are now predicting 16 tropical storms this year, nine of which will develop
into hurricanes. Originally, the NOAA was calling for 17 tropical storms, 10 of
which would become hurricanes.

But this would still represent an active hurricane season, well above last
year's unusually low number of named storms. In 2006, there were only 10 named
storms, credited largely to the fact that it was an El Niño year and El Niños
tend to shear off the tops of tropical storms before they can develop.

A disturbance has to reach at least tropical storm status (the next level below
a hurricane) to be given a name.

Peter Bowyer of Halifax, manager of the Canadian Hurricane Centre, said
yesterday that the small adjustment by NOAA ^' entailing one less hurricane and
one less tropical storm than they originally projected ^' does not dissuade from
it being a brisk hurricane season this year. If anything, it makes the latter a
more likely possibility, he said.

"The fact that they are tightening the reins on some of their numbers shows that
they have a high level of confidence that it is going to be an active season for
named storms," he said. "You must remember they are making slight reductions to
high numbers."

Bowyer said the Canadian Hurricane Centre is not putting a figure on the number
of named storms it anticipates this year, but is sticking to its earlier
prediction that it should be a busy hurricane season. "Nothing has happened to
change that," he added.

Jon Pacheco of State College, Pa., a spokesman for the AccuWeather.com Hurricane
Centre, said they are also not revising their earlier call for 13 or 14 total
storms in the Atlantic in 2007, six or seven of which will strike the U.S.
and/or Canadian east coasts.

Pacheco said they still expect three of more of them to be major hurricanes of
Category 3 or greater. Category 5 is the highest level a hurricane can reach.

So far this year, there have only been three tropical storms ^' Andrea, Barry
and Chantal ^' none of which reached hurricane status. However, a tropical
depression formed Monday in the eastern Atlantic, one which all three hurricane
centres feel most likely will form into a tropical storm and then, a hurricane.

"It is much better developed than the previous three storms," said one expert.
If it should reached named status, it would be designated as Tropical Storm
Dean.

Bowyer said it would be right in line with the hurricane season's peak period,
which generally comprises the second half of August through September.

n Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 267 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                             June 4, 2008 Wednesday

2008 could be busy year for hurricanes; First tropical storm of hurricane season
already recorded in central America

BYLINE: Charles Perry Weather

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 441  words


Although it has since receded to the status of a tropical depression, Tropical
Storm Arthur made its appearance right on cue this year.

With the official hurricane season running from June 1 to Nov. 30, Arthur
developed into a named storm just in time for the start of the season.

To be designated a name, a disturbance has to make it at least to tropical storm
status. A tropical storm represents the level of severity below that of a
hurricane.

Alan Reppert of State College, Pa., a spokesman for the AccuWeather.com
Hurricane Centre, said yesterday that Arthur never came close to any kind of
landing in the United States, but instead, swung further south, soaking the
Yucatan peninsula, causing heavy flooding and threatening mud slides in Mexico,
Belize and Guatemala.

By the end of the weekend, he said it had weakened to a tropical depression, but
its remnants were still bringing heavy rains to Mexico and Central America.

Although it may not be the most common route for tropical storms, Reppert said
it is not unusual for a named storm to head south into Latin America, instead of
moving up the Atlantic coast or inland in the United States.

Last year, the hurricane season also kicked off its first week with a named
storm -- Tropical Storm Andrea, said the hurricane centre spokesman. He said
Andrea brought winds and heavy rainfall to the Carolinas and made it up to the
mid-Atlantic coast before starting to recede.

Following two years with a below normal to normal number of named storms,
Reppert said hurricane experts are calling for above average hurricane activity
in 2008. He cited rising water temperatures in the Atlantic and it not being an
El Niño year as the major reasons for the prediction.

The forecast is for an increase in both the number of hurricanes and the number
of major hurricanes.

So-called "major or intense hurricanes," which rank from Category 3 to Category
5 on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale of hurricane severity, are the most
destructive, said Reppert.

Last year, there were 15 named storms, six of which reached hurricane status.

This year, the team of hurricane experts at Colorado State University is calling
for 15 tropical storms the same as last year. The difference, however, is they
predict eight of them will become hurricanes and four of them major hurricanes
with winds of at least 178 kilometres (111 miles) an hour.

And for certain, said Reppert, some of them will move up the Atlantic coast,
possibly affecting Atlantic Canada.

The tropical storm causing the most problems in 2007 in the Atlantic provinces
was the last hurricane of the year -- Hurricane Noel.

n Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 268 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                             August 7, 2009 Friday

Hurricane season has been quiet so far; But some of worst storms have occurred
in 'quiet' seasons

BYLINE: Charles Perry Weather

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 440  words


More than two months into the official Atlantic hurricane season, there have
been no hurricanes or even named storms this year.

As well, hurricane experts are in agreement that 2009 will deliver an unusually
light year for hurricanes, mainly due to the effect of El Niño.

John Kocet of State College, Pa., senior meteorologist for AccuWeather,
cautions, however, that it could be be a big mistake to think they need not
worry about these storms this year.

Although the numbers of named storms are well below normal on certain years,
Kocet said the hurricanes that do occur in those years are often the most
devastating ones.

To be designated a name, a disturbance has to reach at least tropical storm
status, which is the next level below a hurricane. The official hurricane season
runs from June 1 to Nov. 30.

Kocet said the greatest number of hurricanes tend to occur from August through
October, whether it is an active or slow hurricane season. And the intensity of
the named storms is often at its highest later in the season, even during a year
when there are fewer hurricanes.

Two prime examples, said the AccuWeather spokesman, are Hurricane Andrew in 1992
and Hurricane Anita in 1977, both years with lower-than-normal named storm
numbers.

On Aug. 24, 1992, Andrew, the first named storm that year, slammed into Florida,
devastating Homestead, Florida City and Miami, before continuing northwest
across the Gulf of Mexico to strike the Louisiana coastline.

Altogether, the hurricane resulted in 15 direct deaths and 25 indirect
fatalities, along with $30 billion in property damage, making it the costliest
disaster in United States history. It was also a Category 5 storm, the highest
and most devastating category a hurricane can reach.

More than 250,000 people were left homeless, 82,000 businesses were destroyed or
damaged and about 100,000 residents of Dade County permanently left the area in
Andrew's wake.

Andrew also had a severe impact on the environment, damaging 33 per cent of the
coral reefs at Biscayne National Park and 90 of South Dade's native pinelands,
mangroes and hardwood hammocks. It also created 30 years worth of debris.

Hurricane Anita was a powerful Atlantic hurricane, which developed on Aug. 29,
1977 which, up to that time, had been an otherwise quiet hurricane season.

In fact, it was the first named storm of the season.

Bearing winds of 130 kilometres (80 miles) an hour along with torrential rains,
Anita charged into Mexico, causing floods and mud slides, resulting in 10
deaths, countless injuries and serious property damage. The hurricane's name was
later retired.

n Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 269 of 881 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                           August 31, 2005 Wednesday
                                National Edition

Global warming storm surge is bunk

BYLINE: George H. Taylor, Tech Central Station

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST: COMMENT; Pg. FP19

LENGTH: 922  words


I could see this one coming. The other day a lady in my department saw me and
said, "Well, George, with all these hurricanes it's pretty clear that global
warming is happening, right?" I think Jane was just being playful, because she's
heard me talk about global warming and knows of my politically incorrect
viewpoint on this issue, Yet she raises a question that a lot of people have
been asking: Does the busy hurricane year in the Atlantic have anything to do
with global warming?

The short answer: no.

The long answer: Long-term statistics on hurricanes are quite good, so we can
have some confidence in the trends we see in hurricane counts. There are two
reasons for this: Hurricanes are big, powerful storms and very hard to miss; and
they are well-defined. The Saffir-Simpson scale uses wind speed (one-minute
average) to define a hurricane's strength, starting at 120 km/h (Category 1) and
ending at speeds above 250 km/h (Category 5). Other rating systems use central
pressure as a criterion.

Data provided by the National Hurricane Center, shows hurricane strikes
(landfalls) by decade in the United States since 1900. The 1940s were rather
busy, the 70s the quietest, and the 1990s pretty close to the long-term average.
A simple linear fit suggests a decrease over time. This is a result echoed by
Easterling, et al. (2000), who said, "the number of intense and landfalling
Atlantic hurricanes has declined." In the Gulf of Mexico there is "no sign of an
increase in hurricane frequency or intensity," according to Bove, et al. (1998).
For the North Atlantic as a whole, according to the United Nations Environment
Program of the World Meteorological Organization, "Reliable data ... since the
1940s indicate that the peak strength of the strongest hurricanes has not
changed, and the mean maximum intensity of all hurricanes has decreased."

Granted, there has been an upswing in the Atlantic since 1995, and this year's
bumper crop of storms has struck Florida in numbers and intensities seldom
occurring before. A sign of things to come, especially in a warmer world? Not
according to Bill Gray's Tropical Forecast group at Colorado State University.
Gray, who has developed successful methods for predicting hurricane activity,
said, "Various groups and individuals have suggested that the recent large
upswing in Atlantic hurricane activity (since 1995) may be in some way related
to the effects of increased man-made greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide
(CO2). There is no reasonable scientific way that such an interpretation of this
recent upward shift in Atlantic hurricane activity can be made."

And there is no reason to expect increases in hurricanes due to greenhouse
warming. Climate models, for all their problems, are unanimous in at least one
respect: They predict that most of the future warming will be in high latitudes,
in the polar regions. This will reduce the north-south temperature gradient and
make poleward transfer of heat less vigorous -- a task in which tropical storms
play a major role. All other things being equal, a warmer world should have
fewer, not more, hurricanes.

The same effect should reduce the overall intensity of mid-latitude storms as
well. Does it? Let's examine the evidence.

Schwartz and Schmidlin (2002) analyzed frequencies of blizzards in the United
States since 1959. Defining a blizzard as a storm with falling or blowing snow,
visibilities less than 400 metres and winds over 16 m/sec, they concluded that
there have been increasing numbers of blizzards reported, while the area
affected by all blizzards has not changed significantly. This would indicate
that blizzards are becoming smaller. It is also possible that "NWS [National
Weather Service] is recording smaller, weaker blizzards in recent years that
went unrecorded earlier in the period, as occurred also in the official record
of tornadoes in the United States," which would suggest that blizzard frequency
increases may be overstated.

Changnon and Changnon (2000) studied hail frequencies in the United States over
the last century. They found that "the national average based on all hail values
formed a bell-shaped 100-year distribution with hail occurrences peaking in
mid-century." Thunderstorm distributions were similar to the hail results.
Further, the authors found that hail insurance loss values have declined since
the 1950s, in agreement with the hail results.

Zhang, et al. (2000) examined storm activity along the U.S. East Coast over the
20th century. After stating, "it has been speculated that future global warming
will change the frequency and severity of tropical and extratropical storms,"
the authors used historical data in an attempt to help predict future trends.
Using a variety of indices, including storm surge water levels, the authors
found "no significant trend in storm activity during this century along the East
Coast." The real problem along the coastline, they say, is not changing climate
but changing land use, as more and more development occurs along the shorelines,
creating greater susceptibility to storm damage.

Gulev, et al. (2000) employed reanalysis data since 1958 to study the occurrence
of winter storms over the northern hemisphere. They found a statistically
significant (at the 95% level) decline of 1.2 cyclones per year for the period,
during which temperatures reportedly rose in much of the hemisphere.

"Global warming causes increased storminess" makes for interesting headlines. It
also violates fundamental scientific truth and the lessons of history.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart/Graph: Tech Central Station, National Post; LITTLE CHANGE IN
HURRICANES: U.S. hurricane strikes by decade: All hurricanes, Strong (3-5), Very
strong (4-5): (See print copy for complete chart/graph.)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business; Opinion

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2005 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 270 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                              May 20, 2011 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Above average hurricane season predicted in U.S

BYLINE: Christopher Doering, Reuters

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 635  words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The 2011 Atlantic hurricane season will be "above normal", spawning six to 10
hurricanes of which around half could become major, the U.S. government's
weather agency forecast on Thursday.

However, as the 2010 season showed -it was very active but the U.S. coastline
escaped a hit -a high frequency of storms does not always translate into more
destructive landfalls.

In its first forecast for the season that begins on June 1, the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) anticipated 12 to 18 named storms, a
somewhat lower level of activity than the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season.

Six to 10 of those storms were seen developing into hurricanes, of which three
to six could become major at Category 3 or above, with winds of more than 110
miles per hour (177 km /h), the agency said.

"NOAA's forecast team is calling for an above-normal season this year," NOAA
Administrator Jane Lubchenco told a news conference outside the agency's
Satellite Operations Facility.

But she added NOAA's forecasting capacity could not yet pinpoint where or when a
hurricane would hit: "This hurricane outlook does not make any predictions about
landfall, either place or timing."

The briefing took place under a light rain shower.

NOAA's 2011 outlook mirrored earlier predictions from private forecasters
calling for an active hurricane season this year.

The hurricane season officially starts on June 1 and typically peaks between
late August and mid-October. An average Atlantic hurricane season brings 11
tropical storms with six hurricanes, including two major hurricanes, NOAA said.

The 2010 season produced 19 named storms, tying for the third most active season
with 1887 and 1995, according to the U.S. National Hurricane Center. Twelve
storms grew into hurricanes, tying with 1969 for the second most active season
in that category.

The activity last year was in line with NOAA's spring 2010 forecast that called
for 14 to 23 named storms, with eight to 14 developing into hurricanes.

But no hurricane made U.S. landfall last year. "This year we are unlikely to see
a repeat of last year, where there were a total of 19 named storms ... Despite
this tropical onslaught, most of the tropical storms and all of the hurricanes
last year fortunately avoided U.S. coastlines, " Lubchenco said.

"We cannot count on having the same luck this year," she said.

Lubchenco said the La Nina weather phenomenon, whose conditions generally
contribute to storm development in the Atlantic-Caribbean basin, was weakening
but its influence should continue at least into the early summer.

"La Nina, which continues to weaken in the equatorial Pacific Ocean, is expected
to dissipate later this month or in June, but its impacts such as reduced wind
shear are expected to continue into the hurricane season," NOAA's forecast said.

Wind shear, the shifting of winds at various levels in the atmosphere, impedes
the formation of hurricanes.

Forecasts are being closely watched by energy analysts and oil producers this
year with oil prices holding over $100 a barrel and consumers paying more than
$4 a gallon at the pump.

If a hurricane approaches U.S. offshore energy installations in the Gulf of
Mexico, a major storm can pose a threat to about one-quarter of U.S. oil
production and about 10 per cent of natural gas output.

NOAA had accurately predicted that last year would be the busiest since the
record-shattering 2005 season, when Hurricane Katrina killed more than a
thousand people and wreaked havoc with energy production in the Gulf of Mexico.

But neither NOAA nor any private forecaster foresaw that the successive 2010
storms would entirely miss the U.S. coast. Even at their most accurate,
pre-season forecasts can only estimate the number of storms, not the precise
paths.

The U.S. coast has been spared a direct hit since 2008.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2011 Windsor Star, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 271 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                           September 10, 2004 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricanes are on upswing: New weather cycle turning Sunshine State into magnet
for deadly storms: scientists

BYLINE: MARTIN MERZER, Miami Herald

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 815  words

DATELINE: MIAMI


Charley, Frances and Ivan. Three major hurricanes. Two assaults on Florida
already and possibly a third by next week.

This is the new normal.

Scientists say we are in a period of enhanced hurricane activity that could last
for decades, ending a 24-year period of below-average activity. They also say
the law of averages has caught up with Florida, with a change in atmospheric
steering currents turning the state into a hurricane magnet.

"People are suddenly alert, suddenly paying attention," said Stanley Goldenberg,
a meteorologist with the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's
hurricane-research division on Virginia Key. "They can see now that we are in an
active era. People should realize that it is very unlikely that Frances is the
last storm the U.S. will see this year."

Which brings us to Hurricane Ivan.

Though subject to considerable error, long-range forecasts are consistently
suggesting that Ivan will strike Jamaica today and Cuba on Sunday as a vicious
Category 4 hurricane. The southern half of Florida remains in the five-day cone
of probability.

If Ivan hits the state, it will be the first time since 1964 that three
hurricanes smacked Florida in the same year. And September and October tend to
be among the most active months of the six-month hurricane season that ends Nov.
30.

"The season is still young," said Max Mayfield, director of the National
Hurricane Centre in West Miami-Dade County. "It certainly seems from my
perspective that we're in the active period that has been predicted. The only
surprise is that Florida hasn't been hit more often in the last few years."

Between 1941 and 1950, seven major hurricanes - with winds stronger than 175
kilometres per hour - attacked Florida. "And that doesn't include the other,
less powerful hurricanes," Goldenberg said. That 10-year period fell in the
middle of a cycle of heightened activity that began in 1926 and persisted until
1970.

Now, the combination of complacency bred during a long lull between 1971 and
1994, the new hyperactivity since 1995 and the continuing mega-development of
Florida's coasts frightens emergency managers and scientists.

"The implications are much-increased damage when storms make landfall,"
Goldenberg said, "and the potential for major loss of life in the event of an
evacuation foul-up during a rapidly intensifying storm."

He has more than academic interest in this. Goldenberg and his family were
nearly killed when Hurricane Andrew crushed their South Miami-Dade home in 1992.

Research he later conducted with NOAA scientist Chris Landsea, private expert
William Gray and others found distinct patterns of low-activity hurricane
periods and high-activity periods, each of which endured for decades. These
patterns, unrelated to the current concern over global warming, are caused by
regular cycles of oceanic and atmospheric phenomena, such as unusually warm
water in hurricane- breeding grounds.

One period of "hyperactivity" ended in 1970 and was followed by a 24-year lull.
The new period of heightened activity began in 1995 and could last for another
10 to 30 years, according to their report, which was peer-reviewed and published
in 2001 in the journal Science.

In the last few years, and particularly this year, the statistics related to the
number, power and duration of storms appear to verify the report's conclusions,
especially when major hurricanes are considered.

This is significant because, though relatively few in number, major hurricanes -
Category 3 or higher - cause 80 per cent of all damage from tropical weather.

"We're not talking about stronger hurricanes than in the past," Goldenberg said.
"We're talking about more of the stronger hurricanes."

The long-term average, including relatively quiet periods and busy periods, is
2.6 major hurricanes a year.

Between 1971 and 1994, only four years had more than two major hurricanes and
none had more than three. Between 1995 and 2003, a much shorter period, seven
years had three or more major hurricanes.

And Florida's already had four major storms this year - Alex, Charley, Frances
and Ivan.

All the other numbers tell the same tale: total storms, total strength, total
duration, Caribbean hurricanes, October and November hurricanes, each at least
100 per cent - in some cases 500 or 1,000 per cent - higher since the lull.

"That's a humongous increase," Goldenberg said. "This is striking. This is not a
little signal. It would be like saying the average temperature is 8 degrees
Celsius warmer than last summer. It's huge. It's huge."

Worse, atmospheric steering currents have changed to the Sunshine State's
disadvantage.

During the beginning of this active period, a persistent and beneficial bend in
the jet stream carried hurricanes away from Florida. Now, that phenomenon has
disappeared, replaced by a persistent ridge of high pressure over the Atlantic
that is pushing them toward Florida.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 272 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              July 18, 2004 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricanes Are Coming; Just Wait

BYLINE: NEIL JOHNSON, njohnson@tampatrib.com

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


TAMPA -- Seven weeks into what experts predict will be a busy hurricane season,
you'd expect to have seen at least one storm scooting around the Gulf of Mexico
or the Atlantic.

Instead, so far in the 2004 season there's been zip. Nada. Nothing. Not even a
tropical depression.

In the past 20 years, 13 hurricane seasons had at least one storm by now.

The slowest starting season in the past two decades was 1984, when the first
storm did not appear until Aug. 28.

In May, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted that the
2004 season would be especially active, with 12 to 15 storms, six to eight
growing into hurricanes.

An average season has nine tropical storms with six of those reaching hurricane
strength.

William Gray, a Colorado State University professor who has issued predictions
of hurricane activity since 1984, expects this season to have 14 storms, with
eight of those becoming hurricanes.

So where are all those storms?

They'll show up, said Jack Bevin, hurricane specialist at the National Hurricane
Center in Miami.

"If we get to Sept. 1 and don't have a named storm, then it's time to ask what's
happening with the hurricane season," he said.

The lack of hurricanes or tropical storms so far does not necessarily mean the
forecasts are off or that this will be a quiet season.

"It's not all that unusual to have a season with no storms in June or July,"
Bevin said.

"You don't judge the season forecast until after the season is over."

There are no major meteorological reasons for the slow start to the season such
as an El Niño, when the water in the Pacific Ocean grows warmer than normal and
creates changes in the atmosphere that dampen hurricane development.

"There's nothing obvious that screams at us," Bevin said.

The conditions that led experts to predict a busy season, such as warm Atlantic
Ocean water temperatures, are still in place, Bevin said.

The season is just ripening.

In June, the normal birthplace for storms is either the Caribbean Sea or Gulf of
Mexico, where the water warms faster.

Those storms tend to move into the western Gulf toward Texas and Mexico.

July is less hospitable for hurricane formation than June.

The Bermuda High, an area of high pressure that usually hunkers over Bermuda,
expands into the tropical Atlantic and helps shut down hurricanes there.

But wait until August and September.

That's usually the heart of the hurricane season, when the trade winds are
established over the Atlantic, and storms form near the Cape Verde Islands off
the African coast.

Those are the classic storms that track across the expanse of ocean for days.

"What makes or breaks a hurricane season is what happens in August and
September," Bevin said.

Tropical waves, boiling masses of thunderstorms that can be the seeds of
hurricanes, move from the African coast into the Atlantic every three to five
days during hurricane season, which is from June 1 through Nov. 30.

It's just that no tropical waves have gone from seed to storm.

"Large and powerful systems have come off Africa and did nothing," Bevin said.

If the storms have not formed during August and September, there's always the
last two months of the season.

The Atlantic Ocean tends to shut down its hurricane factory in October, and we
switch our attention -- especially in the Tampa Bay area -- to the western
Caribbean.

There, tucked under the curve of the Yucatan, the water is still teapot hot.

Storms can form south of Cuba and quickly move into the Gulf of Mexico.

Those storms tend to head east toward Florida.

They also can intensify quickly, going from a depression to a full-blown
hurricane in a matter of days.

"It's not like the tropical Atlantic when we're watching them for a week or
more," Bevin said.

Once in the Gulf, there is virtually no place for a storm to go without hitting
somewhere.

Bevin is quick to point out that 1992 was a hurricane season that got a late
start.

The first storm did not form until Aug. 16.

It was Hurricane Andrew.

(CHART) GRADE "A' STORMS

For the past 20 hurricane years, most hurricane seasons have gotten an earlier
start than 2004.

First Date

Year Storm Formed

2003 Ana April 20*

2002 Arthur July 14

2001 Allison June 5

2000 Alberto Aug. 3

1999 Arlene June 11

1998 Alex July 27

1997 Ana June 30

1996 Arthur June 17

1995 Allison June 3

1994 Alberto June 30

1993 Arlene June 18

1992 Andrew Aug. 16

1991 Ana July 2

1990 Arthur July 22

1989 Allison June 24

1988 Alberto Aug. 5

1987 Arlene Aug. 8

1986 Andrew June 5

1985 Ana July 15

1984 Arthur Aug. 28

* Storm formed before official June 1 start of hurricane season. First storm
after June 1 formed June 29.

Source: National Hurricane Center

Reporter Neil Johnson can be reached at (352) 544-5214.

Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CHART

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 273 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              June 5, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Expert Answers Hurricane Questions

BYLINE: STEVE KORNACKI, skornacki@tampatrib.com

SECTION: PASCO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 503 words

DATELINE: PORT RICHEY


METEOROLOGIST WARNS OF CONTINUED INCREASE

By STEVE KORNACKI

skornacki@tampatrib.com

PORT RICHEY -- Steve Jerve answered questions on everything from the proper
thickness for protective plywood to the likelihood of hurricanes.

Jerve, chief meteorologist at News Channel 8, gave a brief presentation and then
answered questions from more than 300 gathered Saturday morning in the center
court of Gulf View Square mall.

His half-hour session was part of Hurricane Expo, sponsored by The Suncoast News
and The Pasco Tribune.

"A hurricane is nature letting off its energy around the Earth," Jerve said.
"It's like an atomic bomb."

Between mid-August and late September, hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and
Jeanne made landfall in Florida. Charley had been predicted to hit near Tarpon
Springs until hours before it jogged to the southeast and made landfall Aug. 13
at Punta Gorda.

"Even 24 hours from landfall, the changes in direction can be huge," Jerve said.
"The storms are highly unpredictable."

Jerve said experts are feeling secure about predicting a continued increase in
Florida hurricane activity. He said the next 20 to 30 years could see a
significant jump in hurricanes making landfall in the state.

"We've been recording storms since 1880, and we've never had a season here like
2004," Jerve said. "From the 1920s to the 1960s, 15 major hurricanes hit the
state. But from 1960 to 1995 only one major hurricane hit us, and that was
Andrew [in 1992].

"Since 1995, we've been in a more active hurricane period. So, we need to talk
about how to live with hurricanes and how to prepare for them."

Jerve urged his audience to visit with hurricane safety vendors set up adjacent
to the stage he spoke from, noting that plywood used for window and door
covering should be at least 3/4-inch thick and that www.tbo.com offers tips on
installing various forms of protection.

Trish Rieker of New Port Richey asked Jerve which part of the hurricane season,
running June through November, is most dangerous.

Jerve said that early and late in the season are the times when the Gulf of
Mexico coast is most vulnerable because hurricanes usually form in the nearby
Caribbean those months. He said July through September hurricanes generally come
from Africa and hit the Atlantic coast.

"It has to do with sea-surface temperatures," Jerve later explained. "The
Caribbean and Gulf are more shallow than the Atlantic, and water heats up faster
and stays warm longer.

"Warm water drives the formations of tropical storms."

Both Rieker and Arthur and Helen Daigle of Holiday, all seated in the front row
for Jerve's presentation, said they had been to two previous Hurricane Expos,
held at the Chasco Elementary and Middle School complex in prior years.

The Daigles said they purchased protective window film last year, and Rieker
said she bought a generator this year for about $4,000.

Reporter Steve Kornacki can be reached at (813) 731-8170.

Copyright © 2005, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 2
Steve Jerve Spoke at the Hurricane Expo on Saturday. Tribune photo by CHRIS URSO
Carmen Solimini, of New Port Richey, talks with a Plylox representative Saturday
about the company's hurricane window clips during his visit to the Hurricane
Expo.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 274 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                              June 9, 2015 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

18 storms hit in slow seasons

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 476 words


Hurricane Flossy passed a little south of Pensacola on a September day in 1956,
a mostly unremarkable Category 1 storm except that it brewed up unexpectedly in
an otherwise quiet season.

Since 1882, 18 hurricanes have hit Florida during years considered to be below
average for hurricane activity, according to a map created last week by Colorado
State University storm researcher Philip Klotzbach.

The map, which covers 17 Gulf Coast and Northeastern states, shows Florida has
had the most hits by hurricanes in slow storm years, with Texas following at 15
storms and Louisiana taking on 10 hurricanes.

Two of the hurricanes to hit Florida during below-average storm seasons were
Category 4 on the Saffir-Simpson scale, meaning they packed winds of 130 mph to
156 mph.

Klotzbach said he produced the map to put a number to the caveat always offered
at forecasts where the season is expected to be below average: A slow season
doesn't mean no season.

"Just because it's below average doesn't mean you won't get hit," Klotzbach
said. "Florida hasn't been hit by a hurricane in nine years and I think that's
really what causes people not to prepare."

In the stretch between 1882 and 2014, 49 years were considered below average for
hurricanes, including 1919, which produced a killer Category 4 storm that raked
the Florida Keys on Sept. 9 and barreled into Texas. The unnamed hurricane is
blamed for hundreds of deaths, most of them at sea.

Many of the hurricanes to hit Florida during a slow season occurred before
naming storms was the norm. But others included 1968's Category 2 Hurricane
Gladys, Hurricane Agnes in 1972 and Hurricane Floyd in 1987. Both Agnes and
Floyd were Category 1 storms with winds between 74 mph and 95 mph.

The activity level of a hurricane season is gauged by its "accumulated cyclone
energy," a measure that takes into account storm strength and how long each
storm lasts. A below-average season is considered to have an ACE of less than
66, Klotzbach said.

Last week, Klotzbach's team released an updated hurricane forecast that said
there was a 15 percent chance that a major hurricane could hit the East Coast
this season. The average for the last century is 30 percent.

Hurricane forecasters and emergency managers have been wringing their hands over
this season's below-average forecast, fearing it will lull Floridians into a
false sense of security.

"All this information about it's going to be a slow season and an El Nino
season, that's leading us into complacency," said Palm Beach County Emergency
Management Director Bill Johnson, in an interview last month. "It only takes one
storm, and as you know, Mother Nature doesn't follow rules."

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

WEATHER ONLINE

Kim Miller is The Post's new weather reporter. Follow @kmillerweather at The
Post's WeatherPlus blog at palmbeachpost.com/weatherplus

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 275 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            September 6, 2015 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Pacific storms burgeoning as Atlantic's struggle;
Boon here, bane there, El Niño of 2015 might be strongest yet seen.

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller     Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 905 words


The peak of South Florida's hurricane season is here and while Atlantic activity
has been mercifully meek this year, hurricane records are being shattered in the
Pacific as El Niñ o continues to roar.

Most notable was a triumvirate of Category 4 hurricanes churning side-by-side in
the Pacific last month. Each reached wind speeds topping 130 mph on Aug. 29 -- a
first in recorded history.

The Atlantic has seen two weak hurricanes and four tropical storms, compared
with the Pacific's 10 hurricanes and six tropical storms. The most recent,
Kevin, formed Thursday several hundred miles southwest of Mexico.

One hurricane scientist referred to the 2015 Pacific hurricane season as
"bonkers," and for Hawaiians who have watched the fury of activity all around
them, it's been a tad unnerving.

"A lot of people are ready for this season to be over," said Tom Evans, a
meteorologist with the Central Pacific Hurricane Center in Honolulu. "It's not
normal. It's double what we normally get."

The Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, with the average peak
of season around Sept. 10, according to NOAA. The Eastern Pacific hurricane
season runs from May 15 through Nov. 30, while the Central Pacific season
follows the Atlantic's calendar of June 1 to Nov. 30.

Although Hawaii has been threatened by some of this year's Pacific storms, it
has evaded a direct hit. Evans said the center has issued three hurricane
watches this year, but no warnings.

"Most of the impact has been storm surge and high surf," he said.

Blame Mother Nature's El Niño for the busy season in the Pacific and lazy one in
the Atlantic.

El Niño is a periodic warming of the water temperatures across the eastern path
of the Pacific Ocean. The warm water shifts rainfall patterns, suppressing rain
over Indonesia and moving it to the eastern part of the Pacific.

There, strong thunderstorms form, which influences wind patterns in the upper
atmosphere, reducing wind shear in the Pacific and increasing it in the
Atlantic.

"It means more hurricanes, stronger hurricanes and longer lasting hurricanes in
the Pacific, and shorter, weaker storms in the Atlantic," said Gerry Bell, lead
seasonal hurricane forecaster with NOAA's Climate Prediction Center. "There is
no question this is a strong El Niño ."

Last month, the Climate Prediction Center announced that this year could produce
the strongest El Niño weather pattern on record, rivaling the notable 1997
season and possibly reaching the pinnacle title of "super El Niño ."

El Niño was first detected this year in March. To be considered a super El Niño,
water temperatures in the Pacific have to meet or exceed 2 degrees Celsius, or
3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, above the norm.

Phil Klotzbach, a hurricane research scientist with Colorado State University,
said El Niño has pushed three storms this year across the international date
line -- an unusually high number that gives credit to the longevity and muscle
of the Pacific storms.

When hurricanes cross the international date line they get the title "typhoon."
The name of the storm doesn't change, or its intensity, but different titles are
used in different areas.

In the Atlantic and Northeast Pacific, storms are called hurricanes. In the
Northwest Pacific, they're called typhoons.

"If you are going to get a lot of activity in the Pacific, it will be in an El
Niño year when the wind shear is extraordinarily weak," Klotzbach said.

This year the shear is strong in the Atlantic, blowing west high in the
atmosphere and cutting into storms that move off the west coast of Africa.

But don't count on El Niño to crush every storm coming off Africa.

"There are some years where the cause-and-effect nature of El Niño practically
brings an early shutdown to the Atlantic hurricane season, and other years where
we see tropical storms or hurricanes well into October," said Dan Kottlowski, an
AccuWeather hurricane expert.

NOAA predicted in May that the Pacific would have an above-average hurricane
season while the Atlantic would spawn fewer storms than the average.

In the Eastern Pacific, NOAA forecast seven to 12 hurricanes with five to eight
of them being major hurricanes. The region has already had eight hurricanes
including six major hurricanes. A major hurricane is considered a Category 3 or
higher.

In the Central Pacific, NOAA forecast five to eight tropical cyclones, which
includes depressions, storms and hurricanes. The area has had five so far.

NOAA said the Atlantic would get six to 11 named storms, including three to six
hurricanes. Of those, no more than two were expected to be major hurricanes.

So far, it's seen four tropical storms and two hurricanes, neither of which
exceeded Category 1 strength.

"Florida has kind of gotten a break," Bell said. "But we are in the peak of the
season and any time there is something out in the Atlantic moving west, the U.S.
is a target."

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

2015 Hurricane Season, so far

Central Pacific

Tropical Storm Ela

Tropical Storm Halola

Tropical Storm Iune

Hurricane Kilo

Hurricane Loke

East Pacific

Hurricane Andres

Hurricane Blanca

Hurricane Carlos

Hurricane Dolores

Tropical Storm Enrique

Tropical Storm Felicia

Hurricane Guillermo

Hurricane Hilda

Hurricane Ignacio

Hurricane Jimena

Tropical Storm Kevin

Atlantic

Tropical Storm Ana

Tropical Storm Bill

Tropical Storm Claudette

Hurricane Danny

Tropical Storm Erika

Hurricane Fred

Tropical Storm Grace

Source: National Hurricane Center, Unisys Weather

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 276 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             April 15, 2016 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Experts forecast 13 named storms for season

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 677 words


The Atlantic Ocean is expected to brew up a near-average number of tropical
cyclones during the 2016 hurricane season, and experts Thursday cautioned that
current climate conditions resemble those present in 1992 when Category 5
Hurricane Andrew struck.

In a much-anticipated hurricane forecast, Colorado State University researchers
issued their early predictions for the season that begins June 1, calling for a
total of 13 named storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes with sustained
winds of 111 mph or more.

The baker's dozen of storms includes January's Hurricane Alex, which was
unremarkable except for its untimely appearance during winter.

Also included in Thursday's analysis is a 50 percent probability that a severe
hurricane will make a U.S. landfall, just below the historical average. The
chances for a major hurricane hitting the Atlantic coast of Florida are 30
percent, also just skirting the historical average of 31 percent.

"It only takes one landfall event near you to make this an active season," said
Phil Klotzbach, a research scientist with CSU's Department of Atmospheric
Sciences and lead author of the forecast. Klotzbach took over as the report's
lead author from hurricane expert William Gray in 2006.

Thursday's forecast is notable in that it is the first time since 2013 where the
season was not forecast to be below average. Seasonal averages include 12 named
storms, six hurricanes and three major hurricanes.

As recently as March, Klotzbach was predicting slightly fewer than normal
storms, based partly on a frigid blob of water in the far North Atlantic that
may limit storm formation off the coast of Africa if it drifts south.

"Especially in April, all of these forecasts are challenging," Klotzbach said.
"I would say the confidence level is on the lower end of the spectrum, but for
what we know, I think it's a reasonable forecast."

CSU will issue its next forecast in June.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association's 2016 hurricane forecast is
expected to be released next month. The Pennsylvania-based forecasting company
AccuWeather put out its numbers last week, which called for a slightly
above-average season.

It has been more than 10 years since a hurricane hit Florida. The last was
2005's Hurricane Wilma, which left more than 6 million Floridians without
electricity, some for weeks.

Delray Beach resident Myra Goldman, who experienced the hurricane seasons of
2004 and 2005, said she's better prepared today, but hadn't thought about the
pending June 1 storm start date until told about Thursday's forecast.

"I'm not nervous because we haven't had anything since (2005)," Goldman said
when stopped Thursday in downtown West Palm Beach. "I think people don't take it
seriously, and they didn't take it seriously until we had problems."

The wild card in this year's hurricane forecast is El Niño, which came on strong
last season to help knock down growing storms with powerful westerly winds high
in the atmosphere. But El Niño is expected to be gone by summer.

Klotzbach said global climate patterns this year are similar to six previous
years that were moving out of strong El Niño patterns, including 1992.

While 1992 was a below-average season for storms, Hurricane Andrew hit like a
bomb in August, devastating suburban Miami. The other years include 1941, 1973,
1983, 1998 and 2003. Only 1998 and 2003 had above-average hurricane activity.

"Even in inactive seasons, you can certainly have landfalls," Klotzbach said.
"Florida has gone 10 years without a hurricane, and that streak is going to end
sometime."

Last year, CSU's April forecast called for seven named storms, three hurricanes
and one major hurricane.

The 2015 Atlantic hurricane season ended with 11 named storms, four hurricanes
and two major hurricanes.

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

get the app

The free PBPost Weather app is available on iTunes and at Google Play

video online

get the app

Post weather reporter Kimberly Miller talks about the hurricane forecast with
West Palm Beach Mayor Jeri Muoio . See it at myPalmBeachPost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2016 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 277 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             August 12, 2016 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Season forecast 2.0: Experts projecting more named storms

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller     Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 638 words


Climate experts increased the number of named storms they expect to see this
season and upped the chances of above-normal activity as Mother Nature's mood
turns mischievous closer to hurricane prime time.

The Climate Prediction Center released its new forecast Thursday, which calls
for 12 to 17 named storms, five to eight hurricanes and two to four major
hurricanes of Category 3 or higher.

While the new prediction isn't exceptionally higher than the May forecast, when
10 to 16 named storms were predicted, the center also increased the probability
of a more active season to 35 percent from 30 and is calling for the busiest
season since 2012.

Hurricane season peaks mid-August through mid-October.

"Conditions are in place that favor a more active season, and that's the bottom
line," said Gerry Bell, lead seasonal hurricane forecaster for the center, which
is part of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. "The outlook is
really a reflection of what will happen during the peak months of the hurricane
season."

The demise of El Niño, weak vertical wind shear, feeble trade winds over the
central tropical Atlantic and a strong west African monsoon are all contributing
to the hike in storm numbers.

La Niña, once given a 75 percent chance of blazing onto the climatological
scene, is now expected to be only a weak event by fall and winter with little to
contribute to storm season. La Niña doesn't necessarily encourage more
hurricanes, but isn't one to knock them down, either. "La Niña does favor a more
active season, but that's only one player in the game," Bell said.

An average hurricane season has 12 named storms, six hurricanes and three major
hurricanes.

And it's important to note that the new storm numbers include the five named
storms that have already come and gone this year -- Hurricanes Alex and Earl,
and Tropical Storms Bonnie, Colin and Danielle.

That means up to 12 more named storms could form and six hurricanes if the high
end of the center's prediction holds true.

"The fear a lot of people have is we may get these storms fast and furious,"
said Dan Kottlowski, a hurricane expert with the Pennsylvania-based AccuWeather.
"We saw how things exploded across the Pacific a few weeks ago."

In a five-week period beginning July 2, the Pacific has burned through five
tropical storms and four hurricanes.

The Atlantic basin storms to date have been mostly unremarkable for the U.S.
Hurricane Earl, which made landfall in Belize on Aug. 4 is being blamed for at
least 40 deaths as its remnants triggered landslides in Mexico.

"Most of the U.S. is probably saying 'What hurricane season?'~HOA~128~128~"
Kottlowski said. "But when you look at the numbers, we're right on schedule to
be near normal, and all we need is a couple more storms to be above-normal."

The easterly African waves that serve as embryos for Atlantic tropical cyclones
this time of year move off the coast every three to five days. They form when
rainfall patterns shift in Africa, sending thunderstorm systems toward a ribbon
of swift winds at about 15,000 feet called the African Easterly Jet. On the
south side of that stream of air, the storms begin to rotate, spinning toward
the coast like pinwheels.

But no storms are expected through at least next week. Kottlowski said most
forecast models show debilitating wind shear -- differences in wind speed and
direction with height in the atmosphere -- in the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean.

"Those conditions will change," Kottlowski said. "Everyone believes it will
become quite active during the height of the season."

kmiller@pbpost.com Twitter: @kmillerweather

get the app

Check local conditions, see live radar and keep up with reporter Kimberly
Miller's weather updates. The free PBPost Weather app is available on iTunes and
at Google Play. Search for Palm Beach Post WeatherPlus.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Hurricane Wilma caused major damage when it struck Florida in
October 2005. Hurricane season peaks from mid-August through   mid-October.
Lannis Waters / the palm beach post 2005

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2016 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 278 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                            October 26, 2015 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

WHAT IS A CATEGORY 5 HURRICANE?

BYLINE:  STEVEN A. ACKERMAN and JONATHAN MARTIN , UW-Madison department of
atmospheric and oceanic sciences

SECTION: LOCAL; ASK THE WEATHER GUYS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 290 words


Q. What is a Category 5 hurricane?

A. An obvious hurricane threat is its powerful wind, which can blow in a single
spot for many hours.

Wind damage is such a hallmark of hurricanes that they are classified by
meteorologists using the Saffir-Simpson scale, which rates hurricanes on a scale
of 1 to 5 based on the damage their winds would cause upon landfall. Major
hurricanes are those classified as Category 3 and higher on this scale.

Fortunately, most hurricanes do not produce the extreme winds linked with the
highest category on the Saffir-Simpson scale. Since 1900, only three Category 5
hurricanes have crossed the United States coastline: the Labor Day Storm of 1935
in Florida, Hurricane Camille in Mississippi in 1969, and Hurricane Andrew in
1992.

A Category 5 storm has wind speeds greater than 155 mph with minimum surface
pressures of less than 920 millibars. Patricia, the recent hurricane off the
west coast of Mexico, was a Category 5 with winds over 200 mph. This is the
strongest hurricane measured in the Western Hemisphere. It was also unique in
terms of how fast it intensified to a Category 5 storm.

Flooding from these hurricanes causes major damage to shoreline and buildings.
The winds in a hurricane push ocean water in front of them. The stronger the
wind, the more water is "piled up" by the wind. As the hurricane nears shore,
the wind pushes this water inland. This process of wind-induced seawater
flooding is called storm surge. Historically, the storm surge has caused as much
as 90 percent of all hurricane-related deaths.

Steve Ackerman and Jonathan Martin, professors in the UW-Madison department of
atmospheric and oceanic sciences, are guests on WHA radio (970 AM) at 11:45 a.m.
the last Monday of each month.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: REBECCA BLACKWELL - Associated Press Residents walk through the debris
of homes destroyed by Hurricane Patricia, in Chamela, Mexico, on Saturday.
Record-breaking Patricia pushed rapidly inland over mountainous western Mexico
early Saturday, weakening to tropical storm force while dumping torrential rains
that authorities warned could cause deadly floods and mudslides.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2015 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 279 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                            January 18, 2016 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

HURRICANES IN JANUARY ARE RARE

BYLINE:  STEVEN A. ACKERMAN and JONATHAN MARTIN , UW-Madison department of
atmospheric and oceanic sciences

SECTION: LOCAL; ASK THE WEATHER GUYS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 269 words


Q. Are hurricanes in January typical occurrences?

A. No. The annual hurricane season typically runs from June 1 to Nov. 30.
Approximately 97 percent of hurricanes occur during that time. January
hurricanes are rare.

Alex was declared a hurricane in the Atlantic on Thursday and maintained
hurricane winds until Friday. It was a Category 1 storm with sustained winds of
85 mph.

While rare, there have been other hurricanes in the month of January. This is
the fourth storm since record keeping started in 1851. Before Alex, the most
recent January hurricane, Alice, was in 1955. Another unique aspect of Alice was
that it formed on Dec. 30, 1954 and lasted until Jan. 6, 1955.

Why are January hurricanes rare?

Hurricanes form over warm waters. The evaporation of the warm ocean waters
condenses to form clouds and precipitation releasing latent heat energy that
helps to maintain the storm. A general rule of thumb is that hurricanes will not
form unless the water temperature is at least 80 degrees.

Evaporation is a function of the temperature difference between the air and
water. The larger the temperature difference the greater the evaporation. The
Northern Atlantic Ocean is typically not that warm in January.

Alex formed over waters whose temperatures were about 68 degrees, certainly
below our rule of thumb. But, about 6 miles above, the air was very cold, at
minus 76. The 144-degree difference between the air and water temperature, along
with small vertical wind shear, helped the storm to develop into a hurricane.

Unfortunately, this early storm does not allow us to make a forecast about the
upcoming season.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: NASA This photo taken from video provided by NASA on Friday shows
Hurricane Alex seen from the International Space Station. The rare January
hurricane in the Atlantic closed in on the Azores on Friday, with authorities in
the Portuguese islands warning of waves up to 60 feet high, wind gusts up to 100
mph and torrential rain.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2016 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 280 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                              June 5, 2005 Sunday
                                  ALL EDITION

Odds favor a quiet June;
Alma, Agnes were notable early hurricanes to hit Florida

BYLINE: By CATHY ZOLLO cathy.zollo@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 704 words


Hurricane ditty

June too soon

July stand by

August come they must

September remember

October all over

On the web: Our online guide to the hurricane season is available 24 hours a day
at heraldtribune.com/hurricane.

There's a ditty about hurricanes that says "June too soon." The cooler Atlantic
waters in late spring and early summer tend to make it true.

Since 1851, Florida has seen six June hurricanes. The last of those was Agnes in
1972, a Category 1 storm that did little damage in Florida but drenched the
northeastern U.S., causing record flooding and killing more than 120 people.

Hurricane Alma swept past Sarasota on June 9, 1966, on its way to landfall in
the Panhandle. En route, it spawned heavy rains and strong winds, leaving $10
million in damage and killing six people across the state.

July hurricanes are even more rare and have hit Florida just five times since
1851, the last one in 1936.

While Floridians typically know what to expect, last year's hurricane season,
which sent four storms churning through Florida, blew away conventional
hurricane wisdom.

What specific storms will do in any hurricane season or any particular month of
that season is literally up in the air, said Frank Lepore, spokesman for the
National Hurricane Center. He said people need to prepare for the one storm that
comes their way, whenever it happens.

"If you give them any kind of excuse, say only a 4 percent chance of activity,
they'll say, 'Well heck, that's a pretty low percentage,'" Lepore said. "We can
have the greatest science in the world, but nature doesn't necessarily follow
the science. There's enough uncertainty that a prudent person would prepare."

History shows that the number of storms and their intensity increases as the
season progresses, growing in August and peaking in September, then dropping off
in October and November.

The earlier storms have tended to be weaker Category 1 and Category 2
hurricanes, said hurricane historian and author Jay Barnes, though bigger storms
do occur early in the year.

"August and then into September is when you typically see stronger, major
hurricanes, Category 3 and above," Barnes said.

Those are the Cape Verde storms that usually begin off the western edge of the
African coast as tropical waves.

Out of approximately 100 tropical waves that will roll off the African continent
this year, between 12 and 15 are expected to become tropical storms. Hurricane
experts expect seven to nine of them to become hurricanes, and three to five of
those will be major storms.

But Barnes, whose book "Florida's Hurricane History" outlines each storm to hit
the peninsula, said a banner year isn't always the one that holds the most
danger.

"There have been incredibly destructive storms in below-average years," Barnes
said.

Among those was Hurricane Andrew, which struck a devastating blow to South
Florida in August 1992, a year that saw only four hurricanes.

Though hurricane records go back to 1851, they are fairly spotty before the
advent of aerial weather reconnaissance in the mid-1940s.

By the 1960s, satellites in polar orbits gave weather forecasters a global view
and the ability to monitor each storm as it formed off Africa's west coast or
developed in the Gulf of Mexico.

To those who would hold firmly to history for their chances of being caught
unprepared for a hurricane, Lepore offers one last caveat.

"Just because a climatologist says 4 percent of the activity occurs in the month
of June, that's an average," he said. "What if this particular year everything
happens in June? That's the problem with averages."

50 years of hurricanes

Over the past 50 years, Florida has had two June hurricanes and four August
hurricanes. There hasn't been a July hurricane in more than 50 years.

Month Year Name Category

June 1966 Alma 2

June 1972 Agnes 1

August1964 Cleo 2

August1992 Andrew 5

August1995 Erin 2

August2004 Charley 4

Sept. 1956 Flossy 2

Sept. 1960 Donna 4

Sept. 1964 Dora 2

Sept. 1965 Betsy 3

Sept. 1975 Eloise 3

Sept. 1979 David 2

Sept. 1985 Elena 3

Month Year Name Category

Sept. 1998 Earl 1

Sept. 1998 Georges 2

Sept. 2004 Frances 2

Sept. 2004 Ivan 3

Sept. 2004 Jeanne 3

Oct. 1964 Isbell 2

Oct. 1966 Inez 1

Oct. 1968 Gladys 2

Oct. 1987 Floyd 1

Oct. 1995 Opal 3

Oct. 1999 Irene 1

Nov. 1985 Kate 2

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Hurricane Season 2005

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 2
 COURTESY PHOTO / SARASOTA COUNTY HISTORY CENTER A photograph taken on the
morning of Thursday, June 9, 1966, shows the Colony Beach Resort as the outer
bands of Hurricane Alma hit Longboat Key. Since 1851, Florida has experienced
only six June hurricanes. COURTESY PHOTO / SARASOTA COUNTY HISTORY CENTER Boat
racks on City Island show severe damage from Hurricane Alma on the morning of
Thursday, June 9, 1966.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2005 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.


                          FOCUS - 281 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 1, 2013 Saturday

Hurricane hunters are ready

BYLINE: Aldeth Lewin, The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 374 words


June 01--It is the start of hurricane season, and the Hurricane Hunters already
are on the job.

Members of the 403rd Wing of the Air Force Reserve 53rd Weather Reconnaissance
Squadron -- the Hurricane Hunters -- set up their station on St. Croix in May.

"We're geared up and ready to go," Master Sgt. Brian Lamar, an Air Force Reserve
spokesman, said Friday.

The Hurricane Hunters are based at Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi, Miss., but
during hurricane season, they fly missions out of St. Croix to gather data on
the approaching storms.

The Hurricane Hunters fly WC-130J aircraft into tropical cyclones and
disturbances to gather data that the National Hurricane Center then uses to help
it determine the status of a storm and make predictions.

The St. Croix location also puts them in range to fly missions throughout the
Caribbean, as well as into the Gulf of Mexico.

The Hurricane Hunters fly all four quadrants of a storm, and one of their major
functions is to determine the exact location of the center of the storm, which
helps in predicting the storm's track.

"We receive taskings from our customer, the National Hurricane Center, and they
tell us where they would like us to gather data," Lamar said.

Each plane has a five-person crew: a pilot, a co-pilot, a navigator, a weather
officer and a dropsonde operator.

The planes release dropsondes to measure meteorological data from inside the
storm and transmit it back to the Hurricane Center. The dropsondes -- about the
size of a tennis ball canister -- can send two pages of text messaging every
second to the Hurricane Center.

The data collected by Hurricane Hunters enables the Hurricane Center to reduce
the "cone of uncertainty" in its projected hurricane tracks by 25 to 30 percent,
Lamar said.

The storm missions are not affected by the budget cuts in Washington, and
missions will occur as needed, according to Lamar.

"We're prepared. We're resourced to do the missions, and we're still going to be
out there to protect lives," Lamar said.

- Contact Aldeth Lewin at 714-9111 or email alewin@dailynews.vi

___ (c)2013 The Virgin Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) Visit The Virgin
Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) at www.virginislandsdailynews.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130601-1VI-Hurricane-hunters-are-ready-0601-20130601

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2013 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 282 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 31, 2009 Sunday

Hurricane season starts Monday

BYLINE: Laura Tillman, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 832 words


May 31--Cameron County officials are encouraging residents to begin preparing
for the 2009 hurricane season.

With the hurricane season beginning on Monday, officials want the public to not
only think preparations, but to begin them.

Hurricane forecasters are predicting there will be nine to 14 named Atlantic
storms, with four to seven of them becoming full-fledged hurricanes.

Hurricane season begins June 1 and runs through Nov. 30.

Cameron County officials have sent letters to churches, nonprofit organizations
and smaller towns offering to make hurricane awareness presentations to anyone
who wants them, Cameron County Judge Carlos H. Cascos said, adding that the
county has not done such presentations in the past.

They have already made a presentation at the Town of Indian Lake and at least
one adult daycare center, Cascos said.

"We are trying to get people into that frame of mind" that hurricane season is
almost here and that the public needs to begin making preparations, the county
judge said. "Some people spend more time planning for a vacation than they do
planning for a hurricane."

Residents should begin putting together and sealing in plastic baggies personal
documents, such as birth certificates, immigration papers and other paperwork
for identification purposes. They should also be reviewing evacuation routes
they plan to take should they need to leave the area, the county judge said.

Weather radios and free hurricane maps have already popped up at the checkout
lanes in the H-E-B store on Central Boulevard in Brownsville.

In late July the Rio Grande Valley experienced the wrath of Hurricane Dolly
after the storm made landfall in an uninhabited area near the Cameron County and
Willacy County line.

Dolly dumped about 16 inches of rain on the Laguna Madre area and a reported 15
inches near Rio Hondo. Brownsville received an estimated 9 inches of rain while
Harlingen received nearly 7 inches, the National Weather Service reported.

Damage to the South Texas area was estimated at $1.2 billion. Dolly was the
first Atlantic storm of the 2008 hurricane season to make landfall, the National
Climatic Data Center reported.

What worries Johnny Cavazos, emergency management coordinator for Cameron
County, is that some people in the Lower Cameron County, particularily
Brownsville, may be come complacent should a hurricane strike the area because
of the city's experience with Hurricane Dolly.

Hurricane Dolly bypassed Brownsville causing minimal damage to the city while
other areas in upper Cameron County experienced severe flooding and were left
without electricity for weeks.

"People in Brownsville will be more reluctant to leave" because they survived
Dolly with no major destruction, Cavazos said. "What they survived was a
Category 1 hurricane that missed them and went north of them and didn't do a
whole lot of damaging and flooding," Cavazos said.This is the part of the reason
why the letters are going out offering to make presentations so residents can
make the right choices during hurricane season.

Cascos said residents, who need help evacuating should a hurricane make landfall
in the area, should sign up now with 2-1-1. Registering with 2-1-1 will allow
officials to know the addresses of people who need to be evacuated should a
hurricane threaten the area.

The 2-1-1 program is designated for individuals who have no means of
transportation to leave the area and others deemed to have special needs.

Cavazos said residents need to be aware that while they are registering
addresses with the 2-1-1 database, they will be responsible for getting
themselves and their families to the designated pickup points where evacuation
buses will meet them.

The pickup points will be announced as a storm approaches, Cavazos said.

The county is following the leadership of the Governor's Emergency Management
Division's plan that will be put in action should a hurricane threaten to strike
anywhere along the Texas coastline. This includes setting up water stations,
gasoline suppliers and rest areas along evacuation routes.

Because the state of Texas has devised an evacuation plan that will be utilized
statewide, Cascos said there is no need for municipalities to attempt to address
issues on their own.

"You can't have every city doing their own thing," Cascos said. "It's not going
to work. It's not going to happen."

Last year, there were 16 named storms with eight of them growing into actual
hurricanes, the Associated Press reported. Four of the hurricanes struck Texas.

Whatever happens this year, Cascos said: "We will be ready."

To see more of The Brownsville Herald, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.brownsvilleherald.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Brownsville Herald,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090531-BV-HURRICANE-SEASON-20090531

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2009 The Brownsville Herald


                          FOCUS - 283 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 28, 2010 Tuesday
                                 Every Edition

Hurricane predictor will update forecast Wednesday Hurricane predictor will
update forecast Wednesday

BYLINE: - Rachel Saslow

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. E03

LENGTH: 618 words


ATMOSPHERIC SCIENTIST PHIL KLOTZBACH  is in the business of forecasting
hurricanes months in advance - which, he admits, cannot be done. "It's
impossible to say, 'We're going to have 18 storms and nine hurricanes this
year.' We can say it's going to be an active season and here's the science
behind it."

Still, Klotzbach does try to predict the number of hurricanes in an upcoming
tropical storm season (August through October).    On Dec. 9, 2009, he released
his first forecast for the current season, predicting an above-average year,
with six to eight Atlantic hurricanes. Starting in August, Klotzbach, based at
Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology Project, issues forecasts every
two weeks; the  next one is due Wednesday.

Klotzbach's mentor is William Gray, who has been studying hurricanes for more
than 50 years and produced forecasts for 26. Gray - who has gotten attention
lately for calling global warming a hoax - gave up his prognosticating duties at
the Meteorology Project in 2006, making Klotzbach the country's leading
hurricane forecaster at age 26.

We spoke to Klotzbach from his office in Fort Collins, Colo., about Hurricane
Hunter flights, his famous boss and his impossible job.

Have you always been interested in hurricanes?

I was just a hard-core weather geek from a young age. I remember taking blank
maps of the U.S. and drawing weather fronts on them.

I would say, with regard to hurricanes, I got interested in 1985. I was 5, and
we had Hurricane Gloria go through close enough to Plymouth, Mass., to get some
strong winds and heavy rain. I was interested in why and how it happened.

Your boss is a vocal global warming skeptic. Do you think it's a hoax, too?

I think it's a much more complicated question than that. Certainly, the climate
has warmed over the last century. I think you can't attribute all of it to CO2;
there are a lot of other factors involved as well. I wouldn't take the same
position that he does, and I definitely wouldn't state it in the same way. His
main focus in life is climate change, and mine is hurricanes.

Since you admit that it's impossible to predict the number of hurricanes in an
upcoming season, why do you still do it?

I think one of the primary benefits is that it increases public awareness. You'd
be surprised how quickly people, even in places like Florida, forget if they
don't have [a hurricane] for a few years.

Also, people are curious for the same reason why people want to know in February
who is going to win the World Series [that  fall]. You, of course, can't know
for sure. But we base our predictions on historical data and statistics, and
assume the future behaves similarly to the past.

What's it like to give a forecast that turns out to be dead wrong?

People give us hell. They say, "They're a bunch of idiots!" It gives you extra
motivation to figure out what happened. We do a verification every year that's
60 to 70 pages long where we go back and figure out why the season behaved the
way it did. It's an important part of the process.

Which were your best and worst prediction years?

In 2006, we predicted nine hurricanes and only had five. In 2008, we predicted
eight and got eight. Now that's a good forecast.

Have you ever experienced a major hurricane?

Growing up in Massachusetts, it's not like going through Hurricane Andrew in
Florida or anything, but I was in Hurricane Bob in 1991. I'm interested in going
on Hurricane Hunter flights.

What's a Hurricane Hunter flight?

They're run by the Air Force in partnership with [the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration]. It's really hard to get on those flights, and the
empty seats usually go to media. You kind of have to get lucky in a way.

- Rachel Saslow

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: District-Maryland

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 284 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

             September 10, 2003 Wednesday 0 South Pinellas Edition

Hurricane menace boils to a peak in mid September

BYLINE: CRAIG PITTMAN

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 735 words


For three months, Florida has been safe. Although nine named storms have sprung
to life since hurricane season began in June, the season has been fairly quiet
in the Sunshine State.

But don't stick the candles and duct tape in the back of the closet just yet.

The experts at the National Hurricane Center say now is the time to really be
alert. In fact, today.

After studying weather records dating back to 1851, they concluded Sept. 10
marks the day hurricane season hits its most dangerous point.

"The season is actually very sharply peaked around Sept. 10," said Colin McAdie,
a meteorologist with the National Hurricane Center in Miami.

A case in point: Today marks the 14th anniversary of the day Hurricane Hugo was
first identified as a potential storm in the Atlantic Ocean.

Hugo roared through Puerto Rico and then, on Sept. 22, 1989, charged ashore near
Charleston, S.C., with 135 mph winds and a 17-foot storm surge that flattened
everything in its path. It killed 23 people and caused nearly $11-billion in
damage.

September always has been the cruelest month, the one in which all the
conditions are ripe for the swirling winds off Africa to spawn a raging
hurricane that threatens the coast of the U.S.

The newest named storm, Isabel, has already reached hurricane strength. As it
swept through the Atlantic on Tuesday with winds already as strong as Hugo's,
forecasters warned it could threaten the Caribbean islands by Friday.

At 11 p.m. Tuesday, Isabel had a maximum wind speed of 135 mph, making it a
Category 4 storm. It would become a Category 5, the top of the scale, if winds
reach 156 mph.

Isabel was 875 miles east-northeast of the northern Leeward Islands in the
northeastern Caribbean and was moving west-northwest at 14 mph. Forecasters
predicted the storm would take a turn toward the west during the next day or two
and said some strengthening was possible.

"It's pretty far away," said meteorologist Eric Blake of the National Hurricane
Center. "With our average error being 300 miles, it certainly could be a
threat."

It's hardly surprising that Isabel has formed now.

"There are certain elements that need to be in place for a cyclone to become a
hurricane, and all of those come together in September," McAdie said.

Crucial to the formation of a hurricane are plenty of warm water and a steady
supply of easterly winds in the tropics, both at their height this month.

Of course, hurricanes hit during other months. The worst natural disaster in
U.S. history, Hurricane Andrew, flattened South Florida in August 1992.

But many of history's most horrible hurricanes were born in September, including
the infamous Labor Day hurricane of 1935, which killed more than 400 people in
the Florida Keys with wind gusts that topped 200 mph; the 1900 hurricane that
killed 8,000 people and nearly wiped Galveston, Texas, off the map; and
Hurricane Betsy, which in 1965 killed 75 people in Florida and Louisiana.

Between 1900 and 2000, 165 hurricanes struck the U.S. September saw the most
hits, 65. Of the 571 tropical storms and hurricanes documented in the Atlantic,
Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico between 1944 and 2000, the largest number, 198,
sprang to life in September.

Typically there are 10 named storms every year, and six become hurricanes.
Experts forecast that this year would be an above-average one, with 11 to 15
storms of which six to nine would be hurricanes. So far, they have been on
target.

If no big storms surface by Sept. 30, most of the country can breathe easily but
not Florida, McAdie said. The state's extensive coastline, so attractive to
tourists, makes Florida vulnerable long after the other coastal states are in
the clear.

"October is still an active month for Florida," he said. In fact, he said,
"we're not really off the hook until Thanksgiving."

- The Associated Press contributed to this report.

September hurricanes since 1889

September is the peak of hurricane season, and forecasters' predictions of an
above-average year appear to be on target. Florida has had its share of
September storms, according to a map of historical hurricane paths from the
National Climatic Data Center.

Category 4 (135-155 mph)

Category 3 (111-130 mph)

Category 2 (96-110 mph)

Category 1 (75-95 mph)

Severity not recorded

Source: National Climatic Data Center, Florida Geographic Data Library

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

GRAPHIC: MAP, AMANDA RAYMOND, MATTHEW WAITE; MAP; A map of the state of Florida
locates historical hurricane paths supplied from the National Climatic Data
Center.; Locates the projected paths of Hurricane Isabel and Tropical Depression
14.

                    Copyright 2003 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 285 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                     September 19, 2017 Tuesday 5:06 PM GMT

Hurricane Maria: Why are so many cyclones hitting the Caribbean and US?;
Here's what you need to know.

SECTION: VIRAL; Version:1

LENGTH: 659 words


Hurricane Maria has swiftly followed Hurricanes Harvey and Irma in wreaking
devastation across the Caribbean. The category five storm is moving across the
Caribbean Sea towards St Kitts and Nevis and is due to make landfall in Puerto
Rico on Wednesday.

Hurricane Maria: Why are so many cyclones hitting the Caribbean and US? twitter
1

Are so many hurricanes in a short space of time normal, and why is this
particular area of the world being battered by tropical cyclones now? Here's
what you need to know.

What is a hurricane, exactly?

A hurricane is another name for a tropical cyclone. A tropical cyclone starts
over the sea and according to the Royal Meteorological Society, there has to a
number of particular factors for one to form.

These include a warm ocean temperature, humid atmosphere and different speeds of
wind on the surface of the sea and in the upper atmosphere. It is deemed to be a
tropical cyclone once surface wind speeds exceed 36mph, and a severe tropical
cyclone once they reach 73mph.

Why are the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico being battered by multiple
hurricanes?

Alasdair Hainsworth, chief of the Disaster Risk Reduction Services Division at
the World Meteorological Organisation, says that although September is seen as
hurricane season (the time of year hurricanes occur most frequently), "it is
unusual that we've had this many severe hurricanes move through the Caribbean
Islands".

He explained that most hurricanes follow "tracks" which run through different
areas where weather conditions make hurricanes more likely. "There are a number
of these preferred tracks around the world and unfortunately the one in the
Caribbean is exactly one of those," said Hainsworth.

Hurricane Maria: Why are so many cyclones hitting the Caribbean and US? twitter
2

The track which runs hurricanes over the Caribbean and into the southern US is
caused by the hot weather in North Africa at this time of year.

These temperatures create low pressure systems which are pushed off the coast of
Sierra Leone and the Gambia by prevailing easterly winds. Then, if conditions
are favourable, they progress from tropical storms into tropical cyclones. If
conditions continue to create hurricanes, as described above, they move across
the Atlantic and potentially gain in strength, reaching further into the
Caribbean and the US. Some have even reached Mexico this year.

Who decides what a hurricane is called?

Hurricane Maria: Why are so many cyclones hitting the Caribbean and US? twitter
3

The naming convention for hurricanes was established in 1953 by the World
Meteorological Organisation. Each regional area has different lists of names
from A to Z, which are used in rotation; for example, the 2015 list of names for
the Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico and the North Atlantic region will be used
again in 2021.

For a time, all hurricanes in the US were named after women, but in the 1970s
male names were included on the list.

However, if a hurricane of a particular name gains notoriety because of the
amount of damage, destruction or loss of life it caused, the government of the
countries affected can ask for the name to be retired and replaced with another
name beginning with the same letter.

Over 50 hurricane names have been retired since 1978, including Katrina (2005),
which killed 1,833 and caused devastation across New Orleans, and Mitch (1998),
the second deadliest hurricane on record, with a death toll of 19,325.

How is the category of a hurricane measured?

Hurricanes are measured by the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale, which places
them into categories one to five, with five being the most intense. The scale is
used to estimate potential property damage.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2017 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 286 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                 Ottawa Citizen

                           September 16, 2005 Friday
                                 EARLY Edition

More powerful hurricanes on the way: Scientists say warmer oceans making
Katrina-strength storms the new order

BYLINE: Tom Spears, The Ottawa Citizen

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 596  words


Hurricanes are becoming more violent worldwide, with twice as many Category 4
and 5 hurricanes -- the strongest types -- as there were 35 years ago,
scientists warn.

And while they won't blame the ferocity of Katrina on this trend, they say
warmer oceans are making Katrina the face of the future.

There aren't more hurricanes overall than in past decades, says the study by the
Georgia Institute of Technology and the U.S. National Center for Atmospheric
Research. But a greater proportion of hurricanes are growing into monsters like
Katrina, Andrew and Hugo.

"What we found was rather astonishing," said lead scientist Peter Webster of
Georgia Tech.

"In the 1970s, there was an average of about 10 Category 4 and 5 hurricanes per
year globally. Since 1990, the number of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes has almost
doubled, averaging 18 per year globally."

Category 4 hurricanes have sustained winds of at least 210 kilometres an hour at
sea level. Category 5 winds are at least 250 km/h.

He said warmer sea temperatures are feeding hurricanes, making them stronger.
Whether this is due to global warming caused by humans or whether there's a also
natural cycle involved, he can't say.

Between 1975 and 1989, the North Atlantic and Caribbean had 16 of these
hurricanes, the study says. From 1990 to 2004, the number increased to 25.

The Western Pacific Ocean went from 85 to 116 strong hurricanes in the same time
frame. The South Indian Ocean went from 23 to 50, and the eastern Pacific from
36 to 49, the study says.

Forecasts of global warming generally point to bigger hurricanes. But the new
study is bound to stir debate, as a conflicting theory says hurricane frequency
changes in a natural cycle. There are also questions about the completeness of
data from the earliest weather satellites.

Many environmentalists and hurricane victims have pointed to Katrina as evidence
that global warming is causing stronger storms.

But scientists agree it's impossible to read a trend in one single storm.

"If you look at Katrina you can say, 'Was that climate change or not?' I don't
know. It's an argument we could debate for a long time," added Canadian climate
scientist Gordon McBean of the University of Western Ontario.

"But in the aftermath of Katrina, the redevelopment strategy for that part of
the U.S. should factor in, in my view, the expectation that the hurricane
intensities of the future will be greater than those of the recent past."

Katrina was a Category 5 over the Gulf of Mexico, dropping slightly to Category
4 just before reaching land.

In today's study, published in the journal Science, the researchers compared the
earliest years of the "satellite era" in weather tracking with more recent
years. Pre-satellite information on hurricanes is considered too patchy.

The North American insurance industry needs no convincing about the trend to
more violent hurricanes, said Paul Kovacs, executive director of the Institute
for Catastrophic Loss Reduction, in Toronto.

"There's no question that all of our research -- and I've got a team on the Gulf
Coast now -- is based on the belief that there may not be more hurricanes, but
there will be more big ones," he said.

Besides the high winds, stronger hurricanes also drop more rain and cause
flooding, he said.

And he said even slightly stronger winds can make the difference between a roof
that holds tight and one that is ripped away. "Up at that top end, the damage
just takes off" with every slight increase in wind speed, he said.

- - -

On the web: Read a science blog of quirks and snarks by Tom Spears.

www.ottawacitizen.com

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; A satellite image shows
Hurricane Katrina on Aug. 29, as it came ashore on the U.S. Gulf Coast as a
powerful Category 4 storm.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 287 of 881 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                           September 17, 2004 Friday
                                Toronto Edition

Hurricane season gets hairier every year

BYLINE: Michael Kuss, National Post

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; On the Weather; Pg. PM14

LENGTH: 317  words


Another day, another hurricane to track. Almost at the exact moment Hurricane
Ivan was running low on fuel, and was subsequently downgraded to a tropical
storm, Jeanne was waiting in the wings to take the spotlight as the new
hurricane on the block. It's been one destructive storm right after the other
this severe weather season. The active action has made for an exciting run for
meteorologists but conversely a stressful time for Ontario travellers, snowbirds
and those with family down south. And it's not over yet. There's still almost
two and a half months left in the North Atlantic hurricane season.

So how does this year stack up historically? So far in the North Atlantic this
year we've had 10 named storms. Six of those storms became hurricanes and four
of the hurricanes were major storms, which means they reached category three
status or greater. A category three hurricane has sustained winds between 175
and 210 kilometres per hour. A normal year sees 10 named storms, six of those
are hurricanes and two of those hurricanes are classified as major hurricanes.
This year has already reached the norm for named storms and for hurricanes and
has had twice the average total of major hurricanes. This season is by no means
a record-setter yet though. In 1933, there were an incredible 21 named storms,
as recently as 1995, 19 storms were named in one season. Of those storms 11 were
hurricanes and five of those hurricanes were major. Two of the most damaging
storms of 1995 were hurricanes Opal and Marilyn. Opal caused nearly $3US-billion
in damage and caused 59 deaths and Marilyn killed eight and resulted in almost
$2US-billion in damage.

This year's death and damage totals will unfortunately surpass those of 1995.
Since 1995 there has been an alarming trend: All but two of the last 10 years
have seen above-average storm activity and definitively more major hurricanes
than normal.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2004 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 288 of 881 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                             August 17, 2007 Friday
                                National Edition

Hurricane Dean heads briskly for Caribbean; Category 2 Storm's Top Winds Reach
160 Km/H

BYLINE: Michael Christie, Reuters

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 554  words

DATELINE: MIAMI


MIAMI - Hurricane Dean strengthened and threatened to become a dangerously
powerful storm as it ploughed toward the Caribbean and aimed for Mexico's
Yucatan Peninsula or the Gulf of Mexico beyond, forecasters said yesterday.

More immediately in the path of the 2007 Atlantic storm season's first hurricane
were the Lesser Antilles, in particular the islands of Dominica and St. Lucia
and the French territories of Martinique and Guadeloupe, the U.S. National
Hurricane Center said in Miami.

The hurricane's top sustained winds had reached 160 kilometres per hour by 5
p.m. yesterday, making it a Category 2 storm on the five-step Saffir-Simpson
scale of hurricane intensity.

Computer models showed the hurricane could become an extremely dangerous
Category 4 storm as it passes just south of Jamaica early next week.

Category 3 to 5 hurricanes, such as Katrina, Rita and Wilma in the devastating
2005 Atlantic storm season, are potentially the most destructive storms, but a
Category 2 hurricane can still cause some damage to buildings and create a
1.8-to 2.4-metre storm surge.

"Preparations to protect life and property should be rushed to completion," the
hurricane centre said in an echo of warnings that rang out repeatedly in 2004
and 2005, when a series of hurricanes struck the United States, the Caribbean
and Central America.

Energy markets in particular have been on edge since 2004 and 2005, when
hurricanes Ivan, Katrina and Rita toppled oil rigs and flooded refineries on the
U.S. Gulf Coast.

The Gulf of Mexico accounts for about a third of domestic U.S. oil and natural
gas production.

By 5 p.m. yesterday, Dean was about 340 km east-northeast of Barbados and 490 km
east of Martinique. The storm was moving westward at 37 km/h, a brisk pace that
could bring it over the Lesser Antilles islands early today.

The hurricane centre said the French government had issued a hurricane warning
for Martinique and Guadeloupe.

Hurricane warnings were also in effect for Dominica and St. Lucia.

A hurricane warning means hurricane conditions can be expected within 24 hours.

Tropical storm warnings were in effect for Grenada, St. Vincent and the
Grenadines, Barbados, Montserrat, Antigua and Barbuda, St. Kitts and Nevis and
St. Maarten.

A tropical storm watch, meaning tropical storm conditions could be expected
within 36 hours, was issued for the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.

Meanwhile, another weather system, Tropical Storm Erin, weakened into a
depression as it washed ashore in Texas about 40 km northeast of Corpus Christi,
spooking oil markets and killing one person as its heavy rains flooded Houston
and caused a grocery-store roof to collapse.

Forecasters have predicted the six-month hurricane season, which officially
began on June 1, will be more active than average, with up to 16 named storms.
An average year historically has 10 to 11 storms, of which six strengthen into
hurricanes.

None of the storms that have formed this year -- Andrea, Barry or Chantal --
posed a serious threat.

Atlantic hurricanes shot into the public consciousness after the devastation of
2004, when four storms in a row crossed Florida, and again in 2005, when Katrina
swamped New Orleans.

In 2005, Hurricane Rita also slammed into the Texas coast near New Orleans and
Wilma became for a while the most powerful hurricane ever recorded.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map:; (See hardcopy for Map) ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2007 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 289 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 23, 2016 Monday

Virginia: Hurricane and Flooding Preparedness Week, May 22-28

LENGTH: 243  words

DATELINE: New York



 Richmond: Fairfax County, The state of Virginia has issued the following news
release:



 Of all the weather events that impact Virginia the most, hurricanes top the
list. Historical storms like Camille, Fran, Floyd, Isabel, Gaston and Irene are
a reminder to inland and coastal residents that significant flooding, damages
and loss of life can occur in Virginia.





 To emphasize the importance of preparing for hurricane season, Gov. Terry
McAuliffe has designated this week, May 22-28, as Hurricane and Flooding
Preparedness Week in Virginia.



 Hurricane season starts June 1 and continues through Nov. 30.



 Colorado State University hurricane researchers are predicting (PDF report) a
near-average hurricane season for the Atlantic basin with 12 named storms, five
to become hurricanes and two to reach major hurricane strength (Saffir/Simpson
category 3-4-5) with sustained winds of 111 miles per hour or greater.



 The National Weather Service (NWS) considers hurricanes among nature's most
powerful and destructive phenomena. Even when hurricanes make landfall in other
states, they can still cause significant damage and loss of life in Virginia. In
fact, some of the worst storms in Virginia's history were from hurricanes that
made landfall in other states. Tropical storms or depressions can be just as
damaging or deadly as a hurricane.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 290 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 5, 2014 Thursday

Texas: Early Gulf-Formed Hurricanes Can Be Deadly

LENGTH: 707  words

DATELINE: Austin


Texas A&M University, The State of Texas has issued the following news release:

September may be the peak month for hurricanes, but don't let the calendar fool
you - some surprisingly strong storms have formed in June, says a Texas A&M
University at Galveston professor.

William Merrell, holder of the George Mitchell '40 Chair in Marine Sciences and
former head of the Texas Center for Beaches and Shores with more than 35 years
of marine experience, says that gulf-formed hurricanes can strike quickly and
they tend to catch people totally off-guard. He notes that over the past 150
years, most of the upper Texas coast has received numerous strikes from
gulf-formed hurricanes.

"This is in sharp contrast to Louisiana and the lower coast of Texas where
significantly less than one-half of storms making landfall form in the Gulf,"
Merrell explains.

"Gulf-formed storms have three nasty characteristics besides forming close to
us:  they form early in the season, their forward speed often accelerates as
they make landfall and, most troublesome of all, they often intensify as they
make landfall."
Gulf-originated storms generally occur earlier in the hurricane season than
Atlantic hurricanes, Merrell adds, noting that June is the busiest month on
record for Gulf-originated storms making landfall in Texas while Atlantic
hurricanes peak in September.

Such storms often catch people off guard, he adds.

"It's a strange part of human nature, but in June, at the beginning of the
season, we are not yet conditioned to hurricane dangers even though we know from
past experience the true dangers of hurricane season," he says.

"Our minds allow us to forget past hurricanes when the weather is clear and no
storms are forecast. Even though we know better, we are often unprepared when
hurricane season starts. Add to that the fact that with Gulf-formed storms, we
don't have the 'benefit' of watching an Atlantic hurricane slowly approach us
causing destruction in its path and building concern among weather forecasters.
We are caught by surprise, time and time again, when storms form early in the
season."

Merrell says the upper Texas coast has experienced major hurricanes that made
landfall within 72 hours after reaching hurricane status in the Gulf of Mexico.
The most noteworthy one was Hurricane Humberto that formed in September 2007
with almost no warning and actually achieved hurricane status while over land on
the Bolivar Peninsula.

Two other gulf-formed hurricanes were Audrey in 1957 and an unnamed 1932 storm
that hit near Galveston.

"Hurricane Audrey was a very fast-moving gulf hurricane that made landfall on
the coast near the Texas-Louisiana border in June of 1957," Merrell points out.

"Audrey was a Category 1 or 2 as it initially moved through the Gulf, and then
suddenly gained intensity to a Category 4 hurricane about 125 miles off the
coast. Six hours later Audrey made landfall as a Category 4 hurricane, causing
catastrophic damages in eastern Texas and western Louisiana. Between 416 and 550
people died, making Audrey the sixth deadliest hurricane in the history of the
United States."

And although not a hurricane, tropical storm Allison formed on June 5, 2001 and
pounded the Houston area for several days, resulting in 22 deaths and causing $5
billion in damages as it produced more than 30 inches of rain in several
locations.

The 1932 Gulf hurricane that hit near Galveston formed off the Yucatan about 2 ½
days before it hit, Merrell says, adding that on Aug. 13 around midnight, the
1932 storm reached the status of a category 1 hurricane about 240 miles off the
coast.

"The hurricane rapidly gained intensity, becoming a Category 2 six hours later
and a major hurricane (Category 3) six hours after that when it was about 100
miles off the coast," he notes. "The 1932 storm finally made landfall as a
Category 4 hurricane the evening of Aug. 14, killing about 40 people and causing
extensive damage to Freeport, Angleton and Galveston.

"So the message is very clear: Texans should not take the early part of the
hurricane season lightly and, when storms form just outside our back door, pay
careful attention because these types of storms can be deadly."

For further information please visit: http://tamutimes.tamu.edu/

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 291 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                     August 30, 1998, Sunday, ALL EDITIONS

HURRICANE SEASON;
Despite petering out, Bonnie most studied storm in history;
This time, NASA joined the usual groups as scientists flew above the storm for
the first time to gain a better understanding of hurricanes.

BYLINE: Charles Seabrook

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16A

LENGTH: 826 words


As Hurricane Bonnie churned and surged in the Atlantic Ocean early last week,
there were times when at least seven aircraft loaded with scientific gear were
flying through, around and over the big storm to study it.

Although Bonnie proved to be a wimp as far as hurricanes go, it was the most
studied hurricane in history because of the scientific scrutiny focused on it.

There were the usual flights by the U.S. Air Force's famed "Hurricane Hunters"
in aging C-130 Hercules planes, which fly into the storm at up to 10,000 feet to
feed real-time data --- air pressure, temperature, location --- to the National
Hurricane Center to help gauge the intensity and direction of the storm. There
were also the usual flights by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
researchers in Lockheed WP 3-D (P-3) Orions to help forecasters predict the
hurricane's strength and landfall.

But with Bonnie, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration also got into
the act as space agency scientists aboard high-altitude aircraft equipped with
spaceflight technology flew above the storm for the first time to gain a better
understanding of why hurricanes act the way they do.

"This storm has more research planes flying around it than any other hurricane
in history," said Frank Lapore, a spokesman with NOAA's National Hurricane
Center in Miami.

"There's no doubt that Bonnie is the most studied hurricane ever," said Texas
A&M University scientist Ed Zipser, one of the researchers leading NASA's
studies. "We need better ways to predict which way a storm will move and how
strong it will be when it gets there, and this program addresses both of those
issues."

While forecasters at the National Hurricane Center --- relying on the Hurricane
Hunters, satellites, computer models and other data --- can now gauge with some
reliability the strength and paths of hurricanes, there is vast room for
improvement.

More accurate forecasting of hurricanes could save lives, millions of dollars in
evacuation costs and reduce damage from the storms.

An unnecessary evacuation for a hurricane, for instance, could cost businesses
millions of dollars in lost revenues while making the public skeptical of future
warnings.

Weather forecasters estimate it costs businesses and government about $ 640,000
for each mile of coastline that has to be evacuated for a hurricane.

"If you have an evacuation order extending for hundreds of miles along a
coastline, that can be quite costly," said Mike Odom, a spokesman for the Air
Force's Hurricane Hunters based at Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi, Miss. "So,
if you can reliably and safely narrow it down, you will save a lot of money."

More than 500,000 people along more than 150 miles of coastline in the Carolinas
were evacuated last week as Bonnie headed ashore. Spaceflight technology

NASA's Global Hydrology and Climate Center in Huntsville, Ala., teamed up with
the Air Force, NOAA and other weather scientists in following through on plans
made this summer to study hurricanes in greater detail than in the past. The
slow-moving Hurricane Bonnie was the first such storm to present itself for such
a detailed study.

NASA's ER-2 plane, a converted Air Force spy plane, circled Bonnie from as high
as 69,000 feet, offering views that were unavailable in previous storms. "We're
bringing spaceflight technology to bear," said mission scientist Robbie Hood. "A
lot of these instruments either have versions flying on satellites now or are
prototypes for new satellites.

"We're bringing NASA technology to the picture, satellite and remote-sensing
technology in particular, and we're trying to give the hurricane research
community data that they don't have, data at high altitude where their aircraft
don't fly."

He said scientists have a good idea what goes on in hurricanes from about sea
level to 27,000 feet, but little is known about the storms' behavior at higher
altitudes.  Hurricanes may be more than 50,000 feet high. Learning about the
storms from top to bottom will improve hurricane prediction, Hood said.

The space agency's scientists made their first flights over the storm a week
ago, when it was still churning in the Atlantic near the Bahamas. NASA also flew
a DC-8 at 35,000 feet over the storm. NOAA's planes buffeted the storm at 15,000
feet and the Air Force's C-130s flew at 10,000 feet or lower.

"We could all communicate and know what parts of the storm we were studying,"
Hood said. "Our timing was perfect."

One surprise: As NASA's aircraft flew to the boundary of Bonnie's winds, the
moisture blown out through Bonnie's "chimney" turned to snow. "This was very
spectacular," Hood said.

The result of all the scrutiny last week was more data flowing into computer
models and programs at the National Hurricane Center than ever before. "It has
been a data-rich environment," Lapore said. "Now, we are going to have to
interpret what it all means."

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Metro Final

                    Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution


                          FOCUS - 292 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

               April 06, 2002, Saturday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

Expert: Hurricane luck running out

BYLINE: AMY WIMMER

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 775 words

DATELINE: ORLANDO



The nation's pre-eminent predictor of hurricanes thinks Florida has been too
lucky for too long.

This year, the United States will experience more named storms than normal, says
William Gray, an atmospheric scientist at Colorado State University. He says
more storms will turn into threatening hurricanes.

And one of these days, the big ones will make landfall, Gray said Friday at the
National Hurricane Conference, an annual gathering of scientists, government
officials and emergency response workers.

"This is ominous-looking stuff," Gray said at the release of his 19th annual
hurricane season forecast.

His prediction: 12 named storms, including seven hurricanes - three of them
major. In a typical season, which runs from June through October, there are
about 10 named storms with six hurricanes, two major.

Gray and his team of scientists at Colorado State think the nation, mostly
spared from serious hurricanes for the last quarter of the 20th century, will
soon encounter a pattern of storms not seen in Florida since air conditioning
made the state livable year-round.

He went so far as to predict economic losses of Sept. 11 proportions.

"If a major hurricane goes into a population center, we're going to see losses
bigger than Andrew," said Gray, referring to the 1992 South Florida  hurricane
that was the most disastrous storm on record.

Gray added: "Southeast Florida is a sitting duck."

Gray thinks the nation is in the midst of a warming trend in the Atlantic Ocean
that will help spawn more storms. The past seven hurricane seasons have been the
most active on record, with 94 named storms, 58 hurricanes and 27 major
hurricanes occurring in the Atlantic basin.

While some scientists blame the recent increase in the number of hurricanes on
global warming, Gray calls global warming "a red herring" and says the climactic
changes run in cycles of 25 years or so.

Consider this: From 1944 to 1969, 18 major hurricanes made landfall. From 1970
to 1994, the number fell to five.

"Now it's warming again, so we're in one of those new eras," Gray said. "When
that North Atlantic area is warmer, you have about 2 1/2 times more landfalling
hurricanes."

Yet while the Atlantic has seen more action, so far, the coastline has not. Only
three of the 27 major storms in the past seven years - Opal, Bret and Fran -
have made landfall.

Gray compares that figure to the average over the past 100 years, when one out
of every three major hurricanes came ashore. "We've been lucky, and we will not
be lucky these next two or three decades," Gray said.

Still, the National Hurricane Center invites Gray each year to announce his
predictions to cap off its annual conference. The National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration does not issue its hurricane predictions until May.

"When he does this, he brings attention to the hurricane program," Max Mayfield,
director of the National Hurricane Center, said of Gray. "It's a no-brainer that
we have to be prepared in Florida, no matter what."

Gray's predictions are based on history - the idea that the atmosphere will
behave in the future as it has in the past. Among the variables he and his team
use to calculate hurricane patterns are rain, temperature, ocean currents and
equatorial winds.

This year's predictions are based less on the African rainfall data used in the
past and more on the warming trend in the Atlantic.

Gray's record has been on target some years, spotty others. (He calls those off
years his "busts.") But the past three years have been fairly accurate.

Last year his forecast predicted 12 named storms and seven hurricanes; in
reality there were 15 named storms and nine hurricanes.

He is a bit of a celebrity around the National Hurricane Conference each year.
After his speech on Friday, he posed for photos with conference attendees.

"His predictions are very certain," gushed Sandra San Antonio, emergency
management office director for Caguas, Puerto Rico, who took several photos of
Gray on Friday afternoon.

Gray says there is a 75 percent chance of a major hurricane making landfall
somewhere in the United States this year, compared to a 52 percent average over
the past century.

Scientists are also debating the impacts of a possible El Nino, a warming
condition of the eastern Pacific, which usually has a calming effect on the
hurricane season.

Gray predicts a moderate El Nino for this year and shaved one storm off his
prediction to account for El Nino.

Bill Gray's 2002 forecast

12 named storms. 9.6 was average for last 50 years.

7  hurricanes. 5.9 was average.

3  major hurricanes. 2.3 was average.


LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; CHART; William Gray; chart lists William Gray's weather
predictions for 2002. Includes drawing of hurricane symbol.

                    Copyright 2002 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 293 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                August 10, 1998, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

LA NINA IS EXPECTED TO FUEL ATLANTIC HURRICANES;
PROFESSOR PREDICTS SISTER OF EL NINO WILL SPAWN TWICE AS MANY THIS YEAR

BYLINE: Reuters News Service

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A4

LENGTH: 422 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


La Nina, the antithesis of the Pacific Ocean warm-water phenomenon El Nino that
flattened last year's Atlantic hurricane season, will help produce twice as many
hurricanes this year, a forecaster says.

In his final forecast for the 1998 Atlantic season, Bill Gray, a Colorado State
University professor, predicted Thursday that the Atlantic basin would see 10
tropical storms this year, six of which will grow into hurricanes. Two of the
hurricanes will be intense, with sustained wind of more than 111 mph, Gray said.

La Nina, an upwelling of cold water in the Pacific off the coast of South
America, has appeared with unusual speed and wiped away the last traces of El
Nino, Gray said.

The El Nino warm-water effect produces strong westerly wind at 40,000 feet that
tend to sheer the tops off Atlantic hurricanes, disrupting their formation and
strengthening. By contrast, La Nina produces weak high-altitude wind that does
little to affect hurricane formation.

Last year's El Nino, the strongest on record, flattened hurricane activity. As a
result, only seven tropical storms and three hurricanes formed, only one
intense, in a year when Gray had predicted 11 storms and six hurricanes.

"We think the speedy onset of La Nina will definitely enhance this year 's
activity relative to last," Gray said.

He said that La Nina was not a strong one yet and that its full effect would not
be felt until after the peak months of the hurricane season - August and
September - had passed.

"However, its forceful beginning leads us to believe it will encourage the
formation of stronger storms in the Atlantic basin for the rest of the year," he
said.

The forecast matched Gray's two previous predictions, released in April and
June. In an average Atlantic hurricane season, 9.3 tropical storms are formed,
5.8 of which grow to hurricane strength with 2.2 becoming intense hurricanes.

Atlantic hurricanes generally affect the Caribbean islands, Central America,
Mexico, the Gulf of Mexico coastline from Texas to Florida, the Florida Keys and
the East Coast of the United States from Florida to Massachusetts.

Tropical storms are circular weather systems that are given names when sustained
wind reaches 39 mph. They become hurricanes when the wind tops 74 mph. The
official Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, although
hurricanes occasionally form in other months.

This year has seen only one tropical storm to date, Alex, which formed on July
28 and fizzled in the Atlantic on Aug. 2.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1998

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 294 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               September 21, 1998, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

HURRICANE GEORGES RIPS INTO CARIBBEAN ISLANDS;
OFFICIALS FEAR THAT DAMAGE COULD BE THE WORST OF ANY STORM IN DECADES

BYLINE: From News Services

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A3

LENGTH: 347 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTOWN, NEVIS


Hurricane Georges tore into the Caribbean's northeastern islands Sunday, ripping
apart buildings, whipping up seas and threatening several million people with
its destructive power.

"I can see roofs and houses flying," a witness on the island of Desi rade told
French overseas radio, monitored in French Guiana. "There is a lot of wind, rain
and the sea is rough."

Desirade lies east of the French resort island of Guadeloupe. The U.S. National
Hurricane Center in Florida earlier Sunday rated Georges an "extremely
dangerous" storm comparable to Hurricane Hugo, which caused billions of dollars
in damage and killed more than two dozen people when it hit the Caribbean in
1989.

Georges, which had winds of 150 mph earlier Sunday, weakened from a category 4
to a category 3 hurricane. But forecasters warned it could regain strength.

Residents of Guadeloupe and Dominica, fearing the hurricane would peel roofs
from homes, moved beds into their basements or headed to hurricane shelters in
schools. Church congregations on many islands cut short Sunday services to
convert their sanctuaries into shelters.

"We expect a full house tonight," said Priscilla Nicholas, a volunteer at the
Seventh Day Adventist church in Cedar Grove, Antigua.

The National Hurricane Center announced a hurricane watch for the Dominican
Republic on Sunday evening. Earlier, it warned that storm-surge flooding of 5 to
10 feet above normal tide levels and 5 inches to 8 inches of rain should be
expected in islands within an 85-mile radius of the eye of the hurricane.

On Antiguq, emergency officials moved through shelters, handing out kits that
included flashlights, water and toilet paper.

Officials in Dominica shut off water service at noon, saying silt caused by the
heavy rains was overloading treatment plants. Emergency workers compared the
storm to 1979's Hurricane David, which devastated banana farms.

In the U.S. territory of Puerto Rico, where 3.8 million residents waited in the
path of the storm, many people rushed to stores for plywood, water and canned
food.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1998

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Francisco Santiago (left) boards
up the windows of his home Sunday in Old San Juan, Puerto Rico, in preparation
for Hurricane Georges, which had winds of 150 mph early in the day.

                  Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 295 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                            December 1, 2014 Monday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

TROPICAL SEASON FORGOES FLORIDA

BYLINE: JOSH SOLOMON, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 713 words



HIGHLIGHT: For a record ninth-straight year, no hurricane made landfall in the
state.


The 2014 hurricane season ended at midnight Sunday, marking the ninth
consecutive year a hurricane did not make landfall in Florida.

"A lot of it is just plain dumb luck," said meteorologist Dennis Feltgen, a
spokesman for the National Hurricane Center. "We've been very fortunate that
when tropical activity has been out there, it hasn't been steered toward us."

This hurricane season was characterized by normal to slightly below normal
levels of activity, said Jennifer Hubbard, a meteorologist with the National
Weather Service in Ruskin, which is almost exactly what experts predicted.

The season's May forecast predicted eight to 13 named storms, three to six
hurricanes and one or two major hurricanes.

There ended up being eight named storms and six hurricanes, including two major
ones.

A major hurricane is a Category 3 or higher on the Saffir-Simpson scale, which
classifies storms by wind speed. Category 3 hurricanes have wind speeds of 111
to 130 mph, enough to cause devastating destruction. Hurricane Katrina was a
Category 3 storm when it made landfall in Louisiana in 2005.

Only one storm hit the continental United States this year. Arthur, a Category 2
storm, clipped the Outer Banks of North Carolina in early July and then turned
northeast and weakened. Its impact was minimal, though, because it had already
started to curl away from the coast, Feltgen said.

Tropical Storm Bertha affected Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic before
strengthening into a hurricane. It, too, turned east away from the coast. And
Tropical Storm Hanna hit Mexico.

The two major hurricanes, Edouard and Gonzalo, lived their whole lives at sea.

Despite the relatively mild hurricane seasons of 2013 and 2014, the Atlantic
Ocean has actually been in an era of heightened activity since 1995, Phil
Klotzbach, a research scientist at the Tropical Meteorology Project at Colorado
State University, said in an email.

These alternating eras of hyperactivity and hypoactivity, called multidecadal
oscillations, last 25 to 35 years. Active cycles are characterized by
above-normal surface temperatures in the tropical Atlantic, lower-than-normal
atmospheric pressure at sea level and reduced vertical wind shear, Klotzbach
said. High vertical wind shear can rip storms apart before they coalesce.

It's not uncommon to have years that run counter to the particular era of
activity or inactivity, Klotzbach said. Shorter-term weather conditions, like El
Nino - warmer-than-average Pacific Ocean temperatures that tend to suppress
Atlantic hurricanes - and La Nina - cooler-than-average temperatures that tend
to enhance them - can override multidecadal oscillations. (Pacific temperatures
were average this season.) He cited 1988 and 1989, which both had above-average
activity even though they were in a quiet cycle that lasted from 1970 to 1994.

The active period we're in will probably last 10 to 15 more years, Klotzbach
said, with a "likely quieter period" to follow.

The nine years without a hurricane that Florida has accumulated is
unprecedented. Since 1878, the next-longest period without a hurricane was five
years, from 1980 to 1984. "Some of this is due to the fact that we have had
anomalous low pressure along the East Coast since 2005, which has tended to
steer the storms out to sea," Klotzbach said.

Eleven percent of all Atlantic hurricanes in the 20th century have made landfall
in Florida, Klotzbach said. And there have been 61 Atlantic hurricanes since the
last one, Wilma, hit in 2005. The odds of not being struck by one of them are 1
in 1,200, he said.

But the fact that Florida has not had a direct hit by a hurricane in such a long
time could prove problematic when the next big storm barrels through. A lot of
people inexperienced with hurricanes have moved to the state since Wilma,
Feltgen said.

He said Floridians should not become complacent, and should use the winter to
prepare for next year's season, which begins June 1.

"The battle of hurricane season is always won in the hurricane offseason,"
Feltgen said. "I'd personally like to go for 10 (years), but that's probably not
realistic. This streak is going to come to an end, and we have to be ready for
that to happen in 2015."

Contact Josh Solomon at (813) 226-3446 or jsolomon@tampabay.com Follow
@josh_solomon15.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - Associated Press: North Carolina's Outer Banks show the effects
of Hurricane Arthur on July 4. The Category 2 storm was the only hurricane to
hit the continental United States this year.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2014 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 296 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                              May 13, 2016 Friday
                                St. Pete Edition

10 STORMS 10 LESSONS

BYLINE: TERRY TOMALIN, TIMES OUTDOORS/FITNESS EDITOR

SECTION: ST. PETE TIMES; 2016 HURRICANE GUIDE; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1652 words


They say those who do not learn from history are doomed to repeat it. - That is
especially true when it comes to hurricanes. Lessons from past storms could
serve us well in future storms. - Here's a look at 10 historic storms, what
we've learned from them, and what we've forgotten.

* * *

Great Galveston Hurricane (1900)

In September 1900, Isaac Cline, the local representative of the newly formed
U.S. Weather Bureau, heard rumblings of a storm forming to the southwest of
Cuba. But the weatherman, who had previously published an article detailing why
he thought the chances of a hurricane hitting the coast of Texas an
impossibility, dismissed the reports.

He was wrong.

Also known as the Hurricane of 1900, the Category 4 storm struck in the middle
of the night, a 15-foot wall of water swept across the barrier island and
destroyed more than half the homes there. Official estimates put the death toll
at around 8,000, making it the deadliest natural disaster in North American
history.

Pride and arrogance make for a deadly combination when it comes to hurricane
predictions.

* * *

Hurricane of 1921

Local legend has it that the Tampa Bay area has been spared a major hurricane
because it is protected by the spirits of American Indians who once prospered
along its shores. But back in October of 1921, a late-season storm sneaked up
the Yucatan Channel, headed straight across the Gulf of Mexico and slammed into
Tarpon Springs.

Hog Island, located a few miles south of the eye, caught the brunt of the storm.
The hurricane carried a 9-foot storm surge that was powerful enough to scour a
channel 20 feet deep, straight down to the underlying bedrock. The newly formed
"Hurricane Pass" split Hog Island in two separate landmasses - Honeymoon Island
and Caladesi Island.

Also known as the 1921 Tarpon Springs Hurricane, a Category 4 storm with winds
of more than 100 mph, it also devastated downtown St. Petersburg and Tampa.

The question is not if it will happen again, but when.

* * *

1928 Lake Okeechobee Hurricane

On Sept. 16, 1928, a Category 4 storm made landfall in Palm Beach and headed
inland toward the farming communities that surrounded Lake Okeechobee. The rain
that accompanied this storm soon swelled the lake, which overflowed the dike
sending a 6- to 9-foot storm surge across the local farmlands, killing more than
2,000.

Most of the dead were poor blacks. Many of the bodies were unceremoniously
buried in mass graves. Others were doused with diesel fuel and burned on funeral
pyres. Author Zora Neale Hurston wrote about the tragedy in her book Their Eyes
Were Watching God.

Afterward, many vowed that the poor and disenfranchised should never suffer so
again. (Until Hurricane Katrina in 2005.)

* * *

Labor Day Hurricane of 1935

It was a small hurricane, with an eye just 8 miles across, but it packed a punch
of a storm 10 times its size.

Thirty hours before landfall, this tropical system was barely at hurricane
strength. But when it hit the warm water of the Florida Straits, it turned into
a monster Category 5 with a barometric pressure of just 26.35. It was the
strongest hurricane to make landfall in the United States until Hurricane
Camille struck Mississippi in 1969.

Authorities were slow to react. A train from Miami sent to rescue the hundreds
of World War I veterans working on the Overseas Highway arrived just in time to
be swept off its tracks by a 20-foot storm surge. More than 400 died.

Author Ernest Hemingway was so critical of the government's poor response that
the hurricane is sometimes called "Hemingway's Storm."

Lesson learned: Don't wait, evacuate.

* * *

Great New England Hurricane of 1938

In the summer of 1938, the popular notion among storm watchers was that Atlantic
hurricanes usually veered out to sea before Bermuda. But this Category 5 storm
had other plans.

Barreling up the eastern coast of the U.S. at 70 mph, the "Long Island Express"
shot the gap, roared across the peninsula north of New York City then crashed
ashore in New England, taking hundreds of thousands by surprise.

With peak winds of more than 180 mph and waves as high as 50 feet, the tropical
cyclone killed more than 600 people. How did this killer hurricane catch so many
off guard? Poor communication and lack of technology certainly contributed. But
institutional arrogance was also a factor.

Like many Tampa Bay residents, the locals thought "it could never happen here."
Few had heard of the Great Colonial Hurricane of 1635 that nearly sent the
Puritans packing. Historical research has shown that a major hurricane has hit
the New York-New England region every 80 to 100 years, a fact not lost on the
victims of Superstorm Sandy in 2012.

* * *

Hurricane Donna (1960)

This storm was like a shark on the deck of a fishing boat. Just when you think
it's done, it turns around and bites you.

Donna tore up Cuba in September of 1960 then hammered the Florida Keys. It
roared across the Everglades into the Gulf of Mexico then turned north, came
ashore at Fort Myers and travelled straight up the Florida Peninsula.

It exited at Daytona Beach but wasn't quite done. Donna made landfall again in
North Carolina and continued its path of destruction up into New England. At its
peak, Donna had wind gusts ranging between 175 and 200 mph and a storm surge of
13 feet. At the time, Donna was the only storm to have ever produced hurricane
winds in Florida, the Mid-Atlantic and New England.

Hurricane Donna showed the country just how unpredictable tropical cyclones can
be. Because of its impact on so many people, the name Donna was retired. Her
lessons were forgotten until 2004, when a storm named Charley followed an eerily
similar path.

* * *

Hurricane Andrew (1992)

One of the costliest and most intense storms in U.S. history, Andrew would have
caused even greater destruction if it had made landfall a little further up the
coast in Miami.

In 1992, few people living in South Florida remembered 1965's Hurricane Betsy.
Andrew, while smaller (just 40 miles in diameter), was more powerful. Only the
Labor Day Hurricane of 1935 and Hurricane Camille in 1969, both Category 5
storms, had lower barometric pressures at landfall.

Andrew killed 65 people and left nearly 25,000 homeless. The widespread
devastation, broadcast for months on network television, helped raise hurricane
awareness. It also prompted government officials to take a closer look at the
state's building codes, which many believed to be woefully inadequate.

Because of Andrew, Florida now has some of the strictest building codes in the
nation.

* * *

Hurricane Charley (2004)

With seven named storms, August 2004 will be remembered as one of the most
active months in hurricane history. But one storm stands out from all the rest:
Hurricane Charley.

It started off slow and crossed Cuba, but picked up steam when it hit the warm
waters of the Gulf of Mexico. The Tampa Bay area braced for impact as residents
thought Charley might be the dreaded "100-year storm" they had long feared.

But then, contrary to all computer models, the hurricane suddenly made an abrupt
turn to the right and came ashore south of the bay area, making landfall in
Punta Gorda and Port Charlotte. Despite minute-by-minute updates from the
24-hour news media, many locals were still caught off guard.

More than 12,000 homes were destroyed as Charley headed inland. Ironically, west
coast evacuees found themselves in the storm's path as the hurricane battered
seemingly safe Orlando.

Charley left many weather forecasters, whose predictions proved wrong,
scratching their heads. When it comes to hurricanes, there are no safe bets.

* * *

Hurricane Katrina (2005)

Those who survived Hurricane Andrew's wrath in South Florida brushed off the
Category 1 storm that hit on Aug. 25, 2005. The eleventh named tropical system
of the season crossed the peninsula and then grew in strength when it hit the
warm waters of the southeastern Gulf of Mexico.

As it headed northwest, Katrina grew stronger until it achieved Category 5
strength, kicking up waves that towered at nearly 50 feet. When it eventually
came ashore in Louisiana and Mississippi it carried with it a 25-foot storm
surge.

Damage up and down the coast was severe, but the worst loss of life occurred in
a city that had been spared the brunt of the storm, New Orleans. Antiquated
levees, designed to withstand a Category 3 storm, failed and flooded many poor,
predominantly African-American neighborhoods. The city, state and country were
unprepared for what followed.

Grim images of the dead and stranded led the nightly news. Katrina killed nearly
2,000 people and damaged $67.8 billion worth of homes, businesses and vehicles,
making it the costliest natural disaster in U.S. history.

But like the 1928 Lake Okeechobee Hurricane, it was the poor and disenfranchised
who suffered the most.

* * *

Superstorm Sandy (2012)

At the height of its fury, Hurricane Sandy had tropical storm-force winds that
extended 1,000 miles from its center of circulation. Its sheer size, some 2,000
miles in diameter, earned the designation "super."

But Sandy was not only big, it was also strong, one of the most powerful systems
ever recorded north of Cape Hatteras, N.C. High wind, heavy rain, big waves and
a storm surge devastated the Jersey Shore, which had seen nothing like it in
decades.

A wall of water nearly 14 feet high pushed into New York Harbor, which then
flooded parts of lower Manhattan and Hoboken.

Superstorm Sandy knocked out power in 17 states and left more than 8 million
people in the dark. As hurricane death tolls go, Sandy's was relatively low:
just 33 casualties in the United States.

But the psychological impact the storm had on the Northeast is immeasurable. A
tropical cyclone can hit anyone on the East Coast anywhere, anytime.

Times Outdoor/Fitness Editor Terry Tomalin teaches hurricane history at the
University of South Florida St. Petersburg. Contact Terry Tomalin at
ttomalin@tampabay.com Follow @TomalinTimes.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - NOAA: Hurricane Andrew, one of the costliest and most intense
storms in U.S. history, barrels toward Florida's east coast in August 1992.
PHOTO - Palm Beach Historical Society: The Okeechobee Hurricane of 1928 left a
path of destruction in Belle Glade. PHOTO - Times files: The wreckage of an
11-car passenger train is shown in the Florida Keys on Labor Day 1935 after it
was swept off its tracks by a 20-foot storm surge. PHOTO - SCOTT KEELER - Times
(2004): A home on Capitiva Island is framed by mounds of debris from a home
damaged by Hurricane Charley's high winds in August 2004. PHOTO - Associated
Press: Fires sparked by Superstorm Sandy in October 2012 destroyed more than 100
homes in the Breezy Point section of the Queens borough of New York. The tiny
beachfront neighborhood was also inundated by floodwaters.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2016 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 297 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday

Brutal string of hurricanes threatens U.S. once again;
2006 season likely to hit hard, experts say, as agency predicts 13 to 16 named
storms

BYLINE: PAUL KORING

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 1024 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Another worse-than-usual hurricane season threatens, the U.S. National Hurricane
Center warned yesterday, as workers in storm-devastated New Orleans work
feverishly to rebuild levees destroyed last summer by hurricane Katrina.

In the wake of last year's killer storms - Katrina's toll now stands at more
than 1,800 dead and tens of thousands still homeless - coastal complacency about
hurricane warnings may be a thing of the past.

"One hurricane hitting where you live is enough to make it a bad season," Max
Mayfield, the centre's director, said yesterday as he unveiled the predictions
for this year.

The Atlantic remains in the middle of a decades-long cycle of intense hurricane
activity that follows nearly 20 years of relative quiescence, a period when
coastal development surged in Florida and along the Gulf of Mexico. Since 1995,
there have been more - and more powerful - storms. Between 1995 and 2005, the
Atlantic season has averaged 15 named storms, just over eight named hurricanes
and four major hurricanes, according to the hurricane centre. Before this latest
above-normal cycle, from 1971 to 1994, there were an average of 8.5 named
storms, five hurricanes and just over one major hurricane.

Four monster storms hit the United States last year, causing more than
$100-billion (U.S.) in damage. The prediction for this year is a season somewhat
less devastating than 2005's record of atmospheric violence when the hurricane
centre ran out of names as 27 massive storms - 15 of which developed into
hurricanes - formed in the Atlantic.

"For the 2006 North Atlantic hurricane season, NOAA is predicting 13 to 16 named
storms, with eight to 10 becoming hurricanes, of which four to six could become
'major' hurricanes of Category 3 strength or higher," said Vice-Admiral Conrad
Lautenbacher, administrator of the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.

But 2005 turned out to be far worse than last year's original predictions, both
in the number of storms and their severity.

Yesterday, the hurricane centre's experts were stressing the importance of
preparedness, a warning that no longer extends just to individual households.

Hurricane Katrina's broad swath of destruction, despite earlier warnings of the
potential threat to New Orleans from a major hurricane, also savaged the
reputations of three levels of government.

President George W. Bush was widely perceived as slow to grasp the severity of
the disaster while hordes of poor black residents were marooned in a stultifying
sports dome and hundreds drowned in their homes. A lower-than-expected death
toll and a belated but effective federal response failed to salvage the
President's reputation.

Democratic presidential hopefuls for 2008 were still citing Katrina this week as
evidence of Mr. Bush's ruinous path.

"The damage that he's done to the way America's viewed in the world, the lack of
respect for America in the world, what the ongoing conflict in Iraq is doing to
America's image, his response to this hurricane on the Gulf Coast . . . is part
of a pattern of incompetence," former North Carolina senator John Edwards said.

Katrina's impact was huge, yet in some ways disproportionate. Two summers
earlier, nearly twice as many people died - but only five in Florida - when
tropical storm Jeanne caused massive flooding across impoverished Haiti.

In the United States, a death toll over 1,000 from a storm, coupled with
knocking out nearly a quarter of the nation's refining capacity and much of the
offshore oil and gas production in the Gulf of Mexico, dominated the agenda for
months.

New Orleans may take a decade to rebuild. Much of its population remains a
diaspora, scattered across two dozen states in temporary housing or trailers.

A massive effort is under way to rebuild the city's damaged levees, although
promises that they would be ready to withstand a Katrina-sized storm when
hurricane season officially begins June 1 won't be realized. The U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers expects work to be complete before August. Meanwhile, a poll this
month found barely half of respondents have high confidence that federal
emergency authorities can cope with a major hurricane.

The Atlantic season runs from June 1 to Nov. 30. The names chosen for 2006
storms are: Alberto, Beryl, Chris, Debby, Ernesto, Florence, Gordon, Helene,
Isaac, Joyce, Kirk, Leslie, Michael, Nadine, Oscar, Patty, Rafael, Sandy, Tony,
Valerie and William.

Year of the hurricane

Last year was a record breaker for Atlantic weather systems, with 27 named
storms and 15 hurricanes - including three that reached the most fierce
category. These were the seven most destructive.

KATRINA:

Aug. 23-30: Katrina, the most destructive hurricane to strike the U.S. in years,
killed at least 1,800 people when it made landfall along the coasts of
Louisiana, Mississippi, Florida, Georgia and Alabama. Thousands more were left
homeless in what was the costliest storm ever, with estimated damages at
$75-billion (U.S.).

DENNIS:

July 8-13: Dennis caused at least 42 deaths in Haiti, Cuba, the United States
and Jamaica and inflicted an estimated $2.5-billion in property damage.

RITA:

Sept. 18-26: The U.S. Gulf Coast was evacuated of as many as two million people
before Rita struck. Seven people were killed and an estimated $10-billion in
damage was inflicted.

STAN:

Oct. 1-5: The exact toll from hurricane Stan's landfall in Mexico and Central
America is unknown, but estimates range from 1,000 to 2,000 after it triggered
flooding and landslides.

OPHELIA:

Sept. 6-17: Ophelia killed two people in Florida and caused an estimated
$75-million in damages.

WILMA:

Oct. 15-25: Twenty-two deaths have been directly attributed to Wilma: 12 in
Haiti, one in Jamaica, five in Florida and four in Mexico, where major damage to
the Yucatan dealt a blow to the tourist industry there.

EMILY:

JULY 11-21: Emily killed six people when it struck the Caribbean, including
Grenada. Jamaica and Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula, including Grenada, Jamaica and
Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula, where it causes great damage to local homes and the
tourist infrastructure.

SOURCES: NOAA, UNISYS

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2006 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 298 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            August 9, 2006 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

NOAA Curtails Hurricane Forecast;
Predicted Total Is Still Above Average

BYLINE: Peter Whoriskey, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A Section; A08

LENGTH: 595 words

DATELINE: MIAMI Aug. 8


The 2006 hurricane season  --  so far quiet  --  has fallen far behind last
year's record for tropical storm activity, but scientists on Tuesday issued a
prediction that this year will nonetheless be above average, with  seven to
nine hurricanes forming in the Atlantic basin.

In the kind of season that is anticipated, an average of two or three hurricanes
make landfall in the United States,  scientists at the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration said.

"I don't want anyone to focus on the numbers," said Max Mayfield, director of
the National Hurricane Center. "It only takes one hurricane to make it a really
bad year."

The prediction, while still threatening, slightly downgrades the predicted
hurricane activity from the seasonal outlook the agency issued in May, in which
eight to 10 hurricanes were foreseen.

Some scientists have suggested that the recent intensity of hurricanes may be an
outcome of global warming. But Gerry Bell, lead meteorologist at NOAA's Climate
Prediction Center, said "the work done so far doesn't allow us" to determine how
much  storm activity is due to  global warming and how much is the result of a
long-recognized fluctuation in hurricane activity created by the "multi-decadal
signal."

The multi-decadal signal, in which weather conditions become conducive to
hurricanes, is believed to have led to the uptick in Atlantic hurricanes that
began in 1995.

The long-term forecasts of tropical storms are used by emergency managers. They
are also reviewed by insurers, who have in recent years doubled premiums for
properties in some coastal areas and refused to renew policies in others.

"It's not a time for complacency," said FEMA Director R. David Paulison.

The seasonal forecasts are based on an analysis of sea-surface temperatures in
areas where hurricanes form, as well as wind conditions and other factors.

The warmth in the ocean is, in essence, the fuel for hurricanes.

This year, ocean waters are a half a degree  to two degrees Fahrenheit warmer
than average. That likely will help generate above-average tropical storm
activity, but not as much as last year, when comparable ocean temperatures were
two to three degrees  warmer than average.

Three tropical storms have formed this year; last year, seven had formed during
June and July.

Another key factor in the forecast is the strength of high-level winds that can
inhibit hurricane formation. Essentially, strong shearing winds can blow apart
incipient storms.

Wetter-than-predicted conditions over the Pacific Ocean have forced slightly
stronger upper-level winds over the Caribbean,  said Christopher Landsea of
NOAA's Hurricane Research Division,  making the weather this year less amenable
to hurricane formation than last year.

Still, forecasters predict  an above-average season,  with 12 to 15 tropical
storms, seven to nine hurricanes  and three to four major hurricanes.

Those predictions fall in line with a report issued last week by researchers at
Colorado State University. They   predicted 15 tropical storms (the average is
9.6); seven hurricanes (the average is 5.9); and three major hurricanes (the
average is 2.3). It also reported that there is a 73 percent chance that a major
hurricane  --  Category 3 or greater  --  will  hit the United States.

Paulison and the NOAA scientists used the announcement to warn residents of
coastal areas to prepare before a storm hits. They said that although  the
government can help,  residents who fared best in last year's hurricanes were
those who had made adequate preparations.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 299 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Star-News (Wilmington, NC)

                            March 19, 2009 Thursday
                                  1ST Edition

Milder hurricane season predicted;
Early forecast: Weaker storms,;
fewer landfalls

BYLINE: Gareth McGrath; Staff Writer

SECTION: jump; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 513 words


The only hurricanes on the radar screen in North Carolina these days are the
ones playing hockey up in Raleigh.

But with the tremendous power and destructive capacity of the natural kind,
along with the memories of hurricanes Fran, Bertha and Floyd still fresh for
many residents, it's never too early to start thinking about what might be in
the works when the weather - and the water temperatures - start warming up.

So folks might be glad to hear that Joe Bastardi, AccuWeather's hurricane
expert, is predicting a milder 2009 hurricane season than last year - which was
basically a non-event for Southeastern North Carolina.

"Early indications show a reduction in the overall number of named storms and of
major hurricanes in the Atlantic basin compared to last year, but the number of
storms should still be near or a little above normal," he said Wednesday in
unveiling his early-season forecast.

He said cooler water, weak El Nino conditions and more African dust could mean a
calmer season with fewer and more scattered landfalls on the mainland United
States.

In all, Bastardi is projecting 13 total storms versus 16 last year, and two
major hurricanes compared to five in 2008.

Of those 16 storms, four would impact the United States - half last year's
total.

But it isn't all light surf and clear skies for coastal North Carolina.

Bastardi said the developing weather pattern reminds him of the 1950s, when the
"road map for hurricanes was up the East Coast."

Jay Barnes, author of "North Carolina's Hurricane History," said that decade was
headlined by Hurricane Hazel, which in 1954 became the only Category 4 storm to
strike the Tar Heel state and all but wiped clean Oak Island in Brunswick
County.

The 1950s also saw three land-falling hurricanes in three weeks in 1955, and
Hurricane Donna book-end the rough period in 1960.

"It was a very busy time storm-wise for us," said Barnes, who also is the
director of the N.C. Aquarium in Pine Knoll Shores.

Also forecasting a slightly above-average hurricane season, but one that's
calmer than 2008, is the team from Colorado State University led by William
Gray.

They also are projecting limited impacts from El Nino conditions and the
probability of a Category 3 or stronger hurricane making landfall on the
mainland United States at 120 percent of the long-term average.

Both Gray and Bastardi will update their forecasts closer to the June 1 start of
hurricane season, and the federal National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, which is the parent agency of the National Hurricane Center,
also will put out its own predictions for the year.

But Barnes said that while the forecasts remind people in hurricane-prone areas
to make or double-check their storm-preparedness plans, they are still just
educated guesses.

It takes only one hurricane landing on your front doorstep to make it a really
bad year. he said

"The science is getting better," he said. "But the atmosphere is so darn
complex.... There are multiple factors out there that can influence what
happens."

Gareth McGrath: 343-2384

gareth.mcgrath@starnewsonline.com

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2009 Star-News, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 300 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 14, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Florida Stares at Hurricane Twice the Size of State

BYLINE: By RICK BRAGG

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 13


A hurricane that meteorologists said was four times the size of the infamous
Hurricane Andrew and potentially even more destructive pounded toward Florida
today, forcing the authorities to order the evacuation of at least one million
people and leaving countless residents to hope that the massive storm would
somehow pass their cities by.

"This hurricane," said Jerry Jarrell, director of the National Hurricane Center,
"could be catastrophic."

Bearing down on Florida, Hurricane Floyd, with winds of up to 155 miles per
hour, stretched for about 700 miles, twice as long as the state of Florida.
Hurricane-force winds, at least 74 m.p.h., extended 125 miles out from the eye.
Hurricane Andrew's hurricane-force winds extended only 25 or 30 miles.

"It looks like a giant bull's-eye out there," said Brad Cramer, a lifeguard in
Palm Beach, referring to the satellite photos of the storm.

Forecasters warned that the storm could start pounding the Florida coast north
of Palm Beach by Tuesday morning. It could make land in the next couple of days
anywhere from central Florida to South Carolina, forecasters said.

From as far south as Miami to as far north as Cape Canaveral, hundreds of
thousands of residents were ordered today to evacuate the densely populated
Florida coast.

Jonathan Gottschalck, a research associate in meteorology at the University of
Miami's Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, called Hurricane
Floyd "one of the largest and strongest storms" in history to hit the United
States coast.

"It runs 700 miles in all directions," Mr. Gottschalck said of the storm. "We
are going to feel it."

Or, as Bill O'Brien, Director of Emergency Management in Palm Beach County,
said, "This is the sort of thing you have nightmares about."

Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida declared a state of emergency late today, mobilizing
the National Guard, enhancing coordination among towns and granting Joe Meyers,
Florida Emergency Management Director, power over local authorities.

All day today, meteorologists in Florida offered hope that Hurricane Floyd would
be nudged from its westerly course by another weather system that could push the
storm up the coast away from South Florida, keeping its eye offshore.

But the hurricane continued to plow on westward and slightly northwest early
this evening, in the general direction of Cape Canaveral, according to the
National Hurricane Center in Miami.

In a frightening scenario, the hurricane could turn north just as the most
powerful winds surrounding the eye make landfall, letting the most destructive
part of the storm hug the coast, meteorologists said.

Mr. Jarrell warned that, even if the hurricane's eye stays as much as 30 miles
off the coast, it could still rip roofs off houses and flatten walls.

Even as Florida prepared , The Associated Press reported that residents of the
Bahamas had abandoned beachfront homes and had scrambled for emergency supplies
as the hurricane bore down. The storm was expected to batter the islands
overnight.

Like Hurricane Andrew in 1992 , Hurricane Floyd was a Category 4 storm, on the
verge of being a Category 5, the most powerful, with the power to turn houses
into rubble and splinters, if it makes landfall. Hurricane Andrew killed 40
people, left 160,000 homeless and caused more than $25 billion in damage in
Florida and Louisiana, where it made a second landfall.

At the Kennedy Space Center, which is just 9 feet above sea level, almost all of
the 12,500 workers were being evacuated. A skeleton crew remained, but they,
too, would leave if the wind was as fierce as predicted, a spokesman said.

Three of NASA's space shuttles were in a hangar that was designed to withstand
wind of only up to 105 m.p.h. A fourth was in a building designed to stand winds
of up to 125 m.p.h.

American Airlines, United Airlines and US Airways today canceled Tuesday's
flights in and out of Miami. The airlines also canceled some or all flights at
Fort Lauderdale and West Palm Beach, officials said.

Because it was still too soon to more closely predict landfall, the entire state
of Florida had been placed under a hurricane warning. Shelters and hotel rooms
inland began to fill, cruise ships in Miami left for safer waters to the south,
flotillas of pleasure craft snaked along canals, looking for safe harbor, and
lines grew at hardware and grocery stores.

In South Carolina, Gov. Jim Hodges ordered 600 National Guard troops and 500
state police to the coast in case an evacuation was ordered.

"This is probably the most serious threat we've had to the Georgia coast this
century," said Gary McConnell, director of the Georgia Emergency Management
Agency.

In South Florida, Allen Fiske's boat is his home, and he was worried about
losing it as the storm drew closer. A paraplegic as a result of a car accident
17 years ago, he lives aboard his 35-foot sailboat, "Minimum Balance."

"I don't know what I'm going to do," he said. "I can leave it here at Dinner Key
marina and let it get smashed into the pilings, or I could take it up the Miami
River along with everybody else and let it get smashed against all the other
boats.

"I'm leaning toward going south, down to Key Largo."

While a few people said they thought the evacuations were premature and a sign
of media-driven panic, most people took the threat seriously.

"There have only been two other Category 5 hurricanes to hit the U.S. -- Camille
in the 1960's and an unnamed storm in 1935," Mr. Gottschalck said. "This kind of
storm needs to be taken seriously."

The Labor Day hurricane of 1935, which hit the Florida Keys, killed 408 people.
Hurricane Camille, which went ashore in Mississippi and Louisiana in 1969,
killed 256.
 As far north as Jacksonville, people watched in amazement as the storm swirled
across television screens.

"Oh, my God," said Courtney Edwards, 17, standing in front of a big-screen
television in the electronics department of the Sears, Roebuck & Company store
in The Avenues mall in Jacksonville.

Further south, even people who lived miles inland considered leaving their
homes.

"We did consider driving to Atlanta," said Bettye Cox, who lives in Boca Raton.
Instead, they just went to the Home Depot, for supplies.

As the storm approached, the weather along the South Florida beaches, even as
far north as Palm Beach, was balmy, breezy.

Edmond Zion, a retired limo driver from Queens, N.Y., was another who scoffed at
the growing concern.

"You would think that people down here would be used to these storms already,"
he said. "They act like it's all new, like they never heard of such a thing
before."

But in this case, it may be true. This storm could be something entirely new.

As if the threat of this hurricane was not enough bad news for Florida, another
potentially dangerous storm, Hurricane Gert, seems to be taking roughly the same
path as Hurricane Floyd, just a few days behind.

That storm, which became a hurricane today, was expected to push through the
Leeward Islands, Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico later this week, and eventually
threaten Florida or the East Coast. Gert, the fifth hurricane of the season, was
expected to pound through the Atlantic with winds well over 100 m.p.h.

For now, Hurricane Floyd is trouble enough.

In Palm Beach, workers cleared the last of the chairs off the beaches, leaving
them unusually bare.

Mr. Cramer, the lifeguard, has seen this deceptive calm before.

"When you live here, you get used to the idea of hurricanes, but you respect
them," he said. "This one demands a lot of respect."


http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: As Hurricane Floyd neared, residents of Titusville, Fla., lined
up yesterday to buy plywood to cover windows. (Reuters)(pg. A1); Sailboats and
motorboats were taken out of the water and secured yesterday at a marina in
Indiantown, Fla., as Hurricane Floyd neared. (Michael Beebe/Stuart News via
Associated Press)(pg. A21)

                   Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 301 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           December 1, 2004 Wednesday
                            MARTIN-ST. LUCIE EDITION

BUSH LAUDS TREASURE COAST'S HURRICANE EFFORTS

BYLINE: By SOFIA SANTANA Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1034 words

DATELINE: VERO BEACH


Gov. Jeb Bush got teary-eyed on the last day of the hurricane season Tuesday as
he thanked scores of Indian River County officials, emergency workers and
volunteers for their relief efforts following Hurricanes Frances and Jeanne.

The governor also promised to push for new laws aimed at making storm recovery
efforts easier next time, specifically mentioning legislation to help protect
people from having to pay more than one insurance deductible in a storm season
and property taxes when a home becomes uninhabitable - two issues that became
complaints after the storms.

He has said he hopes the legislature will take up the issues if it meets in a
special session before the end of the year, but he said Tuesday he did not know
exactly when a special session would happen.

"The next six months we will have to upgrade to make sure that next hurricane
season we're stronger and quicker to respond," Bush said.

Bush stopped in Vero Beach in the afternoon as part of a daylong tour marking
the last day of a hurricane season in which a record four hurricanes hit
Florida. He also visited Pensacola, which was hit by Hurricane Ivan in
September, and Punta Gorda, which was hit by Hurricane Charley in August.

He ended the day with a live address broadcast statewide from Tallahassee. In
the 10-minute evening speech to mark the end of what he called "the most
traumatic hurricane season in Florida history," Bush rattled off a string of
statistics - 1 million Florida claims filed with FEMA, 1.5 million insurance
claims, $42 billion in total damages - but then said that "doesn't begin to
measure the value of our state."

"The true story is one of . . . darkest days and finest hours that cannot be
severed," a casually dressed Bush said during the broadcast, which was carried
on WXEL-TV Channel 42.

Saying he had hundreds of memories of Floridians' "tears and courage," he cited
several examples from around the state, including National Guardsmen driving
school buses in St. Lucie County and Nathan McCollum, who is Indian River
County's emergency management director and the mayor of Sebastian, using
generators to stay on the air all night to talk listeners through one of the
hurricanes.

"I have never been prouder to be the governor of Florida. . . . I thank you for
your tenacity, determination, hard work and faith," he said.

In Vero Beach, Bush offered an emotional and teary-eyed "thank you" to the
volunteers, first-responders and local government officials who packed into the
Indian River County Commission chambers Tuesday afternoon.

"I really appreciate all that you've done," he said.

After this life-altering hurricane season, he said, the state has learned some
lessons.

"We can't evacuate our way away from a hurricane anymore," he said. "The state
is too big now."

Bush said it was time to make plans to create more shelters around the state and
more affordable housing - but not more mobile homes.

Earlier in the day in Tallahassee, state officials went out to a darkened and
quiet Emergency Operations Center for a look back on the season.

Lt. Gov. Toni Jennings, who along with Bush spent much of the storm season
traveling to damaged areas, cited statistics to convey the enormity of the
effects:

"Fourteen million plus meals - that's a lot of cooking; 28.6 million bottles of
water; 78.5 million pounds of ice."

Craig Fugate, director of the Division of Emergency Management, said that state
and local emergency managers had reason to be proud of their response to the
five named storms, including four major hurricanes, although he also marked the
end of the season by urging people to begin planning now for the next season,
which begins June 1.

"After (today) we have 182 days to get ready for the 2005 hurricane season," he
said. "The lesson for this year is: Florida is vulnerable from hurricanes."

And even as state leaders commemorated the last day of the 2004 hurricane
season, Tropical Storm Otto formed Tuesday far in the central Atlantic, although
it posed no threat to land.

Otto was about 810 miles east of Bermuda at 4 p.m., moving north at about 5 mph
with top sustained winds of 45 mph. The system was expected to gradually lose
strength before dissipating in a few days.

"It's not the first time that this has happened," said James Franklin, a
hurricane specialist at the National Hurricane Center in Miami-Dade County.
Franklin noted that last year there were two named storms in December, Odette
and Peter.

Otto is the last jab in a season in which damage from four hurricanes - Charley,
Frances, Ivan and Jeanne - could exceed the $34.9 in billion, adjusted to 2000
dollars, caused by Hurricane Andrew in 1992, the head of the National Weather
Service said Tuesday in an end-of-the-season roundup.

Some 9.4 million people fled the four storms, which prompted 21 disaster
declarations in 13 states, weather service Director David L. Johnson said at the
National Hurricane Center west of Miami.

Hardest-hit, of course, was Florida. It became the first state since Texas, in
1886, to be struck by four hurricanes in a single year. One in five Florida
homes was damaged by at least one of the hurricanes, according to the Insurance
Information Institute. As many as 250 tornadoes formed.

Other highlights of the season, according to hurricane prognosticator William
Gray and his Colorado State University team: It was the first time a major
hurricane struck the stretch of coast between West Palm Beach and Savannah since
1893, the first time eight storms had struck the U.S. mainland in a year since
1916, the first time four hurricanes struck the U.S. mainland in a year since
1985, the first time two major hurricanes struck Florida since 1950, and the
first time (Charley) a Category 4 hurricane struck Florida since 1995 (Opal).

At the hurricane center, Director Max Mayfield said Tuesday it was too early to
know if the conditions that sent so many storms to Florida would be repeated in
2005, but he also encouraged people to start planning for next year.

"People who were running around . . . at the last minute were a lot more
stressed than those who planned in advance," Mayfield said.

Staff writers S.V. Date and Eliot Kleinberg contributed to this story.

sofia_santana@pbpost.com

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (C)
 DAVID SPENCER/Staff Photographer 'The next six months we will have to upgrade
to make sure that next hurricane season we're stronger and quicker to respond,'
Gov. Bush (right) said on Tuesday. Here, the governor poses for a photograph
with Civil Air Patrol Capt. Lou Cicalese at the Indian River County Commission
chambers.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2004 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 302 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 14, 2013 Saturday

Air Force Hurricane Hunters stationed on St. Croix pack up and head home

BYLINE: Joy Blackburn, The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 717 words


Dec. 14--ST. CROIX -- The Hurricane Hunters were back on island this week to
wrap up after hurricane season, doing some maintenance work and packing up
equipment and supplies they brought down in May.

At that point, the unit -- The 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron of the 403rd
Wing of the Air Force Reserve, based in Mississippi -- was preparing for what
members anticipated would be fairly frequent forward deployments to St. Croix,
after experts predicted a busy hurricane season for the Atlantic basin.

This year, though, the experts were wrong.

The 2013 Atlantic hurricane season actually had the fewest number of hurricanes
since 1982, owing to "persistent, unfavorable atmospheric conditions over the
Gulf of Mexico, Caribbean Sea, and tropical Atlantic Ocean," according to a
statement issued by the National Hurricane Center.

The Atlantic basin had 13 named storms this year, but only two became
hurricanes, and neither one of them grew into a major hurricane.

The 2013 hurricane season was the sixth least busy season since 1950, "in terms
of the collective strength and duration of named storms and hurricanes,"
according to the National Hurricane Center.

"It was a very, very slow hurricane season, which was great for the islands,
great for us, great for everybody," said Lt. Colonel Jon Talbot, who was mission
commander this past week on St. Croix.

Typically, the Hurricane Hunters fly about 100 missions -- each flight of the
aircraft to investigate a storm is a mission -- during any given hurricane
season.

"We had the least amount of flights this year. It was a total of 34 flights for
the whole season, and we typically do a hundred or more," Talbot said. "So it
was the least amount of flights we've had since records have been kept."

Records of Hurricane Hunter flights go back into the mid-1960s, he said.

The Hurricane Hunters fly WC-130J aircraft into tropical cyclones and
disturbances to gather data that the National Hurricane Center then uses to
determine the status of a storm and make predictions.

Although they are based at Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi, Miss., the
Hurricane Hunters forward deploy as needed to St. Croix, where they can
investigate tropical cyclones and disturbances that are within 1,000 miles of
the island. The St. Croix location puts them in range to fly missions far out
into the Atlantic, throughout the Caribbean and into the Gulf of Mexico.

Although the Hurricane Hunters tend to deploy to St. Croix fairly regularly
during hurricane season -- particularly during the peak of the season in late
August and September -- this year was an exception.

They came down in July for a training trip, then had two storm deployments here,
according to Talbot.

Talbot, who is a meteorologist, said several factors contributed to the
slower-than-average season.

"We had a really, really strong high pressure system in the North Atlantic and
the air circulates counter clockwise, so the air coming off of Africa was a lot
stronger than normal -- the windspeeds -- and picked up a lot of extra African
dust, Saharan dust."

The Saharan dust tends to make the air dry and stable.

"It's very dry and stable air and that has a stabilizing effect on the
atmosphere and that had a large impact this summer," he said.

In addition, some westerly winds developed that were a little stronger than
typical, Talbot said.

"What was not foreseen, I think, is how strong that super-strong high pressure
system that was in the Atlantic that caused all this dust would be," he said.
"That basically killed all the African waves that come off Africa that form into
these hurricanes at times. That was a big player."

The Hurricane Hunters were planning to stay a week on St. Croix this time, doing
maintenance and packing up equipment to be flown back stateside for the winter.
During the winter, they investigate storms from the National Weather Service.

While they were here, they also took some clothing they donated to the Queen
Louise Home for Children.

They were scheduled to leave the island on Sunday, but they plan to be back in
May.

- Contact Joy Blackburn at 714-9145 or email jblackburn@dailynews.vi

___ (c)2013 The Virgin Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) Visit The Virgin
Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) at www.virginislandsdailynews.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20131214-1VI-Air-Force-Hurricane-Hunters-stationed-on-St-Croix-pack-up-and-head-
home-1214-20131214

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2013 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 303 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 irishmirror.ie

                    September 6, 2017 Wednesday 6:01 AM GMT

'Extremely dangerous' 185-mph Hurricane Irma hits Caribbean islands and is so
powerful it's been picked up by earthquake monitors;
Winds of 185mph were recorded on St Martin and video shows widespread flooding
and torrential rain

BYLINE: By Natalie Evans

SECTION: NEWS,WORLD NEWS; Version:27

LENGTH: 1463 words


Hurricane Irma left a trail of devastation as it battered several Caribbean
islands with 185-mph winds this morning.

The category 5 storm, the most powerful ever recorded in the Atlantic, barred
down on St Martin and St Bartélemy in the early hours after causing destruction
on Barbuda.

The "extremely dangerous"hurricaneis now heading towards the British Virgin
Islands where some 30,000 islanders, nearly all British citizens, are bracing
for the monster storm.

Winds of 185mph raged on St Martin and videos show widespread flooding and
torrential rain.

Brit Alex Woolfall posted a series of frantic tweets from a stairwell on the
island.

Alex Tweet

Alec Woolfall Tweet 2

Alex Woolfall tweet

The Londoner started tweeting at 4.30am local time as the category 5 storm swept
towards the beautiful island and he was "evacuated" to the stairs

He described the "apocalyptic" scenes and "constant booms and bangs" as the
hurricane took hold.

Irma is now so powerful it has been causing seismic activity as it passes over
the Caribbean and is showing on seismometers - the equipment used to measure
earthquakes.

The Red Cross has released an initial 120,000 Swiss francs from its Disaster
Relief Emergency Fund to help some of the islands affected and volunteers have
started making their way to Florida.

C

Walter Cotte, Americas regional director of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, described the forecast as "extremely worrying".

"We are anticipating major impacts on a number of islands, and we are preparing
to respond to needs that may arise.

"We are especially worried that Irma could affect areas that have been suffering
with severe rainfall in the past months.

"One of the main challenges is going to be logistical, given the isolation of
some the islands. We need to ensure a reliable channel for relief efforts in the
aftermath of the hurricane."

The storm is so large it would cover the whole of the "UK and Ireland",
according to Channel 4 weather forecaster Liam Dutton.

Some experts say it is about to exceed the maximum theoretical intensity of a
hurricane - leading to suggestions a new 'Category 6' should be added to the
traditional Saffir-Simpson scale to accommodate it.

Live: Hurricane Irma hits Caribbean islands with winds of 185mph as forecasters
warn of life-threatening wind and rain

Florida residents are now bracing themselves for Irma's arrival at the weekend
and shops have already reported running out of water and other essential items.

President Donald Trump tweeted that Irma was looking like the "largest ever"
hurricane in the Atlantic.

He added that his administration were watching the storm "closely".

Bahamas prime minister Hubert Minnis has ordered a mandatory evacuation of some
islands.

A

B

Residents and tourists in Mayaguana, Inagua, Crooked Island, Acklins, Long Cay
and Ragged Island will be flown out on Wednesday, just before the storm hits.

Mr Minnis said it will be the largest hurricane evacuation in the history of the
Bahamas and anyone who does not leave will be in "great danger".

WATCH LIVE: Livestream as Hurricane Irma takes force

The strongest hurricane to ever to make landfall on the US coast was the 'Labor
Day' hurricane of 1935, which hit Florida Keys.

Around 500 people were killed and there were reports of bodies being swept from
one end of Florida to the other.

Hurricane Andrew, the most recent Category 5 storm, left the Miami-Dade area
devastated in 1992.

And since then, the city has transformed, adding huge numbers of residents and
reducing the wetlands area which would buffer the storm.

tweet1

tweet

Earlier, business magnetRichard Bransonrevealed he has decided to remain on his
private island in the British Virgin Islands during the storm.

The billionaire says he's survived two hurricanes on the island thanks to his
specialised 'hurricane proof' buildings - but says "nothing can withstand" a
Category 5 storm.

Branson wrote onhis blog: "Generally speaking, we have one hurricane in the
British Virgin Islands around every 10 years.

"Fortunately, most of them drift north of us, but this one is coming straight
for us, with the eye of the storm heading straight for Necker, Moskito Island
and Virgin Gorda.

Hurricane Irma upgraded to 'extremely dangerous' Category 5 with winds of 175mph
set to batter US

"Obviously things can change - hopefully they do, as a category five hurricane
hasn't hit the BVI [British Virgin Islands] full on before.

"On Necker Island we have constructed really strong buildings (with hurricane
blinds) that should be able to handle extreme weather pretty well, though with a
Category 5 hurricane almost nothing can withstand it.

"We had some lovely guests staying on Necker Island who have cut their trip
short for safety reasons, and another group of guests have also postponed.

"I will be on Necker alongside our team, as I have been on the three times we
have had hurricanes over the past 30 years."

Branson, who said he was on the island in 2010 when it was hit by Hurricanes
Earl and Otto, went on to share his concerns for local residents and wildlife.

Hurricane Irma filmed from space looks terrifying

He added: "In the past, many British Virgin Islanders have shrugged off
hurricanes, stayed at home and not gone to shelters.

"This time the BVI Government and the BVI Tourist board have been very active
and providing advice to the local population."

Irma is set to hit Necker Island less than two weeks after Hurricane Harvey
killed 60 people when it battered the United States and surrounding territories.

Hurricane Irma will reach Leeward Islands, east of Puerto Rico, tonight and
could batter Florida by the weekend.

British Airways is already preparing for the worst and flying tourists off the
Caribbean island of Antigua.

A BA spokeswoman told Mirror.co.uk: "We have provided a special flight to
Antigua to get our customers home before Hurricane Irma arrives on the island.

"The Antigua Airport authorities say that operations will be significantly
impacted today, so we have offered all affected customers rebooking options. We
are keeping our flights to other Caribbean islands under review."

Florida has declared an emergency and President Donald Trump has "offered the
full resources of the federal government as Floridians prepare for Hurricane
Irma," reports CNN.

"In Florida, we always prepare for the worst and hope for the best, and while
the exact path of Irma is not absolutely known at this time, we cannot afford to
not be prepared," said Governor Rick Scott in a statement.

Water is expected to rise 9ft (3metres) above normal levels as the storm brings
a predicted 10 inches of rain and "large and destructive waves".

'No way to prevent' chemical plant EXPLODING after it was flooded in Hurricane
Harvey

Irma is forecast to strengthen even more over the next 48 hours.

Forecasters say they cannot predict the exact path the storm will take but,
islands in Irma's path have been warned to brace themselves in preparation for
the intensifyingstormthat could pummel the area with life-threatening winds and
torrential rain.

Hurricane advisories have been issued for territories that dot the West Indies,
including the Leeward Islands, the British and US Virgin Islands and Puerto
Rico.

Not another one! Storm Irma forms in Atlantic and is expected to become
hurricane later this week

Irma was initially a Category 4 hurricane on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale,
meaning sustained winds of 130-156 miles per hour (209-251 kph) with
"catastrophic" outcomes.

This includes the uprooting of trees and downed power lines, water and
electricity outages, and significant property damage causing uninhabitable
conditions, according to the National Hurricane Center.

The NHC said: "There is an increasing chance of seeing some impacts from Irma in
the Florida Peninsula and the Florida Keys later this week and this weekend.

"In addition, rough surf and dangerous marine conditions will begin to affect
the southeastern U.S. coast by later this week."

Texas and Louisiana residents are still reeling from the catastrophic effects of
the deadly Hurricane Harvey.

Harvey struck Texas as a Category 4 hurricane on August 25 and dumped several
feet of rain, destroying thousands of homes and businesses.

In preparation for the storm, the economically struggling Puerto Rico government
on Monday declared a state of emergency and activated the National Guard.

"Despite the economic challenges Puerto Rico is facing, the approved budget has
$15 million for the emergency fund," Governor Ricardo Rosselló said in a
statement.

The island of about 3.4 million people has 456 emergency shelters prepared to
house up to 62,100 people.

To help residents prepare for the storm, the Puerto Rican government activated a
price freeze on basic necessities, including food and water, medicines, power
generators and batteries.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBMGNIRIS


                      Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 304 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              September 23, 1998, Wednesday, 2 Late Tampa Edition

HURRICANE '98

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 506 words



In an average year, more than 100 disturbances with hurricane potential are
seen in the Atlantic, Gulf and Caribbean. But, on an average, only 10 of these
reach the tropical storm stage and only six mature into hurricanes.

The condensation heat energy released by a hurricane in one day can be the
equivalent of energy released by the fusion of 100 20-megaton hydrogen bombs.
Coverted to electricity, that energy could meet the United States' electrical
needs for about six months.

The longest period on record without a hurricane hitting the United States is
three years and seven days, from Aug. 10, 1980 (Hurricane Allen, Brownsville,
Texas) to Aug. 17, 1983 (Hurricane Alicia, Galveston, Texas).

The lowest sea level pressure ever recorded in an Atlantic storm was 26.13
inches, measured inside Hurricane Gilbert on Sept. 13, 1988. The most intense
storm ever measured in this part of the world, it had winds gusting to 218 mph
during its path across Jamaica, the Cayman Islands and the Yucatan Peninsula  to
the northern coast of Mexico.

Each year, about 100 tropical storms form in the world, about 12 percent in  the
Western Atlantic. Some two-thirds of the storms grow into 74 mph or  stronger
hurricanes, typhoons or cyclones.

Hurricanes, which form over all tropical oceans except the South Atlantic and
the eastern South Pacific, are called willy-willy in Australia, cyclone in the
Indian Ocean region, typhoon in the western Pacific Ocean and baguio in the
Philippines, according to the Florida Almanac. The word "hurricane" is  derived
from the American Indian word "huracan," meaning the "evil  spirit."

On April 1, 1960, the first weather satellite was placed in orbit, giving
hurricane forecasters the ability to detect storms before they hit land.

In the 1950s, eight major hurricanes struck the United Sates, with seven  making
landfall on the East coast. For the next 30 years, the only major  hurricane to
hit the Florida peninsula was Hurricane Betsy in 1965. Hugo hit  in 1989;
Andrew, in 1992.

In general, hurricane strength is unrelated to overall size - but very strong
hurricanes usually have relatively small eyes, less than 10 miles in diameter.

The diameter of a hurricane ranges from 60 to 1,000 miles, with the typical
width about 300 miles.

After an average of eight to 10 days of blowing, the typical hurricane dies
when it travels too far from the tropical latitudes of its birth or hits land,
which hinders the free flow of winds and does not offer the supply of moisture
needed to keep the storm going.

According to research by William M. Gray of Colorado State University, 10  major
hurricanes (one that measures a category 3 or better on the  Saffir/Simpson
scale and has sustained winds greater than 110 mph) hit the  continental United
Sates in the 1940s. Seven of those struck Florida.

The most violent activity of the storm takes place in the area immediately
around the relatively calm eye and is known as the eyewall.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Times files; (1992) A board driven through a
palm tree in Homestead after Hurricane Andrew.

                    Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 305 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 Guardian.com.

                             May 23, 2013 Thursday

Noaa forecasts seven to 11 hurricanes for Atlantic and Carribbean season

BYLINE: Suzanne Goldenbergguardian.co.uk

LENGTH: 737 words

ABSTRACT

Scientists say three to six major hurricanes will hit US this year, as
devastating effect of Hurricane Sandy continues to be felt

FULL TEXT

Americans were warned on Thursday to brace for an extremely active hurricane
season - less than a year after the devastation of Sandy, which hit the east
coast in October 2012 - with 13 to 20 named storms, including seven to 11
hurricanes.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, releasing its annual
forecast, said 2013 would be prolific in raising storms out of the Atlantic and
Caribbean. Of the predicted hurricanes, Noaa predicted that three to six could
be major hurricanes, rated category three and packing winds of 111mph or higher.

Thursday's forecast was well above the average of 12 named storms, eight
hurricanes and three major hurricanes. Administration officials also warned that
the impacts of those storms - as with Sandy and Irene in 2011 - could be felt in
areas far beyond those typically associated with hurricanes and tropical storms.

Sandy killed scores as it made its way across the Caribbean to the north-east
US. While it was only a category two storm when it made landfall near Atlantic
City in New Jersey, Sandy caused more than $75bn in damage. Lower Manhattan was
knocked off the electrical grid for days because of storm surges and coastal
communities have yet to recover.

"As we saw first-hand with Sandy, it's important to remember that tropical storm
and hurricane impacts are not limited to the coastline. Strong winds, torrential
rain, flooding, and tornadoes often threaten inland areas far from where the
storm first makes landfall," said Kathryn Sullivan, the acting Noaa
administrator.

Noaa scientists said there were three main causes behind the forecast of an
extremely active season. They included a continuation of an atmospheric climate
pattern, which includes a strong west African monsoon, that has been
contributing to high activity during Atlantic hurricane season since the 1990s.
Warmer ocean temperatures in the Atlantic and Caribbean oceans, where many
storms originate, are also making for stronger storms. Officials said
temperatures were on average about 0.8 of one degree fahrenheit above average.

El Niño, which can inhibit storm systems, was not expected to develop during
this year's hurricane season. The season runs from 1 June to 1 November.

"There are no mitigating factors that we can see that will suppress the
activity," said Gerry Bell, Noaa's lead Atlantic hurricane forecaster. "The
computer models all point to an active, or very active, hurricane season."

Thursday's forecast was released at a time when Republicans in Congress are
sharply scrutinising Noaa's role in forecasting. Earlier in the day, a house
committee held a hearing to discuss privatising some of the forecasting
functions that are overseen by the premier scientific agency. There has also
been criticism of Noaa's messaging in advance of Hurricane Sandy, and whether
its decision to officially downgrade the storm when it made landfall in New
Jersey induced a false sense of security among some coastal communities.

Noaa officials, in unveiling their 2013 forecast, noted improvements to computer
models that would allow better far-range prediction of storms. New Doppler radar
data, to be introduced in July, will allow forecasters to better analyse rapidly
changing storm conditions, officials said. However, the officials said it was
impossible at this juncture to predict which coastal communities along the
Atlantic coast are most likely to be hit this year.

It is also not yet clear when the storms will hit. As Sullivan noted, Sandy
struck in the waning days of the hurricane season. "Hurricane Sandy was at the
very end of the hurricane season and yet was one of the most devastating storms
that we have ever seen," she said.

But officials said repeatedly that residents the length of the coast - and
beyond - needed to prepare in advance, in order to be able to ride out storms in
their homes or, if needed, have an exit plan in place. Such preparations should
include putting aside a 72-hour supply of food and water at home, or having an
evacuation plan in case of storm damage or flooding.

"This is a very dangerous hurricane season," said Joe Nimmich, who directs
disaster response and recovery for the Federal Emergency Management Agency. "If
you are not prepared you may become one of the statistics we don't care to
have."

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies
                              All Rights Reserved
                  Registered in England and Wales. No. 908396
   Registered office: PO Box 68164, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1P 2AP


                          FOCUS - 306 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              June 4, 2010 Friday

Forecaster: 9 chance a major hurricane will come near V.I. this year

BYLINE: Constance Cooper, The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 465 words


Jun. 4--There is a 65 percent chance that a major hurricane will hit the
Caribbean, a 28 percent chance that a hurricane will come within 50 miles of the
Virgin Islands, and a 9 percent chance that it will be a major hurricane --
according to the latest forecast released by Colorado State University
forecasting team William Gray and Philip Klotzbach.

Gray said that they "anticipate a well above-average probability" of a major
hurricane making landfall in the United States and Caribbean.

Gray and Klotzbach are predicting storm activity to be nearly twice as intense
as it is in a normal season. Cooling ocean temperatures in the Pacific tropics
combined with warmer-than-average waters in the tropical Atlantic Ocean and
Caribbean Sea will likely fuel an increase in storms, according to the report.

The forecast predicts 18 named storms and 10 hurricanes, with five of them
developing into major hurricanes with sustained winds of 111 mph or greater.
Gray and Klotzbach have increased their forecast since April, when they
predicted 15 named storms and eight hurricanes, four of them major.

Major hurricanes are defined as category 3, 4 or 5 storms.

The long-term average for a hurricane season is 9.6 named storms, 5.9 hurricanes
and 2.3 intense hurricanes per year, according to the report.

According to Gray and Klotzbach's latest forecast, there is a 51 percent chance
that a major hurricane will make landfall on the Gulf Coast, compared to a
long-term average of 31 percent.

An active season could hamper oil spill cleanup efforts, Klotzbach said.

"If the storm tracks to the west of the oil, there is the potential that the
counter-clockwise circulation of the hurricane could drive some of the oil
further towards the U.S. Gulf Coast," he said.

Gray and Klotzbach's predictions are in-line with forecasts released by other
hurricane experts. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is
predicting 14-23 named storms and eight to 14 hurricanes, three to seven of them
developing into major hurricanes. Joe Bastardi -- a meteorologist with State
College, Pa.'s AccuWeather, Inc. -- is predicting 16 to 18 named storms, 15 of
them in the Gulf of Mexico or the western Atlantic. Weather Services
International, an affiliate of The Weather Channel Companies, predicts 18 named
storms, 10 hurricanes and five intense hurricanes.

To see more of The Virgin Islands Daily News, or to subscribe to the newspaper,
go to http://www.virginislandsdailynews.com/. Copyright (c) 2010, The Virgin
Islands Daily News, St. Thomas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call
800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The
Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20100604-1VI-Forecaster-9-chance-a-major-hurricane-will-come-near-V-I-this-year-
0604

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2010 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                          FOCUS - 307 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       The Star (Shelby, North Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            March 10, 2010 Wednesday

Early report: Hurricane season 2010

BYLINE: The Shelby Star, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 553 words


Mar. 10--STATE COLLEGE, PA, February 10, 2010--AccuWeather.com Hurricane Center
meteorologists, led by Chief Long-Range Meteorologist and Hurricane Forecaster
Joe Bastardi, have released their early hurricane season forecast for the
Atlantic Basin for 2010. The forecast is calling for a much more active 2010
season with above-normal threats on the U.S. coastline.

"This year has the chance to be an extreme season," said Bastardi. "It is
certainly much more like 2008 than 2009 as far as the overall threat to the
United States' East and Gulf coasts."

Bastardi is forecasting seven landfalls. Five will be hurricanes and two or
three of the hurricanes will be major landfalls for the U.S. He is calling for
16 to 18 tropical storms in total, 15 of which would be in the western Atlantic
or Gulf of Mexico and therefore a threat to land. In a typical season, there are
about 11 named storms of which two to three will impact the coast of the United
States.

There are a number of physical drivers that have Bastardi concerned for this
upcoming hurricane season. These include:

--The rapidly weakening El Nino.

--Warmer ocean temperatures in the typical Atlantic tropical breeding grounds
compared to last year. Tropical storms draw energy from warm water.

--Weakening trade winds which reduce the amount of dry air injected into the
tropics from Africa.

--Higher humidity levels which provides additional upward motion in the air and
fuels tropical storm development.

Bastardi compared a number of years to the upcoming season in terms of storm set
up including 1964, 1995, and 1998. All were major impact seasons for the U.S.
coast.

--In 1964, Hurricane Cleo struck southeast Florida near Miami as a Category 2
storm and killed 217 people.

--In 1995, Hurricane Opal made landfall in Pensacola, Florida as a Category 3
storm affecting 200 miles of coastline and causing $3 billion in damages.

--In 1998 Hurricane Bonnie struck near Wilmington, North Carolina as a
borderline Category 2 to Category 3 storm causing significant harm to crops and
$1 billion in damages.

As Bastardi had predicted in last year's hurricane forecast, the 2009 Atlantic
hurricane season was a year far below the average, with eleven tropical
depressions forming and only nine of those becoming tropical storms, the lowest
number of named tropical storms or hurricanes since the 1997 season.

The Atlantic hurricane season officially begins on June 1 and continues through
November 30. These dates were selected because 97 percent of hurricane activity
occurs during this six month period.

In addition to his work leading the AccuWeather.com Hurricane Center, Bastardi
provides weather insights and private forecasting services to industries heavily
impacted by tropical weather and to AccuWeather.com EnergyProÂ® clients. To
learn more about his private forecasting services, go to
http://www.accuweather.com/adc2004/pub/products_services/bastardi.asp

To see more of The Shelby Star or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.shelbystar.com/. Copyright (c) 2010, The Shelby Star, N.C.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100310-SS-Early-report-Hurricane-season-2010-0310

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SS


                            Copyright 2010 The Star


                          FOCUS - 308 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                          September 1, 2005, Thursday

Weather patterns brew up more violent storms

BYLINE: Paul Simons

SECTION: Home news; 6

LENGTH: 455 words


Forecasters were predicting months ago that this would be a bad year for
hurricanes, but the number of storms is unprecedented.

With three months of the hurricane season remaining, the risk of more
devastating storms is extremely high. All the ingredients for a deadly series of
hurricanes are in place. Sea temperatures are at their highest recorded levels
in "Hurricane Alley", the stretch of tropical seas that spawns hurricanes across
the Atlantic, the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico.

Hurricanes feed off ocean waters of at least 26.5C (80F), and the warmer the
water, the better for hurricanes. The waters also need to be about 50m (150ft)
deep, because storms churn up seas so violently that they can drag up cold
water, which kills the storm.

Hot, humid air wafting off a warm tropical ocean is the fuel that drives
tropical storms and hurricanes. As the wet air rises, it cools and condenses
into huge thunderclouds, at the same time unleashing a phenomenal amount of heat
that powers the hurricane. An average hurricane has the energy of 10,000 nuclear
warheads.

Another key ingredient is gentle winds miles above. If the winds are too strong,
or hit the storm head on, they topple the clouds and decapitate the storm. This
is called wind shear, and this summer the wind shear values are up to 40 per
cent below normal.

The lack of any El Nino this year has helped. This climate phenomenon arises in
the Pacific but sends high-level winds across the Atlantic and kills off
hurricanes. Hurricanes are also susceptible to dust storms off the Sahara, but
there have been few this year.

Compounding all this, the weather patterns are steering tropical storms straight
for Florida. Normally a large area of high atmospheric pressure, the
Bermuda-Azores High, sits over the Atlantic and allows the sea to bake under the
tropical sunshine. The hurricanes spin around the edge of it.

This summer, the Bermuda High has reached far to the south and west, and is
steering hurricanes towards Florida and the Gulf of Mexico, which explains the
track of Hurricane Katrina. The same system has also been dragging warm tropical
air northward into the Midwest, leading to a very hot and sticky summer.

Climate experts are debating whether global warming is also to blame, but the
remark-able intensity of this season's hurricanes can be blamed partially on
global warming helping to heat the seas.

And the outlook for the next 15 years is grim. A cycle of hurricane activity
goes round every 20 to 50 years. Since 1995, activity has been growing stronger
and will probably continue to do so until about 2020 -and the threat of the most
intense hurricanes, Categories 3 to 5, is especially high.


LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 2005 Times Newspapers Limited


                          FOCUS - 309 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 9, 2017 Saturday
                                Ontario Edition

The science behind the storm;
Ivan Semeniuk and Eric Andrew-Gee answer hurricane questions, from how they form
to how well we can predict their paths

BYLINE: Ivan Semeniuk, Eric Andrew-Gee

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 880 words


What are hurricanes?

Hurricanes are part of a family of storms called tropical cyclones - storms that
rotate rapidly around a low-pressure centre and produce heavy rain and strong
winds. If one of these storms hits a sustained top wind speed of 119 kilometres
an hour and appears in the Atlantic or eastern North Pacific, it qualifies as a
hurricane. (Similar storms in the western North Pacific are called typhoons.)
The SaffirSimpson hurricane wind scale goes up from there, through to Category
5, which has no ceiling and represents storms with wind speeds greater than 252
km/h.

Anything from Category 3 and up is a "major" hurricane.

How do hurricanes form?

Hurricanes begin as atmospheric disturbances over the tropical waters due west
of Africa near the Cape Verde islands. Typically, when sea-surface temperatures
are above 26.5 C, water vapour from the ocean condenses and releases heat, which
rises and generates an inward movement of air. The air begins to spiral toward
the centre of the disturbance, which graduates to a tropical depression and then
a tropical storm. As long as winds in the upper atmosphere do not produce a
shear force to disrupt the system, it can increase in height and breadth until
it reaches hurricane status, gaining strength as it moves westward toward the
Caribbean and picking up energy from the warm Atlantic waters.

How do they cause damage?

Hurricanes can cause damage in one of three main ways: wind, rain and storm
surge. Because they produce eye-popping windspeed figures, and are most often
measured that way, whipping winds are perhaps the most common risk associated
with hurricanes. But Hurricane Harvey, which devastated Houston and environs in
late August, actually did its damage by hovering over the city and unloading
trillions of gallons of rainwater on it. In 2012, Hurricane Sandy had weakened
to a post-tropical cyclone by the time it hit New York State and New Jersey.
Storm surge did much of the damage in those states, reaching nearly eight feet
on the Jersey Shore. The phenomenon, which Princeton University climate
scientist Gabriel Vecchi likened to a "wall of water" from the ocean, is
produced by a range of factors, including the strength of winds pushing water
toward the coast.

In Irma's case, of the three forms of hurricane damage, "it's probably not clear
which one is going to be worst, simply because they're all going to be really
bad," said Bob Robichaud, a meteorologist at the Canadian Hurricane Centre in
Dartmouth.

How are their paths forecast - and how accurately?

The paths of hurricanes are easier to predict than their intensity, which tends
to be more erratic and variable, said Tom Knutson, a research meteorologist with
the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Better data feeding
into the mathematical models used to track storms have helped. So has improved
jet technology, enabling planes to scale and circumnavigate hurricanes, Mr.
Robichaud said. Every year, hurricane tracking improves a little bit. Still, it
remains uneven: 24 hours out, the models might only show to within a 100km range
where the centre of the storm will be. And the effectiveness of tracking depends
on whose models are being used: In 2012, the European Centre for Medium-Range
Weather Forecasts in Reading, England, predicted Sandy would turn to New Jersey,
while the U.S. National Weather Service did not.

What risk does Canada face from hurricanes?

Once Irma hits the Florida peninsula, it is currently projected to head
northward along a line that roughly parallels U.S. Interstate 75 through Georgia
and Kentucky. Cut off from warm water, it will quickly weaken. By next week, it
could become a mid-latitude storm that brings rainfall to Ontario and Quebec. Of
greater concern to Canada are hurricanes that directly strike the Atlantic
provinces while coming in off the ocean full force, such as Hurricane Igor,
which hammered Newfoundland in 2010. A similar risk is posed by hurricanes that
strike the U.S. mid-Atlantic region and cross the relatively short distance over
Pennsylvania to hit Southern Ontario. This is what occurred in 1954 when
Hurricane Hazel famously devastated Toronto, claiming 81 lives, most because of
flooding.

Is climate change making hurricanes stronger or more frequent?

This is a tricky question, because modern hurricane science dates back only a
few decades, to the advent of meteorological satellites. A warming climate
certainly will bring rising sea-surface temperatures, which may prolong
hurricane seasons on a more regular basis. There is also some evidence that a
warming climate will eventually make the most intense hurricanes more so,
although it is not clear yet if that change can already be observed.

Today, global climate models, which are used to study how the atmosphere behaves
over hundreds of kilometres, are generally not able to say much that is
definitive about hurricanes. "As we move to higher resolution in the future,
we'll be able to better represent hurricanes in our models," say Nathan Gillett,
manager of the Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling and Analysis in Victoria.
What is somewhat more certain is that climate change will mean increased
rainfall from hurricanes and also more serious storm surges along coastlines
owing to sea-level rise.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2017 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 310 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                           Star News (Wilmington NC)

                            June 1, 2005, Wednesday

Hurricane fever / Looking beyond the stormy weather

BYLINE: From staff reports

SECTION: Lifestyle; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 889 words


Yes, hurricane season has begun. Batten down the windows. Tune into The Weather
Channel. Await the arrival of Jim Cantore. Sure, we need to be prepared. But
we've survived lots of hurricanes. When they approach, we'll watch the
television every day, log onto the NOAA Web site and buy up all the plywood at
The Home Depot and all the water at Food Lion. Until then, though, let's relax
and play a game of word association. When I say 'hurricane', don't think of
Bonnie, Ivan and destruction. Think of sweet drinks, classic rock 'n' roll music
and antique-looking lamps.

Let's welcome the season with a look at things that have somehow become
associated with the word 'hurricane.'


CAROLINA HURRICANES

Don't badmouth hurricanes; cheer for the Hurricanes. We could grow some real
enthusiasm for the Carolina Hurricanes, Raleigh's National Hockey League team
that has infused a puck into its eye-of-the-storm logo.

The team's mascot is named Stormy, and the team shop is called The Eye. They've
certainly captured the spirit.

The 2004-05 NHL season was abandoned before it started, however, as the owners
and players couldn't agree on a contract. So cheering for those Hurricanes is a
lost cause.

And since the Myrtle Beach minor league baseball team is the Pelicans (a team
called the Hurricanes played there in the early 1990s), we have only the
University of Miami to root for.

Since they've joined the Atlantic Coast Conference, it's hard to don the green
and orange in a state dominated by allegiance to the Tar Heels and Wolfpack.

So we can take up the cause of the Lake Charles Hurricanes, a team in the
American Basketball Association.


'ROCK YOU LIKE A HURRICANE'

German rockers the Scorpions (below) probably never felt the wrath of 120-mile
winds or the effects of a 12-foot storm surge, but they convinced themselves
that they could Rock You Like a Hurricane.

The song itself is certainly not brilliant songwriting, but the chorus ("Here I
am! Rock you like a hurricane!" Repeat ad nauseam) makes for great motivation
prior to a wrestling match or football game. If you were a teenager in the early
'90s you sang along to it. Don't be ashamed unless you sang it to your
girlfriend.

By the way, if you visit awesomecrap.com, you can get a trucker hat with the
chorus on the front.


HURRICANE, W.Va.

Pronounced like a slang southern verb (Hurrickin'), this town between Huntington
and Charleston was named when surveyors in 1774 saw a stand of trees leaning in
one direction and figured a storm had passed through. The closest thing to
hurricane conditions in the area, though, will be found at the Waves of Fun
pool.

If a big one hits this summer, tell everyone you're going to swim in the waves
of Hurricane. Then head north to West Virginia until the storm passes.


'Isaac's Storm'

Erik Larson's 2000 best-seller about the nameless hurricane that hit Galveston,
Texas, on Sept. 8, 1900, killing 8,000 people, at least. (Estimates vary.) The
"Isaac" of the title was Isaac Cline, a U.S. government forecaster who fatally
underestimated the storm's strength - and lost his family in the ensuing tidal
surge.


'Fisher-Price Hurricane Havoc: Rescue Heroes'

This computer game (for kids ages 4-7) explains the importance of safety while
your kids enjoy interacting with the Rescue Heroes characters they've seen on
TV. It also explains early science concepts and comes with printable extras.


'The Hurricane'

Favorite name for several Hollywood movies:

* The 1937 movie, directed by John Ford was based on a novel by Charles Nordhoff
and James Norman Hall, the team who also wrote Mutiny on the Bounty. Starring
Jon Hall, Dorothy Lamour (the original "Sarong Girl") and Mary Astor, it
depicted the effects of a typhoon on a tiny Pacific island. A subplot dealt with
the colonial governor (Raymond Massey), a Captain Bligh type who mistreated the
natives.

* The 1979 remake focused on the forbidden love between a native boy and an
American girl (Mia Farrow), exciting the jealousy of her father, the governor
(Jason Robards), whose feelings for his daughter were a bit abnormal. Most
critics thought it stank.

* Director Norman Jewison's 1999 film biography of boxer Rubin 'Hurricane'
Carter (left), who battled for years to overturn a murder conviction based on
questionable evidence. Based on Mr. Carter's memoirs, not on the Bob Dylan song.
Denzel Washington played the title role.

* A 1997 drama about teen street gangs (co-starring The Sopranos' Edie Falco).
Its title was changed to Hurricane Streets after distributors' employees began
to mix it up with the 1979 Hurricane feature.


Hurricane

1 oz. vodka

1/4 oz. grenadine

1 oz. gin

1 oz. light rum

1/2 oz. Bacardi 151 rum

1 oz. amaretto almond liqueur

1 oz. triple sec

Grapefruit juice

Pineapple juice

Pour all but the juices, in the order listed, into a hurricane glass
three-quarters filled with ice.

Fill with equal parts of grapefruit and pineapple juice and serve.

- www.drinksmixer.com


In all seriousness ...

for hurricane information to help keep you and your family safe this season, log
on to www.StarNewsOnline.com and click on the Hurricane Guide. In our special
section, you'll find tracking maps, checklists and plenty of news you can use.


LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                            Copyright 2005 Star News


                          FOCUS - 311 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 19, 2014 Monday

Washington: NOAA Kicks Off Hurricane Awareness Tour

LENGTH: 485  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Commerce, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

This week, NOAA hurricane experts will visit five U.S. Gulf Coast cities aboard
a NOAA hurricane hunter aircraft to raise awareness about storm threats and the
danger of being caught without a personal hurricane plan. The five-day tour
begins today and advances NOAA's efforts to build a Weather-Ready Nation through
outreach and effective communication on the steps necessary to prepare for a
hurricane.

National Hurricane Center Director Dr. Rick Knabb, along with senior hurricane
specialist Daniel Brown and storm surge team leader Jamie Rhome, will travel
with the NOAA crew when the aircraft visits Corpus Christi, Tex.; Houston, Tex.;
New Orleans, La.; Tallahassee, Fla.; and Tampa, Fla.

The hurricane hunter aircraft, also known as the NOAA WP-3D Orion turboprop
aircraft, is used primarily by scientists on research missions to study various
elements of a hurricane, flying through the eye of the storm several times each
flight. The crew collects and transmits data by satellite directly to the
National Hurricane Center so that forecasters can analyze and predict changes to
the hurricane's path and strength.

The aircraft is part of our fleet of highly specialized research aircraft
operated, managed and maintained by the NOAA Office of Marine and Aviation
Operations. The aircraft is piloted by officers of the NOAA Corps -- one of the
seven uniformed services of the United States -- and based at the NOAA Aircraft
Operations Center, located at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Fla.

Staff from local emergency management offices and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, non-profit organizations such as the American Red Cross and
the Federal Alliance for Safe Homes, and several local NOAA National Weather
Service forecast offices will be part of the team at each stop.

NOAA has conducted the hurricane awareness tour for more than 30 years,
alternating between the Gulf and Atlantic coasts, and is followed by NOAA's
hurricane hazard education campaign during National Hurricane Preparedness Week,
May 25 to 31. The Atlantic hurricane season begins June 1. History teaches that
a lack of hurricane awareness and preparation are common threads among all major
hurricane disasters. By knowing your vulnerability and what actions you should
take, you can reduce the personal harm and property damage hurricanes cause.

Public Tour Schedule:

[#x25cf] Mon., May 19: Corpus Christi Intl Airport, Corpus Christi, Tex., 3:00
p.m. to 4:30 p.m.

[#x25cf] Tue., May 20: Ellington Airport, Houston, Tex., 3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.

[#x25cf] Wed., May 21: Lakefront Airport, New Orleans, La., 3:30 p.m. to 5:00
p.m.

[#x25cf] Thur., May 22: Tallahassee Airport, Tallahassee, Fla., 1:30 p.m. to
4:30 p.m.

[#x25cf] Fri., May 23: Tampa International Airport, Tampa, Fla., 2:30 p.m. to
4:30 p.m.

For more information please visit: http://www.commerce.govmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 312 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 23, 2014 Friday

Washington: NOAA Predicts Near-Normal or Below-Normal 2014 Atlantic Hurricane
Season

LENGTH: 909  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Commerce, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

In its 2014 Atlantic hurricane season outlook issued today, NOAA's Climate
Prediction Center is forecasting a near-normal or below-normal season.

The main driver of this year's outlook is the anticipated development of El Niño
this summer. El Niño causes stronger wind shear, which reduces the number and
intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes. El Niño can also strengthen the
trade winds and increase the atmospheric stability across the tropical Atlantic,
making it more difficult for cloud systems coming off of Africa to intensify
into tropical storms.

The outlook calls for a 50 percent chance of a below-normal season, a 40 percent
chance of a near-normal season, and only a 10 percent chance of an above-normal
season. For the six-month hurricane season, which begins June 1, NOAA predicts a
70 percent likelihood of 8 to 13 named storms (winds of 39 mph or higher), of
which 3 to 6 could become hurricanes (winds of 74 mph or higher), including 1 to
2 major hurricanes (Category 3, 4 or 5; winds of 111 mph or higher).

These numbers are near or below the seasonal averages of 12 named storms, six
hurricanes and three major hurricanes, based on the average from 1981 to 2010.
The Atlantic hurricane region includes the North Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea
and Gulf of Mexico.

"Thanks to the environmental intelligence from NOAA's network of earth
observations, our scientists and meteorologists can provide life-saving products
like our new storm surge threat map and our hurricane forecasts," said Kathryn
Sullivan, Ph.D., NOAA administrator. "And even though we expect El Niño to
suppress the number of storms this season, it's important to remember it takes
only one land falling storm to cause a disaster."

Humberto was the first of only two Atlantic hurricanes in 2013. It reached peak
intensity, with top winds of 90 mph, in the far eastern Atlantic.

Gerry Bell, Ph.D., lead seasonal hurricane forecaster with NOAA's Climate
Prediction Center, said the Atlantic - which has seen above-normal seasons in 12
of the last 20 years - has been in an era of high activity for hurricanes since
1995. However, this high-activity pattern is expected to be offset in 2014 by
the impacts of El Niño, and by cooler Atlantic Ocean temperatures than we've
seen in recent years.

"Atmospheric and oceanic conditions across the tropical Pacific are already
taking on some El Niño characteristics. Also, we are currently seeing strong
trade winds and wind shear over the tropical Atlantic, and NOAA's climate models
predict these conditions will persist, in part because of El Niño," Bell said.
"The expectation of near-average Atlantic Ocean temperatures this season, rather
than the above-average temperatures seen since 1995, also suggests fewer
Atlantic hurricanes."

NOAA is rolling out new tools at the National Hurricane Center this year. An
experimental mapping tool will be used to show communities their storm surge
flood threat. The map will be issued for coastal areas when a hurricane or
tropical storm watch is first issued, or approximately 48 hours before the
anticipated onset of tropical storm force winds. The map will show land areas
where storm surge could occur and how high above ground the water could reach in
those areas.

Early testing on continued improvements to NOAA's Hurricane Weather Research and
Forecasting model (HWRF) shows a 10 percent improvement in this year's model
compared to last year. Hurricane forecasters use the HWRF along with other
models to produce forecasts and issue warnings. The HWRF model is being adopted
by a number of Western Pacific and Indian Ocean rim nations.

NOAA's seasonal hurricane outlook is not a hurricane landfall forecast; it does
not predict how many storms will hit land or where a storm will strike.
Forecasts for individual storms and their impacts will be provided throughout
the season by NOAA's National Hurricane Center.

"It only takes one hurricane or tropical storm making landfall to have
disastrous impacts on our communities," said Joe Nimmich, FEMA associate
administrator for Response and Recovery. "Just last month, Pensacola, Florida
saw five inches of rain in 45 minutes - without a tropical storm or hurricane.
We need you to be ready. Know your risk for hurricanes and severe weather, take
action now to be prepared and be an example for others in your office, school or
community. Learn more about how to prepare for hurricanes at
www.ready.gov/hurricanes."

Next week, May 25-31, is National Hurricane Preparedness Week. To help those
living in hurricane-prone areas prepare, NOAA offers hurricane preparedness
tips, along with video and audio public service announcements in both English
and Spanish, featuring NOAA hurricane experts and the FEMA Administrator at
www.hurricanes.gov/prepare.

NOAA's outlook for the Eastern Pacific basin is for a near-normal or
above-normal hurricane season, and the Central Pacific basin is also expected to
have a near-normal or above-normal season. NOAA will issue an updated outlook
for the Atlantic hurricane season in early August, just prior to the historical
peak of the season.

NOAA's mission is to understand and predict changes in the Earth's environment,
from the depths of the ocean to the surface of the sun, and to conserve and
manage our coastal and marine resources.

For more information please visit: http://www.commerce.govmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 313 of 881 DOCUMENTS


           Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Florida)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           October 24, 2015 Saturday

OPINION: DEL STONE JR.: '05 hurricane season was one for the record books

BYLINE: Del Stone Jr., Northwest Florida Daily News, Fort Walton Beach

SECTION: COMMENTARY

LENGTH: 789 words


Oct. 24--Ten years ago, residents of the Atlantic Basin endured the most violent
hurricane season in recorded history. That freakish year set numerous records
(from The Weather Underground):

? Most tropical cyclones in a single season (28). The prior record was 21 in
1933.

? Most hurricanes in a single season (15). The old record was 12 in 1969.

? Most Category 5 storms in a single season (five). The old record was two in
1960, 1961.

? Most storm names retired (five). The old record was four in 1955, 1995 and
2004.

? Most major hurricanes to hit the United States (four). The previous record was
three in five different years.

? Most damage ever recorded in a hurricane season, over $150 billion.

? Highest Accumulated Cyclone Energy index at 245. The previous record was 243
in 1950. An average year is 93.

? Latest end to hurricane season (Tropical Storm Zeta, Jan. 6).

Here on the Emerald Coast, we dealt with Hurricane Dennis, which at one point
produced winds of 145 mph. Dennis moved inland near Pensacola Beach and caused
havoc in Santa Rosa and Okaloosa counties. It struck less than a year after
Hurricane Ivan's awful visitation in September 2004.

The season was memorable for a number of other reasons, too:

-- Tropical Storm Arlene formed only eight days into the season and headed for
Northwest Florida. The storm struck Pensacola as an almost-hurricane and spread
its wrath from Escambia County, where Fort Pickens suffered $2.5 million worth
of damage, to Navarre, where a tornado struck, to Walton County, which felt the
effects of a 5-foot storm tide.

-- The third storm of the season, Cindy, struck the Mississippi coast as a
tropical storm -- or that's what most people thought. A post-storm analysis
revealed Cindy had gained hurricane strength just before moving ashore.

-- Hurricane Dennis set the July record for lowest pressure in a hurricane when
it dropped to 930mb. That record lasted a whole week before Hurricane Emily
produced a central pressure of 929mb.

-- Tropical Storm Jose formed off the coast of Mexico but was so close to shore
there was thinking it wouldn't do much. But the storm intensified rapidly and
was forming an eye when it moved ashore. Another 12 hours over water and Jose
could've been a hurricane.

-- When Hurricane Katrina struck South Florida, it barely lost strength as it
moved over the Everglades. It became a tropical storm for three hours, and
barely an hour later, back over water, it blew up into a monstrous Category 5
storm. Katrina was the country's worst natural disaster. Its death toll (1,836)
was second only to the notorious 1928 Lake Okeechobee hurricane (4,075) and the
1900 Galveston hurricane (death toll 6,000).

-- Tropical Storm Lee literally rose from the dead. It formed into a depression
but was torn apart by wind shear. It later re-formed into a depression,
intensified into a storm, then fell apart as shear hit again.

-- Hurricane Maria formed in the Atlantic, moved northeast and lost strength.
Weirdly, it re-intensified into a tropical storm near Iceland and struck Norway,
where one person was killed in an avalanche.

-- A storm that was added to the roster after the season ended formed near the
Azores and was absorbed by a separate weather system the very next day.

-- Vince, a weird October storm, formed in a hostile environment and briefly
gained hurricane strength. The storm went on to strike Spain, of all places. It
was the first tropical cyclone to hit that country since 1842.

-- Hurricane Wilma became the most powerful hurricane ever recorded in the
Atlantic Basin, with a central pressure of 882mb.

-- On Oct. 22, forecasters, for the first time ever, ran out of hurricane names
and turned to the Greek alphabet to name a tropical storm that formed in the
eastern Caribbean. It was called Alpha. It was a deadly storm, killing 42 people
in the Greater Antilles.

-- Alpha's follow-up, Hurricane Beta, struck far south and hit islands off the
northern coast of Colombia before smashing ashore in Nicaragua. Nine people
died.

-- Tropical Storm Gamma struck Central America only a week or so before
Americans celebrated Thanksgiving. Forty-one people died.

-- Hurricane Epsilon continued the persistent season of 2005, intensifying on
Dec. 2. And Tropical Storm Zeta came along on Dec. 30, tying a record for
latest-season storm. It dissipated Jan. 6, 2006, and the season finally came to
an end.

Contact online editor Del Stone Jr. at 850-315-4433 or at
dstone@nwfdailynews.com Follow him on twitter at @delsnwfdn, and friend him on
Facebook at dels nwfdn.

___ (c)2015 the Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Fla.) Visit the
Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Fla.) at www.nwfdailynews.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20151024-FO-OPINION-DEL-STONE-JR-05-hurricane-season-was-one-for-the-record-book
s-1024-20151024

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FO


                  Copyright 2015 Northwest Florida Daily News


                          FOCUS - 314 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                The New York Post

                             August 7, 2007 Tuesday

HURRICANES WREAK HAVOC!

BYLINE: JASMIN K. WILLIAMS

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 770 words


Hurricanes are among nature's deadliest storms. Here's a bit more about them.

HURRICANE season begins on June 1 and continues though Nov. 30. Weather experts
watch storm formations over the Atlantic Ocean. Many tropical depressions will
form and a few will turn into hurricanes. This year promises to be a busy
season.

Hurricanes pack a real punch, causing the ocean to surge and creating flooding
rains and winds that can reach more than 150 miles per hour.

A hurricane has three parts:

EYE - the low-pressure calm center of the storm

EYE WALL - the area around the eye with the most violent winds

RAIN BANDS - thunderstorms circulating from the eye that feed the condensation
and evaporation cycle that powers the storm.

Hurricanes start out as tropical depressions far away from land. They form over
the warm ocean waters near the equator. Warm, moist air from the ocean's surface
begins to rise. As it does, it cools and forms rain droplets and storm clouds.

The rising air below is replaced by more humid air from the ocean's surface. As
this cycle of evaporation and condensation continues, winds swirl in different
directions, combining with the rising ocean air. The storm grows into the
familiar white swirl pattern you've seen on TV. This can take a few hours or
several days.

As many of 100 of these systems can form during hurricane season, but only about
10 will develop into tropical storms. These are not dangerous - until they hit
land.

A tropical depression becomes a tropical storm when its winds reach a dangerous
39 miles per hour or more. Though not as destructive as hurricanes, tropical
storms can still flip over trucks, destroy buildings and topple trees.

Once a tropical storm's winds hit 74 mile per hour or better, the storm takes a
cyclone shape and officially becomes a hurricane.

Hurricanes are classified in categories from one to five, depending on the
storm's strength. A category five is the strongest and has the most potential to
do the greatest amount of damage to land, property and human life.

The areas hardest hit by hurricanes are the Caribbean islands and the southeast
coast of the U.S. bordering the Gulf of Mexico. Southern Florida gets a lion's
share of hurricanes.

Though New York rarely takes a direct hit from a hurricane, we sometimes get
tail effects like heavy rain and flooding. These storms do most of their damage
further south and lose strength by the time they head north and out to sea.

However, in 1938, a Category 3 storm hit Long Island. High winds hit New England
and the heavy rains caused river flooding in New York, Massachusetts and
Connecticut. Six hundred people were killed.

What's in a name?

Our word "hurricane" is similar to words used by other cultures to describe
these violent and deadly storms. Hurakan is the name of a Mayan god that blew
his breath over the water. Hurrican is the name of an ancient evil Caribbean
god.

With so many tropical storm forming during hurricane season, naming them is
necessary to keep track of them. Both male and female names are used. If a storm
has been especially deadly, its name is retired and not used again. Deadly storm
names Agnes, Hazel, Andrew, Camille, Gloria and Katrina are retired 2007
Hurricane Names: Andrea Humberto Olga Barry Ingrid Pablo Chantal Jerry Rebekah
Dean Karen Sebastien Erin Lorenzo Tanya Felix Melissa Van Gabrielle Noel Wendy

The deadliest hurricane in U.S. history was an unnamed Category 4 storm that hit
Galveston, Texas in 1900. It killed 8,000 people.

On Aug. 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina slammed into the Gulf Coast and devastated
parts of Mississippi and Louisiana. New Orleans was especially hard hit as its
fragile levee system failed, completely flooding parts of the city. Thousands of
residents are still without homes. It was the nation's costliest natural
disaster at more than $125 billion in damages.

For more information about the Classroom Extra program, contact Customer Service
at 1-212-801-0100. Today's lesson can be found at nypost.com. Click on the
"More" pull down menu.

Today's lesson fulfills the following New York standards: E1c, E3c, E3d, Science
S3c, S4a, S6a.

---

New York Post Activities

* CHECK the weather page of today's Post for information on Hurricanes or
tropical storms.

* USE the Internet or an encyclopedia to learn more about tropical storms and
hurricanes.

* CREATE a hurricane safety check list. How would you prepare yourself if you
were caught in a hurricane?

***

2007 Hurricane Names:

Andrea Barry Chantal Dean Erin Felix Gabrielle Humberto Ingrid Jerry Karen
Lorenzo Melissa Noel Olga Pablo  Rebekah Sebastien Tanya Van Wendy

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: In 2005, Hurricane Katrina slammed into the Gulf Coast and devastated
New Orleans. [Photo: NOAA/Bloomberg News]

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 315 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              June 2, 1996, Sunday

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; HURRICANE '96: ARE YOU READY?; Pg. 4I

LENGTH: 1055 words



The first hurricane warning in the United States was flashed in 1873, with  the
Signal Corps warned of a storm approaching the coast between Cape May,  N.J.,
and New London, Conn.

The earliest observed hurricane in the Atlantic was on March 7, 1908; the
latest, on Dec. 31, 1954, which persisted as a hurricane until Jan. 5, 1955.

The earliest hurricane to strike the United States in this century was Alma,
which struck northwest Florida on June 19, 1966. The latest hurricane to  strike
the United States was late on Nov. 30, 1925, near Tampa.

The Sept. 16, 1928, hurricane, a category 4 storm, killed more than 2,000
people when it swept ashore in South Florida. Many of those who died were
killed when Lake Okeechobee levees broke. Faced with an overwhelming task in
the storm's aftermath, searchers resorted to burning many of the bodies.

The first named hurricane to strike Florida was Hurricane Easy, a category 3
storm that struck on Sept. 4, 1950.

Ginger, 1971, holds the record for being the longest-lived hurricane (20  days)
and the longest-lived tropical cyclone (28 days).

In an average year, more than 100 disturbances with hurricane potential are
seen in the Atlantic, Gulf and Caribbean. But, on an average, only 10 of these
reach the tropical storm stage and only six mature into hurricanes.

Against the norm, 11 hurricanes were observed in 1916 and 1950; no hurricanes
in 1907 and 1914.

Approximately half of the hurricanes to strike along the middle Gulf Coast,
southern Florida, New York and Southern New England are major ones.

William McKinley, 25th president of the United States (1897-1901), reportedly
said he was more afraid of a hurricane than of the Spanish Navy. In 1898, an
effort was made to establish a comprehensive hurricane warning system.

In 1943, Col. Joseph Duckworth made the first international plane
reconnaissance into the eye of a hurricane.

In general, hurricane strength is unrelated to overall size - but very strong
hurricanes usually have relatively small eyes, less than 10 miles in diameter.

The condensation heat energy released by a hurricane in one day can be the
equivalent of energy released by the fusion of 100 20-megaton hydrogen bombs.
Coverted to electricity, that energy could meet the United States' electrical
needs for about six months.

The diameter of a hurricane ranges from 60 to 1,000 miles, with the typical
width about 300 miles.

The most violent activity of the storm takes place in the area immediately
around the relatively calm eye and is known as the eyewall.

The longest period on record without a hurricane hitting the United States is
three years and seven days, from Aug. 10, 1980 (Hurricane Allen, Brownsville,
Texas) to Aug. 17, 1983 (Hurricane Alicia, Galveston, Texas).

The lowest sea level pressure ever recorded in an Atlantic storm was 26.13
inches, measured inside Hurricane Gilbert on Sept. 13, 1988. The most intense
storm ever measured in this part of the world, it had winds gusting to 218 mph
during its path across Jamaica, the Cayman Islands and the Yucatan Peninsula  to
the northern coast of Mexico.

After an average of eight to 10 days of blowing, the typical hurricane dies
when it travels too far from the tropical latitudes of its birth or hits land,
which hinders the free flow of winds and does not offer the supply of moisture
needed to keep the storm going.

The lowest sea-level pressure ever recorded in the Western Hemisphere, 26.35
inches, was recorded at Long Key on Sept. 2, 1935, during the "Labor Day
Hurricane." The maximum winds in that storm were not recorded because  equipment
was blown down before the peak of the storm was reached. However,  engineers
have calculated that winds of 200 to 250 mph would have been  required to cause
damage reported.

Hurricanes, which form over all tropical oceans except the South Atlantic and
the eastern South Pacific, are called willy-willy in Australia, cyclone in the
Indian Ocean region, typhoon in the western Pacific Ocean and baguio in the
Philippines, according to the Florida Almanac. The word "hurricane" is  derived
from the American Indian word "huracan," meaning the "evil  spirit."

According to research by William M. Gray of Colorado State University, 10  major
hurricanes (one that measures a category 3 or better on the  Saffir/Simpson
scale and has sustained winds greater than 110 mph) hit the  continental United
Sates in the 1940s. Seven of those struck Florida.

According to the National Hurricane Center, the storms of 1995 were directly
responsible for 122 deaths across the Caribbean, Mexico and the United States.
Several other deaths were an indirect result of the tropical activity.

More homes and businesses were damaged or destroyed by the storm surge from
Hurricane Opal than all other coastal storms in Florida since 1975 combined,
according to a study by the Department of Environmental Protection.

In the 1950s, eight major hurricanes struck the United Sates, with seven  making
landfall on the East coast. For the next 30 years, the only major  hurricane to
hit the Florida peninsula was Hurricane Betsy in 1965. Hugo hit  in 1989;
Andrew, in 1992.

Seven named tropical storms were recorded in 1973, three of them hurricanes.
None touched Florida. The next year, seven storms formed, but none touched the
United States mainland. Half of the hurricanes experienced by Florida  residents
in the 20th century made landfall between Sept. 1 and Sept. 15.  Elena, which
stalled 80 miles off Tampa Bay but killed four and injured 471,  was a Labor Day
weekend visitor in 1985.

On April 1, 1960, the first weather satellite was placed in orbit, giving
hurricane forecasters the ability to detect storms before they hit land.

Seventy-one percent of category 4 or higher hurricanes have hit either  Florida
or Texas.

The earliest observed hurricane in the Atlantic was on March 7, 1908; the
latest, on Dec. 31, 1954, which persisted as a hurricane until Jan. 5, 1955.
Thirty-seven percent of all U.S. hurricanes hit Florida.

The first hurricane warning in the United States was flashed in 1873, with  the
Signal Corps warned of a storm approaching the coast between Cap May, N.J.  and
New London, Conn.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 316 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                      June 7, 1994, Tuesday, City Edition

Forecast: a busier hurricane season

SECTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE; THE STATE; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 301 words

DATELINE: FORT COLLINS, Colo.



Noted hurricane forecaster William Gray says this season will be busier than
the past three.

Gray and his team are forecasting a below-average five hurricanes and nine
named storms this hurricane season; one of those hurricanes will be severe,  the
Colorado State University hurricane expert said Monday.

He also said there will be 15 hurricane days - four six-hour periods with
hurricane-force winds of 74 mph or more - and one intense hurricane day, when
winds surpass 110 mph.

During an average hurricane season, there are 5.7 hurricanes and between  four
and five intense hurricane days.

El Nino, a warm-weather pattern in the Pacific Ocean, will not be a factor  this
year, he said. Last year, El Nino was stronger than expected, resulting  in the
formation of fewer hurricanes in the Atlantic Basin. It had a similar  effect on
hurricane activity there in 1991 and 1992, Gray said.

"We expect the El Nino in the Pacific will weaken this summer, causing it  to be
a neutral influence on this year's hurricane activity," Gray said.

In 1993, there were four hurricanes, one of them intense; eight named  storms;
10 hurricane days and one intense hurricane day.

Gray predicted a Hurricane Destruction Potential of 40 during this  hurricane
season. The HDP, a rating of wind- and ocean-surge destruction  potential, is 68
during an average year, he said. During 1993, the HDP was 23.

Gray and his research team based their forecast on five primary factors:  the
strength of El Nino off the west coast of Peru; the direction of the  equatorial
stratospheric winds at 68,000 feet to 75,000 feet and tropospheric  winds at
40,000 feet; rainfall in the West African Sahel region; temperature  and
pressure readings in West Africa and pressure readings in the Caribbean.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 317 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                    August 19, 1995, Saturday, City Edition

Hurricane season is just hitting its prime

SECTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 714 words



This weekend begins the peak of the 1995 hurricane season.

If you thought the season already was pretty darn active, what with three
hurricanes and four tropical storms so far, consider this from the nation's  top
hurricane forecaster:

"I see a lot more," Dr. William Gray of Colorado State University said  Friday
on the Today show. "The real active part of the hurricane season  starts about
(Sunday) Aug. 20 and goes to Oct. 10, so we say the bell doesn't  ring until
around Aug. 20."

Gray, whose track record for the past several years has been uncannily
accurate, recently revised his '95 forecast to predict a total of 16 named
storms this year. That means nine to go.

A tropical wave moving over Puerto Rico and Hispaniola on Friday showed  some
signs of organization and could develop into a tropical depression or  storm in
the next few days.

Despite the greater-than-average hurricane threat this year, bay area
businesses say they haven't seen much evidence of ongoing preparedness.

When it comes to hurricane shutters, people "wait 'til the last damn minute  and
expect you to have them in stock and put them up 10 minutes before a  hurricane
hits," says Dennis Henegar, owner of Douglas Manufacturing in  Clearwater.

But if there's a time to get ready, it's now. Half of Florida's 20th Century
hurricanes made landfall between Sept. 1 and Sept. 15. Elena, which Tampa Bay
residents are unlikely to forget, dawdled off the coast during the 1985 Labor
Day weekend, forcing the biggest peacetime evacuation in U.S. history.

Some other hurricane facts:

In the early part of the century hurricane forecasting was handled by the
weather bureau in Washington D.C., which had little firsthand experience with
the killer storms and even less interest. In 1934, when Galveston residents
sought confirmation that a hurricane was brewing in the Gulf, they got this
telegraphed reply: "Forecaster unavailable - on golf course." In 1935 the
primary forecasting responsibility was moved to Jacksonville and in 1943 to
Miami.

Grady Norton, the first director of the National Hurricane Center, died of
heart failure in 1954 while tracking Hurricane Hazel, which caused enormous
damage in the Carolinas.

Hurricanes were not named until 1953, when forecasters began using women's
names. Since 1979, both male and female names have been used. Some of the
storms  - like Gilbert  - are named after hurricane center meteorologists and
their relatives.

The deadliest hurricane to hit the United States was in 1900, when an  unnamed
storm killed 6,000 in Galveston.  The costliest storm - about  $ 30-billion in
losses - was Andrew in 1992. And the strongest of the named  storms was Camille,
a rare Category 5 hurricane that slammed into the  Mississippi Gulf Coast in
August 1969 with 190 mph winds and a 20-foot storm  surge.

 The lowest pressure ever recorded in an Atlantic hurricane was 26.13  inches in
Gilbert, which hit Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula with 185-mph winds in  September
1988. That broke the previous record, 26.35 inches, for the 1935  hurricane that
devastated the Florida Keys.

 One of the earliest storms to form was Hurricane Alice, which appeared  near
the Lesser Antilles in January 1955 - four months before the official  start of
the hurricane season. The longest-lasting hurricane was Ginger, which  meandered
around for 28 days before hitting North Carolina on Oct. 1, 1971.

 In general, the average amount of rain from a hurricane is 3 to 6 inches.
However, the Cedar Key hurricane of September 1950 dropped nearly 39 inches of
rain in one day and night on Yankeetown.  - Times researchers Carolyn Hardnett
and Cary Kenney contributed to this  report. Information from Times files, wires
and the book 1001 Questions  Answered About Hurricanes, Tornadoes and Other
Natural Air Disasters was also  used.

Are these on the way?

The hurricane season started with Allison, and we've gone through Gabrielle.
Here are the names for the rest of this season's tropical storms:

Humberto

Iris

Jenny

Karen

Luis

Marilyn

Noel

Pablo

Roxanne

Sebastian

Tanya

Van

Wendy

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE; TAMPA TODAY

GRAPHIC: COLOR CHART; gives names for remaining hurricanes during this season,
(ran Tampa Bay & State)

                    Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 318 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             August 25, 2017 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Harvey strengthens into hurricane, takes aim at Texas coast

BYLINE:  By MICHAEL GRACZYK Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 365 words


HOUSTON - Harvey intensified into a hurricane Thursday and steered for the Texas
coast with the potential for up to 3 feet of rain, 125 mph winds and 12-foot
storm surges in what could be the fiercest hurricane to hit the United States in
almost a dozen years.

Forecasters labeled Harvey a "life-threatening storm" that posed a "grave risk."
Millions of people braced for a prolonged battering that could swamp dozens of
counties more than 100 miles inland.

Landfall was predicted for late Friday or early Saturday between Port O'Connor
and Matagorda Bay, a 30-mile stretch of coastline about 70 miles northeast of
Corpus Christi. The region is mostly farm or ranchland dotted with waterfront
vacation homes and has absorbed numerous Gulf of Mexico storms for generations.

Harvey grew unexpectedly quickly Thursday from a tropical depression into a
Category 1 hurricane. Fueled by warm Gulf waters, it was projected to become a
major Category 3 hurricane. The last storm of that category to hit the U.S. was
Hurricane Wilma in October 2005 in Florida.

Typical Category 3 storms damage small homes, topple large trees and destroy
mobile homes. As in all hurricanes, the wall of water called a storm surge poses
the greatest risk.

As of late Thursday afternoon, Harvey was about 305 miles southeast of Corpus
Christi, moving to the north-northwest at about 10 mph. Sustained winds were
clocked at 85 mph.

Harvey's effect would be broad. The hurricane center said storm surges as much
as 3 feet could be expected as far north as Morgan City, La., some 400 miles
away from the anticipated landfall.

And once it comes ashore, the storm is expected to stall, dumping copious
amounts of rain for days in areas like flood-prone Houston, the nation's fourth
most-populous city, and San Antonio.

National Weather Service Director Louis Uccellini said scientists were "looking
at a potentially impactful storm over a two-, three-, four-day period."

No widespread evacuations were immediately ordered. Officials in Port Aransas
and Aransas Pass, two small coastal towns near the projected landfall area,
asked the 12,000 residents to leave and warned those who stayed behind that no
one could be guaranteed rescue.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  A map of the Texas Coast is projected on a screen as Deb Nowinski, a
disability integration coordinator, gives information to a caller regarding the
approach of Hurricane Harvey at the Galveston County Office of Emergency
Management Emergency Operations Center in Dickinson, Texas, Thursday, Aug. 24,
2017. (Stuart Villanueva/The Galveston County Daily News via AP)  Michael
Lambert, the emergency operations center controller at the Galveston County
Office of Emergency Management, looks at a bank of monitors in center in
Dickinson, Texas, Thursday, Aug. 24, 2017. (Stuart Villanueva/The Galveston
County Daily News via AP)  Residents fill sand bags as they prepare for
Hurricane Harvey, Thursday, Aug. 24, 2017, in Corpus Christi, Texas. Two
counties have ordered mandatory evacuations as Hurricane Harvey gathers strength
as it drifts toward the Texas Gulf Coast. (AP Photo/Eric Gay)  James Redford
carries a sheet of plywood as he helps board up windows in preparation for
Hurricane Harvey, Thursday, Aug. 24, 2017, in Corpus Christi, Texas. Two
counties have ordered mandatory evacuations as Hurricane Harvey gathers strength
as it drifts toward the Texas Gulf Coast. (AP Photo/Eric Gay)  Stripes store
workers board up windows in preparation for Hurricane Harvey, Thursday, Aug. 24,
2017, in Corpus Christi, Texas. Two counties have ordered mandatory evacuations
as Hurricane Harvey gathers strength as it drifts toward the Texas Gulf Coast.
(AP Photo/Eric Gay)  Stripes workers board up windows in preparation for
Hurricane Harvey, Thursday, Aug. 24, 2017, in Corpus Christi, Texas. (AP
Photo/Eric Gay)  Palmer Simpson loads suitcases into his truck as he prepares to
evacuate his home in Port Aransas, Texas, ahead of Hurricane Harvey on Thursday,
Aug. 24, 2017. (Courtney Sacco/Corpus Christi Caller-Times via AP)  Aaron Berg
fills up a gas can and his portable generator Thursday, Aug. 24, 2017, in
Houston as Hurricane Harvey intensifies in the Gulf of Mexico. Harvey is
forecast to be a major hurricane when it makes landfall along the middle Texas
coastline. (AP Photo/David J. Phillip)  Two residents make sand bags at the end
of East Avenue G in Port Aransas, Texas, ahead of Hurricane Harvey on Thursday,
Aug. 24, 2017. (Courtney Sacco/Corpus Christi Caller-Times via AP)  Aaron Berg
fills up a gas can and his portable generator Thursday, Aug. 24, 2017, in
Houston as Hurricane Harvey intensifies in the Gulf of Mexico. Harvey is
forecast to be a major hurricane when it makes landfall along the middle Texas
coastline. (AP Photo/David J. Phillip)  Steve Elliott, left, and David Prater,
right, secure a 40-foot shrimp boat at West End Marina, Thursday, Aug. 24, 2017,
in Galveston, Texas, as people prepare for Hurricane Harvey. (Melissa
Phillip/Houston Chronicle via AP)  Shoppers pass empty shelves along the bottled
water aisle in a Houston grocery store as Hurricane Harvey intensifies in the
Gulf of Mexico, Thursday, Aug. 24, 2017. Harvey is forecast to be a major
hurricane when it makes landfall along the middle Texas coastline. (AP
Photo/David J. Phillip)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 319 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Years of More Frequent Storms Predicted

BYLINE: By JOHN RATHER

SECTION: Section 14LI; Page 15; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1361 words


IT was the big one, the storm everyone expected but hoped would never happen. A
Category 3 hurricane, similar to the devastating one of 1938, was churning up
the Atlantic coast, heading for Long Island.

Emergency managers and other officials were on the phones, ordering evacuations
from coastal areas, opening shelters and preparing the Island's 2.7 million
people for winds of more than 110 miles an hour.

The hurricane's timing was ominous: it would strike on the Labor Day holiday
when the moon was one day past full. The date was Sept. 7, 1998.

The storm was just a desktop drill, called by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and carried out last month in Nassau, Suffolk, New York City and
Westchester, several upstate counties, six states and four Canadian provinces.
But with the 1998 Atlantic hurricane season due to begin June 1, these drills
have perhaps never been more prudent.

William M. Gray of Colorado State University, regarded by meteorologists as the
country's leading hurricane forecaster, is warning that a period of more
frequent and more intense Atlantic hurricanes has arrived.

The prediction, based on atmospheric, water temperature and water current
conditions, is for the Atlantic basin, a vast area that includes the
mid-Atlantic states and Long Island.

Dr. Gray said the new period began in 1995, when a long hiatus from active
hurricane seasons lasting from the late 1960's ended in the busiest three-year
period for hurricanes on record. Years of more frequent hurricanes now lie
ahead, he said.

Last year's uneventful Atlantic hurricane season, Dr. Gray and other
meteorologists said, was a result in part of El Nino, the Pacific Ocean warming
phenomenon that affected global weather this year. They said El Nino produced
upper-level winds that blocked hurricane development in the Atlantic by shearing
off the tops of developing tropical storms.

But with the most powerful El Nino ever recorded now fading, Dr. Gray said,
these hurricane-blocking benefits will all but vanish by August, when the most
active part of the hurricane season begins. As a soon-to-arrive La Nina cools
Pacific waters that heated up during El Nino, conditions for hurricane activity
in the Atlantic will improve further, he said.

Dr. Gray said the 1998 season would be near the historic average: he forecast 10
named tropical storms, 6 of which would become hurricanes, including 2 intense
ones.

Rainfall in the Sahel region of Africa could change that prediction, which will
be updated in June. Wet weather in the Sahel is closely linked to the formation
of tropical storms in the Atlantic.

But Dr. Gray is forecasting a more active season for 1999 as El Nino fully
dissipates. Warmer Atlantic Ocean temperatures and western winds favorable to
hurricanes will increase activity further, he said.

Dr. Gray's longer-term forecast for a new period of more Atlantic hurricanes
takes account of what he said was a naturally occurring periodic change in an
ocean circulation system called the Atlantic Ocean Conveyor.

What is happening now, he said, is an increased southern movement of denser,
more saline sea water that sank to deeper levels. Its movement is causing a
compensating northern flow of warmer surface water from the south. Warmer water
sustains tropical storms and hurricanes.

On Long Island, emergency management and planners assume water temperatures are
too low in the North Atlantic to sustain a catastrophic Category 4 or 5
hurricane heading for Long Island. They said a Category 3 storm was the maximum
that could be expected or planned for. But none discounted the possibility of a
stronger storm.

"Everyone is prepared to the level they can be," said David H. Fischler, the
commissioner of Fire Rescue and Emergency Services for Suffolk County. He said a
Category 3 hurricane making landfall on the South Shore barrier islands would
create a tidal surge that would "overwash the entire beach."

Emergency plans, he said, are designed to save lives, not property. "Our
planning involves tracking the storm and making the decision to get people out
of out of vulnerable areas and sheltering them," he said. "Then Mother Nature is
going to do what Mother Nature does."

Charles T. Hamilton, the regional supervisor for natural resources for the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, said a state agreement
between the Army Corps of Engineers provided that any breaches a hurricane
opened on the barrier islands would be closed within 72 hours.

He said the department had also stockpiled sand to deal with problems like a
washover near Shinnecock Inlet on the Westhampton barrier island last month.

"If we have a 4 or a 5, all bets are off," he said. "Then you are dealing with a
catastrophic event."

Ray E. Cowman, the department's Long Island regional director, said emergency
plans were in place and had proven effective in protecting people. "But beyond
that, if you are talking about what can be done from a physical standpoint,
there isn't much we are going to do between now and hurricane season," he said.
"Whatever status we are in now is the status we will be in when the hurricane
hits."

Gerard Stoddard, the president of the Fire Island Association and also the
chairman of the Long Island Coastal Alliance, said Dr. Gray was "certainly right
that we have had a long dry spell for hurricanes, which is one of the reasons
people have gone to sleep on the erosion issue."

"But if there is a 4- or a 5-rate hurricane in the New York area, Fire Island
will be one of the last things people are going to think about."

Forecasters and emergency management officials said the most dangerous hurricane
would be a Category 3 or above making landfall in New York City. In addition to
wind damage in heavily populated areas, large parts of Brooklyn would be
inundated, Kennedy Airport would be submerged and the damage along the South
Shore of Long Island would be vast.

A coastal geologist for the New York Sea Grant program in Stony Brook, Jay
Tanski, said there was evidence to support Dr. Gray's view that hurricane
frequency in the Atlantic basin was cyclical.

A period of greater activity "wouldn't surprise me," said Mr. Tanski, who has
studied hurricanes. "But you have to look at that in terms of the overall
probability of whether a catastrophic one will hit here."

Meteorologists agree that a powerful hurricane of up to Category 3 will
eventually strike Long Island. "The problem is we haven't had one in quite some
while," said Scott Reynolds, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service
forecast office at Brookhaven National Laboratory. "It's inevitable that we are
going to get one. The last direct hit was Gloria in 1985."

Gloria, a Category 3 hurricane, caused flooding along Long Island Sound and
bays, knocked down thousands of trees and left many residents without
electricity for days. Damage on the ocean front was only moderate.

The hurricane caused $1.26 billion in damage on Long Island and surrounding
areas, far less than the record-breaking $30 billion in damage Hurricane Andrew
caused in Florida and Louisiana in 1992.

The 1938 hurricane that struck Long Island and southern New England caused $4.14
billion in damage in 1996 dollars, according to the National Hurricane Center in
Miami. It also caused 600 deaths. The most deadly hurricane of the century, a
Category 4 that hit Galveston, Tex., in 1900, killed 8,000 people.

Widespread loss of life from hurricanes is no longer a threat because of advance
warning, said Lee E. Koppelman, executive director of the Long Island Regional
Planning Board.

"If you have a hurricane like 1938 or stronger, the simple truth is that there
is no way you can escape the damage," Dr. Koppelman said. "The hope is you can
mitigate against the loss of life, not the loss of property."

He said there was "no question" that houses destroyed on the barrier islands by
a hurricane would be rebuilt.

"Years ago I recommended getting rid of the houses," he said. "I clearly lost
that battle. Aside from the well-connected people, it represents tax revenues to
communities and it's a way of life."

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 320 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                The Irish Times

                                August 31, 2005

Experts differ on cause of severe storms

SECTION: World; Hurricane Katrina; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 882 words


Analysis: Rising hurricane activity is focusing scientific opinion on global
warming and on whether any link exists between the two, writes Miguel Bustillo

Is the rash of powerful Atlantic storms in recent years an ominous sign of
global warming?

Although most mainstream hurricane scientists continue to be skeptical, linking
global warming and heightened storm activity, the growing intensity of
hurricanes - coupled with the continuing frequency of large storms - is leading
some to rethink long-held views.

Most hurricane scientists continue to maintain that linking global warming to
more frequent severe storms, such as Hurricane Katrina, is premature at best.
Though warmer sea surface temperatures, caused by climate change, theoretically
could boost the frequency and potency of hurricanes, they assert that the
150-year record of Atlantic storms shows ample precedent for the spate of recent
events.

However, a paper published last month in the journal Nature by meteorologist
Kerry Emanuel of Massachusetts Institute of Technology is part of an emerging
body of research that has begun to challenge the prevailing view.

It concluded that the destructive power of hurricanes and tropical cyclones, the
name for the same storms in the Pacific Ocean, had increased 50 per cent over
the last half-century, and that a rise in surface temperatures linked to global
warming was at least partly responsible.

"I was one of those skeptics myself, a year ago," Mr Emanuel said on Monday.

But, after examining aircraft monitoring data on tropical cyclones in the
Pacific Ocean as well as hurricanes in the Atlantic, he said: "I was startled to
see this upward trend" in the duration as well as the top wind speeds of the
storms. "People are beginning to seriously wonder whether there is a global
warming signal there. I think you are going to see a lot more of a focus on this
in coming years."

Hurricane activity in the Atlantic has been higher than normal in nine out of
the last 11 years, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA).

This month the NOAA raised its already high hurricane forecast for this year
from 18 to 21 tropical storms, including up to 11 that would become hurricanes
and five to seven that would reach major-hurricane status.

That could make 2005 one of the most violent hurricane seasons ever recorded. A
typical storm year in the Atlantic results in six hurricanes.

But the agency believes that the increase in hurricanes is most likely the
result of a natural confluence of cyclical ocean and atmospheric conditions that
tend to produce heightened tropical storms every 20 to 30 years.

If global warming is playing any role in the hurricanes, it is a minor one, the
federal agency maintains.

Computer models have shown for years that rising sea-surface temperatures,
resulting from global warming, could create more ideal conditions for
hurricanes.

Yet before Mr Emanuel's research there were few indications that actual
hurricanes had become stronger or more frequent, despite well-documented
increases in surface values.

Moreover, skeptical hurricane scientists were quick to point out that worldwide
weather records are inadequate for a thorough examination of such trends.

They say that would require an analysis of storm activity going back hundreds if
not thousands of years.

"There is absolutely no empirical evidence. The people who have a bias in favour
of the argument that humans are making the globe warmer will push any data that
suggests that humans are making hurricanes worse, but it just isn't so," said
William Gray, a Colorado State University meteorologist who is considered one of
the fathers of modern tropical cyclone science and who questions Mr Emanuel's
conclusions.

"A lot of my colleagues who have been around a long time are very skeptical of
this idea that global warming is leading to more frequent or intense storms. In
the Atlantic, there has been a change recently, sure . . . I can't say there is
no human signal there, but it's minute."

Nonetheless, some scientists have maintained that the rise in mean global
temperatures over the last 50 years - a well-documented trend widely linked to
human activities such as the burning of fossil fuels - will inevitably have an
effect on storms, if it has not already done so.

"It's the ocean temperatures and sea surface temperatures that provide the fuel
for hurricanes," said Kevin Trenberth, a weather scientist at the National
Centre for Atmospheric Research, who recently published a paper in the journal
Science contending that climate change was causing hurricanes to produce more
rain, thereby becoming more dangerous.

Such views remain highly controversial among veteran hurricane scientists.

Last year, in fact, a leading hurricane expert with the NOAA, Chris Landsea,
withdrew from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) - an
international scientific group that periodically sums up the consensus on global
warming.

Mr Landsea said in a letter to scientific colleagues that he resigned because he
strongly disagreed with public statements made by Mr Trenberth, who was also
part of the IPCC, suggesting that last year's Atlantic hurricanes were linked to
global warming.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 2005 The Irish Times


                          FOCUS - 321 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     April 21, 1990, Saturday, City Edition

Heavy-duty hurricanes are forecast for Florida

BYLINE: DAVID K. ROGERS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 777 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON



A three-decade reprieve may be ending for Florida, if a hurricane forecaster's
new formula is right.
 Get ready for a hurricane, maybe a big one.

    After studying why no major hurricane has hit Florida in decades, forecaster
William Gray thinks he has an answer: the rainfall in the Sahel region of West
Africa. When it's wet there, big hurricanes form and head toward Florida and the
eastern United States. When it's dry, they don't.

    For nearly 20 years, it's been dry in the Sahel. Now the drought seems to be
over.

    "Florida is the sitting duck in the Sahel shooting gallery," Gray told
hundreds of people attending the National Hurricane Conference on Friday.

    "If you want to forecast hurricanes, you go to Mauritania (in West Africa)
with a rain gauge and hold it out. If the drought is indeed broken, as it now
appears, then we should expect more intense hurricanes."

    Research meteorologists have known for years that the strongest hurricanes
tend to come from tropical storms blown west from West Africa and over the warm
waters of the Atlantic Ocean just north of the equator.

    If conditions are favorable, the storms gather energy from the warm water
and are blown west, sometimes into the Caribbean or the western Atlantic or even
the Gulf of Mexico.

    During the last two decades, when the Sahel was experiencing a drought, only
three hurricanes have struck peninsular Florida and the eastern United States.

    By contrast, from 1943 to 1960, when the Sahel region received abundant
rainfall, 15 large hurricanes hit those areas.

    Since the early 1980s, Gray has used four weather factors to make his annual
predictions for the number of hurricanes he expects each hurricane season, which
officially stretches from June 1 to Nov. 30.


   But this year, Gray said he and his colleagues at Colorado State University,
where he is a professor of atmospheric science, were struck by the direct link
between rainfall totals in Africa's narrow Sahel region and the number of large
hurricanes produced each year.

    While his four other factors remain useful in determining whether tropical
storms will survive to grow into hurricanes, the amount of West African rainfall
helps determine the number of Atlantic tropical storms to begin with.

    Gray was struck by the importance of the African rainfall while trying to
figure out why his hurricane forecast was such a flop for the 1989 hurricane
season, his first big miss since he began in the early 1980s.

    "I really didn't realize the relationship was this striking until I busted"
in his prediction for the 1989 season. (He predicted four hurricanes. Seven
developed.) "Sometimes you learn more when you bust."

    Throughout the Sahel drought, hurricanes have continued to batter the Gulf
Coast states of Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi $ Alabama and the Florida
Panhandle. Many of those hurricanes spawned in the Gulf of Mexico, which tends
to produce smaller storms than those coming from the eastern Atlantic.

    Although his prediction for the 1990 hurricane season is still six weeks
away, Gray said his preliminary information indicates an average number of
hurricanes, perhaps six, this year.

     During an average year, forecasters would also expect three storms strong
enough to be named but not powerful enough to be classified hurricanes.

    Gray warned that for Floridians, the number of hurricanes may not be as
significant as the size of the storms generated and the paths they take. A big
hurricane would be devastating for Florida.

    "I hate to be an alarmist. I'm not a member of the environmentalist
scare-of-the-month club," Gray said. "But we're talking about a $ 15-(billion)
to $ 20-billion storm."

    As an example, he noted that in the early 1950s, the Miami-Fort Lauderdale
area had fewer than 600,000 residents. Today, more than 2.8-million people live
there and high-rise buildings form an unbroken wall along the beachfront there.

    "It was about 50 years ago when Winston Churchill took over as prime
minister of England," Gray said. "It was at a very bleak time, when he gave his
famous "blood, sweat and tears' speech.

    "If Churchill were alive today and somehow this conference had named him
prime minister for hurricanes, he would say "I have nothing to bring you but
blood, damage and reconstruction.' '
 Information from the Associated Press was used in this report.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; BLACK AND WHITE MAP; BLACK AND WHITE CHART;
William Gray; Map of the world locating the Sahel region of Africa; Chart
listing predictions from William Gray for hurricanes and tropical storms and
actual storms since 1985

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 322 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                            The Independent (London)

                            September 1, 2008 Monday
                                 First Edition

A savage force of nature - and mounting evidence they are becoming more violent;

HURRICANE GUSTAV THE SCIENCE

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 748 words


HURRICANES are one of the most destructively powerful forces of nature and their
existence depends on the surface temperature of the ocean reaching at least 26C.
One obvious question is whether Gustav is the result of rising sea temperatures
associated with global warming.

The simple answer is that it is virtually impossible to link any one weather
event with climate change, yet there is mounting evidence that global warming
could be causing hurricanes to increase in both frequency and intensity.

Ray Nagin, the Mayor of New Orleans, said yesterday that the temperature of the
sea surface in parts of the Gulf of Mexico was 90F (32.2C). This means that as
Gustav crosses the Gulf to the US coast today it is likely to become much
stronger than the Category 3 it was for most of yesterday. Scientists have
warned Mr Nagin that Gustav could easily reach Category 5 status - the highest
on the Saffir-Simpson scale - by the time the hurricane makes its expected
landfall to the west of New Orleans today.

Hurricanes in this region at this time of the year are not unusual. They form
when the sea warms up during the summer.

All hurricanes begin life as a cluster of thunderstorms which gather to form
columns of warm, moist air that rise above the sea. When these thunderstorms
become concentrated they create pillars of humid air extending from the sea
surface to the boundary of the atmosphere. At the base of the pillar, low
pressure sucks in more air and moisture. Meanwhile, air at the top of the pillar
cools rapidly, falling into a central well that becomes the "eye" of the storm
as the structure begins to spin under the influence of the Earth's rotation.

The point about tropical cyclones is that they possess immense amounts of energy
which is taken in as heat and humidity from the ocean and released again as the
moisture condenses and cools. As a hurricane begins to move across a warm ocean
it can gather more energy, which is dissipated as soon as it hits land.

The energy of a hurricane is unleashed in two ways. One is high wind speeds -
more than 155mph in a Category 5 hurricane - and the other is the high waves
caused by a storm surge - a result of the low pressure that forms over the sea
beneath the storm.

There is little doubt now that hurricanes in the North Atlantic have become more
frequent over the past few decades. Although the past two years have been
normal, 2005, the year of hurricane Katrina, was the most active on record, with
27 named storms, 15 of them big enough to be classified as hurricanes. Of these,
seven were Category 3 or higher on the five-point scale - five more major
hurricanes than in a typical Atlantic season. Indeed, Hurricane Wilma in October
2005 became the strongest Atlantic storm ever recorded, breaking the previous
record set in 1988. So far, 2008 has been relatively active. There have been
seven named storms, including three hurricanes. This time last year there had
been five named storms and one was a hurricane.

Because of the generally chaotic nature of hurricanes, it was once generally
thought that their frequency or intensity had little to do with climate change.
Differences in annual activity were more likely to be caused by local conditions
- the weather, in other words, rather than climate.

Although it may be common sense to suggest that rising sea temperatures are
likely to trigger more hurricanes, and make them more intense, it is by no means
obvious. A warmer atmosphere, for instance, may make hurricanes less intense by
diminishing the temperature difference with the sea, and higher temperatures may
also create winds, scattering tropical storms and making hurricanes less
frequent.

However, a study in 2005 by Kerry Emanuel of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology began to change this view, suggesting a link between hurricane
activity and rises in ocean temperature caused by global warming and climate
change. And in 2007, a study by the US National Centre for Atmospheric Research
in Boulder, Colorado, found a link between the record number of tropical storms
in the North Atlantic over the past decade to rising temperatures and global
warming.

The analysis looked at records of storms going back a century and found no other
way of explaining the significant increase seen in more recent years. "We are
led to the confident conclusion that the recent upsurge in tropical cyclone
frequency is due in part to greenhouse warming, and this is most likely the
dominant effect," the scientists said.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2008 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 323 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 26, 2017 Saturday

Washington: Hurricane Andrew: What it was like to work in a Category 5 storm

LENGTH: 697  words



Washington: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has issued the
following news release:

The hurricane season had yet to see its first named storm in August 1992, but
that changed dramatically with the arrival of Hurricane Andrew and its direct
hit on NOAA's National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables, Florida. We're going to
take you behind the scenes for a glimpse of what it was like to be on duty that
week 25 years ago.


 NOAA's GOES-7 satellite captured this image of Hurricane Andrew on August 23,
1992.
A disturbance rolled off the coast of Africa and became Tropical Storm Andrew on
August 17, but three days later it didn't look like a threat. In fact, according
to forecaster Dr. Richard Pasch, "It looked like the storm had dissipated. The
hurricane hunter aircraft couldn't locate the center of circulation but I told
NHC Director Bob Sheets, I don't think it's going away." Dr. Pasch was spot on.

NOAA continued to track Andrew and on August 21, reconnaissance aircraft found
the system was much better organized. Shortly afterwards on Saturday morning,
August 22, they found hurricane-force winds and Andrew officially became a
hurricane. As it rumbled across the Atlantic the storm intensified. In the
pre-dawn hours of August 24 with winds screaming at more than 155 mph, it neared
Miami-Dade County and the National Hurricane Center.
That's when the whole building shuddered. No one knew what it was, but NHC radar
meteorologist Martin Nelson noticed the Miami radar had quit working. "We
believe another antenna broke loose and hit the fiberglass dome, exposing the
radar". With the Miami radar out of commission, Andrew's trek over Florida was
captured by the National Weather Service Doppler radar in Melbourne, Florida,
about 180 miles north of Miami.
 Radar image of Hurricane Andrew making landfall in South Florida on August 24,
1992.
 Radar image of Hurricane Andrew making landfall in South Florida on Aug. 24,
1992. (NOAA)
 Download Image
Lead forecaster Dr. Ed Rappaport, now the acting Hurricane Center director,
recalls how tense that night was. "Thanks to the frenetic pace, very few of us
were aware of the chaos taking place right outside our building. We were all
focused on our jobs. But after the 5:00 a.m. advisory was issued I realized the
building was actually swaying! A few minutes later, the rooftop anemometer
measured a 164-mph wind gust."
 Anticipating Andrew's arrival, several NHC forecasters were sent to NOAA's
National Meteorological Center in Maryland to back up the hurricane center, just
in case. One of those forecasters, Hugh Cobb, was taking a break a few hours
after Andrew made landfall: "I was watching CNN and the newscaster was talking
about damage to the National Hurricane Center. I happened to glance up and I saw
a photo of my car. The wind was strong enough that a blue Chevy landed right on
top of it."
 Automobiles tossed around like toys in the National Hurricane Center parking
lot, Aug. 24, 1992
 Automobiles tossed around like toys in the National Hurricane Center parking
lot, Aug. 24, 1992 (NOAA)
 Download Image
The National Hurricane Center was heavily damaged by Andrew and an improved,
stronger facility needed to be built. The NHC moved to its new home, about 15
miles inland on the campus of Florida International University in 1995. The new
building is a veritable fortress compared to its predecessor and has survived
close encounters with Hurricane Katrina and Wilma in 2005.
"We've got multiple back-up systems, generators, shutters, everything we need to
hunker down and still issue our forecasts," said Rappaport. "We've got our
hurricane plan in place so we're good to go."
 NOAA's National Hurricane Center under construction in 1995
 NOAA's National Hurricane Center under construction in 1995 (NOAA)
 Download Image
Hurricane Andrew was one of seven storms during the 1992 hurricane season, a
relatively inactive year, but it's a stark reminder that it only takes one storm
to make a very bad season. Having a plan in place is vital for everyone that
lives or visits hurricane prone locations. More preparedness information is
available from FEMA and NOAA's National Hurricane Center.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 324 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      June 11, 2005 Saturday Metro Edition

Tropical storm pays an early call

BYLINE: RUBINA MADAN

SECTION: News; Pg. 1A;

LENGTH: 483 words


Tropical Storm Arlene is bearing down on the northern Gulf coast today in an
unwanted --- and early --- reminder of last year's disastrous hurricane season.

The storm, which forecasters said could be a minimal hurricane by the time it
makes landfall this afternoon, was following a track similar to that of
destructive Hurricane Ivan last September.

Residents of the still-reeling Florida panhandle and Alabama coast spent Friday
in the all-too-familiar search for storm supplies and havens --- especially for
those with still-damaged homes.

In Gulf Shores, Ala., near where Ivan came ashore, real estate agent Jeff
Jackson told The Associated Press he was concerned that high surf could undo
some of the beach repairs that have been under way since February.

"Coming so close to Ivan, it's got people a little edgy," he said.

The Atlantic hurricane season lasts from June 1 to Nov. 30, but typically most
of the storms hit from August to October, peaking around Sept. 10.  Last
season's first storm, Alex, formed on July 31, and in fewer than half of the
past 50 years have named storms formed in June.

Forecasters cautioned that Arlene's early arrival isn't a reliable indicator of
what the 2005 season will be like. The June storm is simply a matter of the
right meteorological ingredients --- water temperatures, wind speeds and
atmospheric elements --- combining to form a tropical storm, said Walt Zaleski,
a National Weather Service meteorologist.

"You might have ingredients that are slightly out of kilter. But if they're
right, a tropical storm might develop," he said.

No matter how early the first named storm occurs, out of every 100 tropical
waves --- forecasters' term for disturbances that give rise to hurricanes --- on
average only 10 a year will become tropical storms. Roughly six of those might
become hurricanes.

Still, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicts this
hurricane season will be busier than usual, with 12 to 15 tropical storms,
including seven to nine hurricanes. The forecasters estimated three to five of
those will become major hurricanes, with sustained winds above 111 mph.

"We do expect this year to be above average hurricane activity over the
Atlantic," said Zaleski.  "We're in a long-term cycle now of above average
hurricane activity.  That may continue for another 15 or 20 years."

Hurricane seasons have been above normal in the Atlantic since 1995, except for
1997 and 2002. In the two decades preceding that, from 1970 to 1994, hurricane
activity was below normal.

In 2004, Tropical Storm Alex led the way for an abnormally active hurricane
season.  It included 15 tropical storms, nine of which were hurricanes --- and
six major hurricanes.  Four hurricanes --- Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne ---
pounded the U.S. mainland in a six-week period, causing $42 billion in property
damage.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CARISA ANDERSON / Associated Press Wayne and Jane Savell of Pascagoula,
Miss., fill sand bags to prepare for the rains and possible flooding from
approaching Tropical Storm Arlene. ; NURI VALLBONA / Associated Press Taija
Samuels, 16, of Lauderhill, Fla., can't maintain her umbrella Friday against
Arlene's winds. The weather caused cancellation of her track and field club's
meet in Miami.  JEROME THOMPSON / Staff 2005 ATLANTIC HURRICANE OUTLOOOK
Tropical storms: 12-15 Hurricanes: 7-9 Major hurricanes: 3-5 2005 outlook
probability Pie chart shows the following percentages: Above normal: 70% Near
normal: 20: Below normal: 10% 2004 actual vs. predicted
.................2004......2004 ................actual...predicted...normal
Tropical storms...15 ......12-15.......10
Hurricanes.........9........6-8.........6 Major
hurricanes...6........2-4.........2 ; Staff Map shows location of tropical storm
Arlene and projected path. Note: Projections as of 5 p.m. Friday. Source:
National Hurricane Center

                Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 325 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                            October 5, 2017 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

Weather Eye

BYLINE: Paul Simons

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 67

LENGTH: 307 words


Something extraordinary was recorded during recent hurricanes Harvey and Irma
when weather radar detected unusual shapes in the eye of these storms.

These shapes were formed by thousands of birds that had been trapped within the
eye, lofted to more than a mile.

The eye of a hurricane is surreal. While all around is a maelstrom of wind and
rain, the eye is an oasis of light winds, no rain and often a clear view of the
sky above.

For birds, the hurricane's eye offers a safe haven where they can continue
flying without harm, travelling with the hurricane in whatever direction it
goes.

How the birds reach the hurricane's eye is not certain. When a hurricane is over
a sea, ocean birds could be drawn into the spiral of winds around the hurricane
and be carried farther into the storm's centre before reaching the eye.

It is possible that these birds stay in the eye until the storm reaches land and
weakens, then seek refuge on land.

This gives birdspotters an opportunity to identify birds far off their usual
track.

During Hurricane Sandy in 2012, land birds that were migrating through Florida
were swept up in the storm and some ended up 2,000 miles away in Newfoundland.

Birds already on land often seek shelter from hurricanes, but others sense the
approaching storm and flee to safe havens. When Hurricane Harvey approached the
Gulf Coast of Texas, radar picked up an exodus of many of the region's
shorebirds before the storm struck.

Sea creatures also face danger from the pounding of violent seas during the
passage of a hurricane, and some species sense the threat.

Sharks are known to detect telltale pressure changes in the sea. In 2001, before
Hurricane Gabrielle hit Florida, blacktip sharks that had been tagged with radio
trackers were observed fleeing from shallow coastal waters into deeper seas,
returning after the storm passed.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2017 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 326 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    August 27, 1992, Thursday, Final Edition

What Was Andrew May Be Down, but It's Not Out;
Meteorologists Expect Heavy Rain as Far North as Central and Western Virginia

Jonathan Freedland, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A18

LENGTH: 916 words


It has lost much of its strength, but Andrew may have one punch left:
Meteorologists are bracing themselves for possibly extremely heavy rain that
could cause flooding as far north as Virginia or Pennsylvania.

Before it was downgraded from a hurricane, Andrew spun off a series of
tornadoes, killing at least two men and injuring dozens of people in Louisiana,
after laying waste to large parts of the South Florida coast, causing billions
of dollars in damage.

Now the greatest threat may be rain. Scientists are watching the southward
progress of a cold front in the Midwest. They expressed concern that, if and
when it meets the remnant of the hurricane, which was drifting northward last
night, the result will be an enormous downpour.

Shawn O'Neill, a meteorologist at the National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables,
Fla., said that, when the storm collides with the front, the front will push
Andrew northward.

"Once the tropical system encounters these winds, they become the steering
currents, driving it north," he said. "Depending on how these two interact, in
the Appalachian region and beyond there is a potential for flash flooding."

O'Neill said "we're expecting 5 to 10 inches of rainfall" as far north as
western and central Virginia by Friday evening.

Virginia state climatologist Patrick Michaels said, "The computer forecast
models have conveyed that there will be some interaction, so people right now
are getting concerned that there's going to be a great release of moisture."
Warning of the possibility of flooding, he added, "It looks like there'll be a
Round 3 with Andrew."

Michaels noted that hurricanes often produce huge rainfall long after the storms
hit land. In 1969, Hurricane Camille -- one of only two Category 5 hurricanes to
hit the United States, and fiercer than Andrew, which was a Category 4 -- made
landfall on the Mississippi coast, producing only 3 to 6 inches of rain as it
traveled northward.

But by the time it reached central Virginia, Michaels said, Camille released a
"staggering" 27 inches. Record flooding followed. Hurricane Agnes had a similar
effect in 1972, flooding an area that stretched from Roanoke to central New York
state.

The potential rain threat remains even as the former hurricane is calming. After
striking land, the first change in a hurricane is a drop in wind speed: It is
estimated that a hurricane loses approximately half its power every 12 hours
after landfall.

Lee Grenci, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University, explained that, "A
hurricane is like a heat engine. It derives its fuel from the warm waters of
tropical oceans. Once it's over land, it's as if its gas meter is on 'E,' " he
said. The roughness of land terrain, compared to the flat surface of the ocean,
causes friction which also slows down the storm's winds.

However, despite that loss of power, the hurricane remnant retains its moisture.
"No one really understands why hurricanes have this habit of releasing rainfall
far from where they made landfall," said Michaels, noting that, by this stage, a
hurricane such as Andrew is more accurately described as a "low pressure system
of tropical origins."

It is unlikely that storms associated with Andrew will produce rainfall on a par
with Camille in 1969. Not only was Andrew a smaller hurricane, but, according to
Herbert Saffir, a consulting structural engineer who co-developed the "category"
system of hurricane measurement and who lives close to where the center of
Andrew hit, it is not a "wet" one.

"Some hurricanes have been very wet, containing an enormous amount of rain and
water," Saffir said. "Andrew was distinctive because the damage it caused was
almost all from wind."

One side effect of Andrew is not a matter of debate: tornadoes. Reports from
Louisiana have spoken of the wind peeling roofs off houses and lifting whole
homes into the sky. Entire mobile home parks in the region have been laid waste.

Grenci said he explains why tornadoes are a frequent spinoff from hurricanes
with a little rhyme: "Big whirls have little whirls, that feed on their
velocity. Little whirls have lesser whirls, and on until viscosity."

That is, winds at the edge of a hurricane impart spin to nearby air masses,
giving rise to smaller vortices. In addition, hurricanes attract thunderstorms
that are known to produce tornadoes.

The irregular shape of the terrain under the hurricane also has a
tornado-producing effect, experts said. The friction slows the lower portion of
the storm, but not the upper portion. That difference in speed leads to the
formation of several vortices, which can become tornadoes.

Andrew reportedly has spawned tornadoes that touched over areas as long as 7
miles. But Grenci said that these hurricane-born phenomena are "weak by Wizard
of Oz standards," with winds generally between 40 and 100 mph. "They are not the
monsters of Tornado Alley," he said.

Rain and tornadoes apart, the encounter with land usually robs a hurricane of
its sting. Deprived of a source of moisture, it is deprived of its source of
power. But on rare occasions, a hurricane can intensify after landfall. After
hitting the Florida peninsula, 1972's Hurricane Agnes moved along the northeast
coast, and began to draw strength by pulling moisture off the Atlantic. Before
it left land, it was reclassified as a stronger hurricane.

A similar phenomenon is unlikely in the case of Andrew, which is expected to
remain farther from a source of moisture.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, HURRICANE'S DEADLY SIDE EFFECT: TORNADOES, JOHNSTONE
QUINAN

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1992 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 327 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Property and Casualty 360

                               December 23, 2010

2010: A Hurricane Season Of Contradictions

BYLINE: PETER DAILEY

SECTION: ISSUES December-2027-2010

LENGTH: 1575  words


Nineteen named storms, 12 hurricanes, and five major hurricanes ranked Category
3 and higher on the Saffir-Simpson scale.

That was the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season.

It was the second most active season on record in number of hurricanes, and the
third most active with respect to the number of named storms (tropical cyclones
with winds of at least 39 mph). Yet, not a single hurricane made landfall in the
United States.

This exception is unprecedented.

In over a century-since at least 1900-there has been no other Atlantic hurricane
season that has had ten or more hurricanes in which not one has struck the
United States.

As a result, many insurers may be asking how this reflects on the catastrophe
models they rely on to manage hurricane risk.

AN ACTIVE SEASON

In June, Hurricane Alex became the first Category 2 hurricane in more than four
decades to form so early. In September, eight named storms developed, tying 2002
and 2007 for the most tropical cyclones on record ever to have developed in that
month. In fact, from August 21 through September 26-36 days-not a single day
passed in which there was not at least one tropical cyclone active in the
Atlantic basin. And for only the second time in more than a century, two
Category 4 hurricanes, Igor and Julia, were active in the Atlantic at the same
time (also in September).

Just how active was it?

The 2010 season was about twice as active as the "average" season in terms of
storm production.

· In a (statistically) average year, 10.7 named storms develop; 2010 produced
19.

· In the average season, six storms develop into hurricanes; 2010 saw 12.

· On average, three (2.8 to be precise) major hurricanes develop in a season. In
2010, five major hurricanes developed.

WHY SO MANY STORMS?

A number of environmental factors, both long-term and short, may have
contributed to the conditions that together produced the 2010 hurricane season's
unusual activity. One was a warm Atlantic.

A hurricane's "engine" is fueled by the heat and moisture of the ocean surface.
The warmer the ocean, the more readily available is fuel; the warmer the air,
the more moisture it can hold for clouds-and eventually precipitation-to form
and fall. Understandably, warm sea surface temperatures (SSTs) are positively
correlated with hurricane activity.

During the 2010 hurricane season North Atlantic sea surface temperatures were
significantly warmer than average. While the jury is still out on the cause-be
it the result of a natural multidecadal cycle as some have argued, or global
warming-SSTs in the Atlantic have been consistently above the long-term average
every year since 1995. At the same time, while each individual season has been
unique, over this 15-year period of warm SSTs, counts of U.S. landfalling
hurricanes, major hurricanes and aggregate annual losses fall in line with
landfall frequency and average annual loss (AAL) encapsulated by the AIR U.S.
Hurricane Model.

A second large-scale climatological factor is the "El Niño/La Niña-Southern
Oscillation," or ENSO, a climate cycle that occurs across the tropical Pacific
Ocean and typically lasts for three to seven years.

ENSO is characterized by temperature fluctuations of the tropical eastern
Pacific-a warming of the sea surface known as El Niño and a cooling known as La
Niña. (Many years are neither warm or cool enough to classify as an ENSO event
and are deemed "neutral.")

Just before the onset of the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season, the Pacific basin
entered a new La Niña ENSO phase. La Niña is associated with a seasonal
reduction in destructive (to hurricanes) wind shear over the Atlantic, thereby
providing a more favorable environment for tropical cyclone formation and
development.

WHY SO FEW LANDFALLS?

While large-scale, long-term climate conditions had a strong effect on the
formation and development of tropical cyclones in 2010, shorter-term weather
patterns strongly influenced where the storms tracked. For the most part, the
most threatening storms were steered away from the North American coastline.

In 2010, the "Bermuda High"-a large, semi-permanent center of high atmospheric
pressure in the eastern Atlantic near the Azores (and roughly at the latitude of
Bermuda)-was at times situated further east than usual and/or was weaker than
usual. Additionally, for much of the core of the 2010 hurricane season, a low
pressure system was in place over the U.S. East Coast. Because of this pattern,
storms tended to track away from the United States.

Additionally, the jet stream's position over North America acted as a barrier
that kept many storms over open water.

Similarly, since many storms formed in the extreme eastern Atlantic (because of
the favorable ocean/wind shear conditions there), they often began their turning
to the north and east well before ever reaching land. Storms that form off the
coast of Africa have a relatively high probability of intensifying into
hurricanes owing to their long trek over warm tropical waters, but a relatively
low probability of making landfall along the U.S. coastline because of the
Coriolis force (an artifact of the Earth's rotation), which inevitably deflects
storms northward.

A LOOK BACK AT THE FORECASTS

The several government agencies, academics and private organizations that
forecast the Atlantic hurricane season every year predicted that 2010 would be
"an active year"-and they proved to be correct.

With respect to forecasting specific numbers of named storms or hurricanes that
would form in 2010, most of the early predictions were actually conservative.
Nonetheless, in May, just before the formal start of the season on June 1, the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecast a very successful range
of counts:

14-23 named storms (there were 19), 8-14 hurricanes (there were 12), and 3-7
major hurricanes (there were 5).

NOAA does not forecast landfalls. Indeed, many forecasters do not, for the very
reason that the factors that determine how storms track-atmospheric steering
currents-are more closely associated with short-term weather variability that
cannot be anticipated more than a few weeks in advance.

Most forecasters that did venture a guess on the number of hurricane landfalls
expected a higher than average count. The average is about two U.S. landfalls
per year. Yet in 2010 only Bonnie, which was barely a tropical storm at the
time, came ashore, and with little adverse effect.

ONE NEAR MISS

The passage of one of the 2010 season's hurricanes elicited a loud and
collective sigh of relief. Hurricane Earl-the season's third hurricane and
second major hurricane-approached Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands at the
end of August as a Category 4 hurricane with winds near 150 mph. As the Labor
Day weekend approached, Earl's projected path was becoming clear: north along
the U.S. East Coast with a possible landfall near downtown Boston!

Hurricane landfalls in the Northeast are relatively rare, occurring on average
once every ten years. The last was Hurricane Bob in 1991; the last major
hurricane landfall in the Northeast-an even more rare event-was the Great New
England Hurricane of 1938.

On September 2, the National Hurricane Center distributed its forecast track and
accompanying "cone of uncertainty" for Hurricane Earl. AIR estimates that had
the left-most side of the cone of uncertainty been realized and the storm had
indeed cut up through Rhode Island and eastern Massachusetts, total insured
losses from Earl would have been about $4 billion.

A few days later Earl made a more northerly turn than projected and eventually
passed well east of Cape Cod. All the same, Earl-like Hurricane Bill last
year-serves as a not so gentle reminder of the very real hurricane risk faced by
the densely populated Northeast.

AFTERTHOUGHTS

The 2010 Atlantic hurricane season was unusually active and broke or matched
several records of hurricane formation, number and behavior. All the same, not
one hurricane made a U.S. landfall.

Climate conditions such as warm sea surface temperatures and the El Niño/La
Niña-Southern Oscillation can significantly influence tropical cyclone formation
and development. However, even under favorable conditions driven by a warm
Atlantic, the number of hurricane landfalls can be average or even well below
average.

This was in fact the case in 2010.

It serves as another reminder that neither warm sea surface temperatures nor
elevated activity in the Atlantic basin will necessarily produce elevated
losses. Loss projections depend on a host of factors, many of which are not
easily forecast.

What matters-in costs and in lives-are the storms that strike where people live
and work. When, where and how often that will happen is uncertain. Given the low
accuracy of forecasting the number and location of hurricane landfalls and
therefore the consequent volatility in hurricane losses, there is currently
insufficient skill to predict losses in advance of a season.

The extreme variability of hurricane losses has led to the use of catastrophe
models, which include thousands of scenarios that represent the full range of
plausible outcomes. Catastrophe models should be expected to capture seasons
like 2010-however unusual they may be. Through the use of catastrophe models,
estimated probabilities can be determined for different levels of loss, which
are essential input to robust catastrophe risk management.

Peter Dailey

is assistant vice president, director of atmospheric science at AIR Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2010 The National Underwriter Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 328 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Star News (Wilmington, NC)

                             June 22, 2006 Thursday

STORM BLOOPERS; Short of doing a rain dance backwards, it seems people have
tried everything, from diaper gel to windmills, to stop hurricanes. And what
they've discovered: You can't mess with Mother Nature. But, that hasn't stopped
these government scientists, entrepreneurs and just-plain whackjobs from going
to war with weather.

BYLINE: Amy Hotz, Stafgf Writer

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1041 words


The Quixotic approach

The plan: Blow the storm away from land with giant windmills.

The theory: In a tug-of-war battle between manmade air and hurricane air,
hopefully the home team will win.

Could it work? Yeah, right. Windmills trump death-dealing storms. Might as well
line us all up on the beach and ask us to blow as hard as we can.

Sub-ocean pipe dreams

The plan: Put a giant pipe under the ocean, pump cold air through it and poke it
into the center of the hurricane. Or pump colder bottom water up to the surface.
Hey, you could even use the moving water in the pipe to produce electricity back
on land - sort of a two-for-one deal.

The theory: Warm water and warm air help power hurricanes. If you cool the
water, the hurricane will starve.

Could it work? Too bad you can't predict where to place those pipes. Plus,
hurricanes are too unwieldy to wrestle with any plumbing known to man.

Da bomb

The plan: Blow it up with a nuclear bomb.

The theory: The energy generated would disturb the weather system so much, it
would dissipate.

Could it work? OK, putting aside the nuclear fallout that hurricane-strength
winds would spread around the globe, it still isn't plausible. One scientist
said trying to blow up a hurricane with an A-bomb would be like trying to stop a
charging elephant by throwing a ping-pong ball at it. No bomb is strong enough.

The great cover-up

The plan: Lay huge tarps or special chemicals, such as soot, out over the ocean
ahead of a hurricane.

The theory: Hurricanes need huge amounts of oceanic evaporation to keep their
intensity. Take that away, and they'll crumble.

Could it work? "There has been some experimental work in trying to develop a
liquid that, when placed over the ocean surface, would prevent evaporation from
occurring," according to the Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological
Laboratory (AOML). But finding a substance that could stay together in rough
seas "proved to be the downfall of this idea."

About 20 years ago the use of soot was proposed, thinking it would produce a
tremendous heat source by absorbing the solar radiation and transferring the
heat directly to the atmosphere. This would kick-start thunderstorm activity
outside of the tropical cyclone core and weaken the eyewall convection. "This
suggestion has never been carried out in real-life," according to AOML.

Taming the ocean has never worked before. And do we really want chemicals
stretched for miles in our oceans?

Diaper gel devastation

The plan: In 2001, Florida businessmam Peter Cordani developed Dyn-O-Gel,
similar to the moisture-absorbing gel in babies' diapers. His idea? To fly
airplanes into a hurricane and dump thousands of pounds of gel on top of it. The
biodegradable gel dissolves on contact with salt water.

The theory: The gel would suck out the moisture reduce winds by up to 15 mph.
Kind of like wiping away a storm with the quicker-picker-upper.

Could it work? Cordani's Web site, www.dynomat.com, declares that only $50
million stands in his way.

Starve'em

The plan: Cool the ocean with cryogenic material or tow icebergs into a
hurricane's path.

The theory: Same principle as the sub-ocean pipes. Hurricanes don't like cold
air and water.

Could it work? Hurricanes cover hundreds of miles. If the eyewall were 30 miles
in diameter, according to the AOML, that means an area of nearly 2,000 square
miles. So, if the hurricane is moving at 10 mph, it will sweep over 7,200 square
miles of ocean. That's an awful lot of icebergs. And what are the poor whales
supposed to do in the cryogenic waters?

Project Stormfury

The plan: By the 1960s, scientists decided they had a better understanding of
how hurricanes work. The U.S. Navy and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration launched another war by dropping silver iodide into a hurricane's
eyewall.

The theory: If you attack the wall, the strongest part of the hurricane,
everything else will dissipate more quickly.

Could it work? In 1961, Project Stormfury reduced Hurricane Esther's winds from
130 to 119 mph. In 1967, silver iodide dropped into Hurricane Beulah cut
windspeed by 9 miles, from 89 to 80. And, in 1969, after 1,000 pounds of silver
iodide was dropped into Hurricane Debbie, the winds decreased from 100 to 70
mph.

But hopes dropped when Debbie's winds picked back up. Years later, scientists
discovered that hurricanes act almost like living, breathing things. Their walls
naturally fluctuate in a process called "concentric eyewall cycle".

Project Cirrus

The plan: Have planes drop and cannons explode dry ice into the hurricane.

The theory: Many believe "cloud seeding," or spreading a substance throughout a
storm, makes clouds drop moisture prematurely. If you could seed clouds before
they reach land, the rain will fall in the ocean instead of expensive beach
homes.

Could it work? The United States tried it in the 1940s with dry ice. Nothing
happened.

Actually, the hurricane turned West and hit Georgia, traveling up to the North
Carolina coast soaking everything in its path.


Sources: Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory; National
Hurricane Center; "Contemporary World Issues: Hurricanes" by Patrick J.
Fitzpatrick (2006); "Hurricanes" by Kris Hirschmann (2002); "Violent Storms" by
Jon Erickson (1988); "Atlantic Hurricanes" by Gordon E. Dunn and Banner I.
Miller (1960).


Is the government secretly experimenting with hurricane manipulation?

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration no longer does any hurricane
modification, says Jana Goldman, spokesperson for NOAA Research Headquarters.

And the Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory released an
"official policy statement" on hurricane modification in 1998 that it still
stands by: "There is no sound physical hypothesis for the modification of
hurricanes, tornadoes or damaging winds in general and no related scientific
experimentation has been conducted in the past 20 years."

Further, ". . . no federal agencies are presently doing, or planning research on
hurricane modification."

World politics probably has a lot to do with abandoning cloud-seeding projects.
Israel was afraid its system of making rain fall prematurely would perturb
downwind Arabs. The Arabs, they reasoned, might accuse them of stealing the
life-giving moisture.

- Amy Hotz

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations by Robert Holst

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2006 Star-News, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 329 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Star News (Wilmington, NC)

                             June 22, 2006 Thursday

STORM BLOOPERS; Short of doing a rain dance backwards, it seems people have
tried everything, from diaper gel to windmills, to stop hurricanes. And what
they've discovered: You can't mess with Mother Nature. But, that hasn't stopped
these government scientists, entrepreneurs and just-plain whackjobs from going
to war with weather.

BYLINE: Amy Hotz, Stafgf Writer

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1041 words


The Quixotic approach

The plan: Blow the storm away from land with giant windmills.

The theory: In a tug-of-war battle between manmade air and hurricane air,
hopefully the home team will win.

Could it work? Yeah, right. Windmills trump death-dealing storms. Might as well
line us all up on the beach and ask us to blow as hard as we can.

Sub-ocean pipe dreams

The plan: Put a giant pipe under the ocean, pump cold air through it and poke it
into the center of the hurricane. Or pump colder bottom water up to the surface.
Hey, you could even use the moving water in the pipe to produce electricity back
on land - sort of a two-for-one deal.

The theory: Warm water and warm air help power hurricanes. If you cool the
water, the hurricane will starve.

Could it work? Too bad you can't predict where to place those pipes. Plus,
hurricanes are too unwieldy to wrestle with any plumbing known to man.

Da bomb

The plan: Blow it up with a nuclear bomb.

The theory: The energy generated would disturb the weather system so much, it
would dissipate.

Could it work? OK, putting aside the nuclear fallout that hurricane-strength
winds would spread around the globe, it still isn't plausible. One scientist
said trying to blow up a hurricane with an A-bomb would be like trying to stop a
charging elephant by throwing a ping-pong ball at it. No bomb is strong enough.

The great cover-up

The plan: Lay huge tarps or special chemicals, such as soot, out over the ocean
ahead of a hurricane.

The theory: Hurricanes need huge amounts of oceanic evaporation to keep their
intensity. Take that away, and they'll crumble.

Could it work? "There has been some experimental work in trying to develop a
liquid that, when placed over the ocean surface, would prevent evaporation from
occurring," according to the Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological
Laboratory (AOML). But finding a substance that could stay together in rough
seas "proved to be the downfall of this idea."

About 20 years ago the use of soot was proposed, thinking it would produce a
tremendous heat source by absorbing the solar radiation and transferring the
heat directly to the atmosphere. This would kick-start thunderstorm activity
outside of the tropical cyclone core and weaken the eyewall convection. "This
suggestion has never been carried out in real-life," according to AOML.

Taming the ocean has never worked before. And do we really want chemicals
stretched for miles in our oceans?

Diaper gel devastation

The plan: In 2001, Florida businessmam Peter Cordani developed Dyn-O-Gel,
similar to the moisture-absorbing gel in babies' diapers. His idea? To fly
airplanes into a hurricane and dump thousands of pounds of gel on top of it. The
biodegradable gel dissolves on contact with salt water.

The theory: The gel would suck out the moisture reduce winds by up to 15 mph.
Kind of like wiping away a storm with the quicker-picker-upper.

Could it work? Cordani's Web site, www.dynomat.com, declares that only $50
million stands in his way.

Starve'em

The plan: Cool the ocean with cryogenic material or tow icebergs into a
hurricane's path.

The theory: Same principle as the sub-ocean pipes. Hurricanes don't like cold
air and water.

Could it work? Hurricanes cover hundreds of miles. If the eyewall were 30 miles
in diameter, according to the AOML, that means an area of nearly 2,000 square
miles. So, if the hurricane is moving at 10 mph, it will sweep over 7,200 square
miles of ocean. That's an awful lot of icebergs. And what are the poor whales
supposed to do in the cryogenic waters?

Project Stormfury

The plan: By the 1960s, scientists decided they had a better understanding of
how hurricanes work. The U.S. Navy and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration launched another war by dropping silver iodide into a hurricane's
eyewall.

The theory: If you attack the wall, the strongest part of the hurricane,
everything else will dissipate more quickly.

Could it work? In 1961, Project Stormfury reduced Hurricane Esther's winds from
130 to 119 mph. In 1967, silver iodide dropped into Hurricane Beulah cut
windspeed by 9 miles, from 89 to 80. And, in 1969, after 1,000 pounds of silver
iodide was dropped into Hurricane Debbie, the winds decreased from 100 to 70
mph.

But hopes dropped when Debbie's winds picked back up. Years later, scientists
discovered that hurricanes act almost like living, breathing things. Their walls
naturally fluctuate in a process called "concentric eyewall cycle".

Project Cirrus

The plan: Have planes drop and cannons explode dry ice into the hurricane.

The theory: Many believe "cloud seeding," or spreading a substance throughout a
storm, makes clouds drop moisture prematurely. If you could seed clouds before
they reach land, the rain will fall in the ocean instead of expensive beach
homes.

Could it work? The United States tried it in the 1940s with dry ice. Nothing
happened.

Actually, the hurricane turned West and hit Georgia, traveling up to the North
Carolina coast soaking everything in its path.


Sources: Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory; National
Hurricane Center; "Contemporary World Issues: Hurricanes" by Patrick J.
Fitzpatrick (2006); "Hurricanes" by Kris Hirschmann (2002); "Violent Storms" by
Jon Erickson (1988); "Atlantic Hurricanes" by Gordon E. Dunn and Banner I.
Miller (1960).


Is the government secretly experimenting with hurricane manipulation?

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration no longer does any hurricane
modification, says Jana Goldman, spokesperson for NOAA Research Headquarters.

And the Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory released an
"official policy statement" on hurricane modification in 1998 that it still
stands by: "There is no sound physical hypothesis for the modification of
hurricanes, tornadoes or damaging winds in general and no related scientific
experimentation has been conducted in the past 20 years."

Further, ". . . no federal agencies are presently doing, or planning research on
hurricane modification."

World politics probably has a lot to do with abandoning cloud-seeding projects.
Israel was afraid its system of making rain fall prematurely would perturb
downwind Arabs. The Arabs, they reasoned, might accuse them of stealing the
life-giving moisture.

- Amy Hotz

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations by Robert Holst

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2006 Star-News, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 330 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 25, 2015 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

Record storm strikes Mexico

BYLINE: Todd C. Frankel;Jason Samenow;Chris Mooney

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1083 words


Hurricane Patricia, packing the strongest hurricane winds ever recorded,
smashed Friday evening into Mexico's southwestern coast, a region best known for
its beaches and the resort city of Puerto Vallarta.

In the tense hours before the storm landed with 160 mph winds, schools closed
and temporary shelters opened from Puerto Vallarta to Manzanillo along the
Pacific Coast. Ships were ordered to return to port, and airports were
shuttered.

People were plunged into darkness, too, as Mexico's state-run electric utility
announced that it was cutting power ahead of landfall as a precaution. The storm
came ashore about 55 miles west-northwest of Manzanillo, a commercial seaport.

With the Category 5 storm bearing down, social media filled with video snippets
of foamy surf and empty beaches being lashed by high winds.

Tens of thousands of U.S. citizens, many of them vacationers, were  hunkering
down or had evacuated, according to the U.S. State Department.

Patricia was described as "potentially catastrophic" by the U.S. National
Hurricane Center, which measured top wind speeds at 200 mph using its Hurricane
Hunter plane, which took measurements within the fierce storm. That speed
approached what many scientists consider the theoretical limits of a hurricane's
power.

Later, the hurricane center said it appeared the storm had weakened somewhat
while off the coast, to winds of 190 mph and then 160 mph.

At its peak, Patricia's strength was off the charts at 8.3 on the 8.0 Dvorak
storm intensity scale. Anything at 7.0 or above on the Dvorak scale is a
Category 5 storm.

In addition to winds strong enough to strip bark from a tree, the hurricane
packed the potential for an "extremely dangerous storm surge" and rainfall that
could reach 20 inches in some places, according to the hurricane center.

Forecasters noted that the destruction could be contained by the fact that the
storm's strongest winds were in a narrow band around its center, extending just
five or 10 miles. Heavy rainfall was expected to be more widespread - 8 to 12
inches along the coast, with more in isolated spots - in the Mexican states of
Nayarit, Jalisco, Michoacan and Guerrero, leading to worries of flash floods and
mudslides.

The hurricane is expected to weaken over the mountains of Mexico and could be a
small tropical storm by Sunday.

In Acaponeta, Mexico, retired schoolteacher Enrique Jimenez Lopez sat tight with
his family in his home 15 miles from the beach as they awaited the storm Friday
evening. He had bought candles, as instructed by local authorities, in
preparation for losing power. But, he said, people did not seem panicked or even
overly worried about the fearsome storm.

"We know there are people in the street," he said. "People just aren't aware."

The scene was calm, too, at a Red Cross shelter set up in an auditorium in
Puetro Vallarta, where nearly 90 people waited for the storm.

"We have prepared a hot dinner, it's not cold," said Ali Nunez, a Red Cross
medical worker, to illustrate the relaxed nature of  emergency preparations. "I
think people are a bit surprised about what they've heard about the hurricane."

The Puerto Vallarta municipality is home to 255,000 people.

Patricia began taking shape late Wednesday, morphing with historic speed from a
series of thunderstorms into an unprecedented hurricane. In little over a day,
it went from a Category 1 hurricane to a Category 4, and soon hit the top of the
scale.

Hurricane records are a little cloudy because similar storms in the western
Pacific - called cyclones and typhoons - are not as closely monitored. But it
appears that Patricia is a record-setter at 200 mph. In 2013, super Typhoon
Haiyan hit the Philippines with peak winds estimated at 195 mph.

Patricia is certainly tops in North America or the Caribbean, the domain of the
National Hurricane Center, besting the  record of 190 mph winds from Hurricane
Allen, which hit the Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico in 1980.

Mexico is no stranger to hurricanes. In September 2014, Hurricane Odile smashed
into  the Baja California peninsula, causing several deaths, damaging hotels and
cutting off water and electricity to tens of thousands of people. The government
sent in the army to evacuate American and other tourists who were stranded by
damage to the local airport.

A year earlier, Hurricane Ingrid and Tropical Storm Manuel socked Mexico's gulf
and Pacific coasts, causing flooding and landslides. At least 34 people died.

Patricia is the ninth storm to reach Category 4 or 5 in the northeast Pacific
Ocean this year, beating the record of eight in 1997, according to Phillip
Klotzbach, a meteorologist at Colorado State University.

The ingredients needed for a superstorm like Patricia are present. This year,
there is a strong El NiÃ±o weather pattern, the periodic warming in sea surface
temperature. That generally leads to hyperactive hurricane activity in the
Eastern Pacific basin, Kerry Emanuel, an MIT hurricane expert, said by e-mail.

Pinning a single hurricane to a long-term trend such as global warming is more
difficult, but record-setting hurricanes are consistent with predictions by
climate researchers about the consequences of a warming world. Rising ocean
temperatures should strengthen these storms. But the issue is beset by
data-related difficulties, since storm measurement techniques are continually
improving and highly variable.

The oceans heating up due to climate change will have consequences, said Michael
Mann, a climate researcher at Penn State University. "Hurricane Patricia, and
her unprecedented 200 mile-per-hour sustained winds, appears to be one of them
now, unfortunately."

todd.frankel@washpost.com

Gabriela Martinez in Mexico City and Niraj Chokshi in Washington contributed to
this report.

A RECORD-BREAKER

The National Hurricane Center said Hurricane Patricia's winds reached 200 mph,
the strongest on record, but weakened before the storm made landfall.

1997 Hurricane Linda

185 mph

Northeast Pacific

1995 Hurricane Wilma

185 mph

Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico

1988 Hurricane Gilbert

185 mph

Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico

1980 Hurricane Allen

190 mph

Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico

A RECORD-BREAKER

The National Hurricane Center said Hurricane Patricia's winds reached 200 mph,
the strongest on record, but weakened before the storm made landfall.

1997 Hurricane Linda

185 mph

Northeast Pacific

1995 Hurricane Wilma

185 mph

Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico

1988 Hurricane Gilbert

185 mph

Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico

1980 Hurricane Allen

190 mph

Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2015 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 331 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               New York Observer

                            September 1, 2017 Friday

After Harvey, Many Texans Will Think Differently About Hurricane Risks

BYLINE: Wanyun Shao and Siyuan Xian

LENGTH: 910 words


Hurricane Harvey was the most powerful hurricane to strike the U.S. mainland
since Hurricane Wilma in 2005. It also was the strongest storm to hit Texas
since 1961's Hurricane Carla.

Although Harvey quickly was downgraded to a tropical storm, it has caused severe
damage to the Texas coast, including unprecedented flooding in Houston. As of
this writing, the death toll stands at 30 with thousands displaced from their
homes.

Many communities in Harvey's path issued mandatory or voluntary evacuation
orders. Some residents obeyed these orders and moved to shelters. But as in
other recent disasters, many chose to stay in their houses and became stranded
as waters rose.

We have studied perceptions of hurricane-related risks along the Gulf Coast and
how they influence public support for flood management policies. What we have
found is that residents have low motivation to take voluntary steps to reduce
their risks before a storm unless they have timely, up-to-date information from
trusted sources about how serious those risks are. Past experience with
hurricanes also is an important factor. In the case of Harvey, we believe that
many victims did not correctly perceive the risks they faced, and failed to
anticipate or prepare adequately for this unprecedented catastrophe.

Recent experiences shape perceptions of storms

Previous studies have found that individuals' past experience significantly
affects their perceptions of hurricanes and their thinking about mitigating
hazards and evacuating. The last two major hurricanes that hit Texas were Celia
in 1970 and Carla in 1961, so vivid memories of catastrophic hurricanes have
faded from many people's minds.

As an example, a 2012 survey asked residents of four coastal counties in Texas
(Kleberg, Neuces, Refugio and San Patricio), all of which were significantly
affected by Hurricane Harvey, about their perceptions of changing patterns of
hurricane frequency and strength, coastal water levels and flooding amounts. A
majority of respondents thought that the trajectory of these coastal hazards had
remained constant or decreased, when in fact many experts believe that climate
change is increasing these coastal risks.

In our own studies, we have found that maximum wind speed associated with the
last landfall is the most powerful predictor of how coastal residents perceive
changes in hurricane strength along the Gulf Coast. People who experienced
higher maximum wind speeds in the last hurricane landfall are more likely to
think hurricanes are becoming stronger.

Water is also a major threat to life and properties. Storm surge flooding can
cause substantial damage, as we saw when Superstorm Sandy inundated lower
Manhattan in 2012. Although coastal residents may not directly relate storm
surge to their perceptions of hurricane strength, the power of storm surge can
be reflected in perceptions of coastal flooding. The study found that people
perceived more flooding if the peak storm surge height was higher in the
previous hurricane.

Overall, it appears that the strength and impacts of the most recent hurricane
tend to leave the deepest impression in coastal residents' memories. We suspect
that collective memory of extreme events from the distant past diminishes, and
therefore has limited influence on risk perceptions, let alone on decisions and
behaviors to cope with such risks.

Linking risks and responses

Since risk perceptions have a powerful effect on risk reduction and mitigation
decisions, we also investigated how risk perceptions impacted Gulf coastal
residents' support for two adaptation policies: providing incentives for
relocation, and funding for educating residents about emergency planning and
evacuation. We found that when people experienced severe weather conditions,
such as high wind speeds and storm surges, their perception of risk grew along
side their support for adaptation policies.

Specifically, individuals who have perceived increasing hurricane strength and
flooding in the past are more likely to express support for policies such as
providing incentives for relocation and funding for educating residents about
emergency planning and evacuation. The fact that Texas Gulf Coast residents do
not appear to have perceived increasing threats from hurricanes may explain why
more people did not evacuate from the region ahead of Harvey.

Anticipating the next storm

Recovery from Harvey should include better channels and methods for
communicating scientific information about risks and ways to respond to future
disasters. Local governments in the coastal area need to consider using venues
such as public meetings, education campaigns and social media to disseminate
scientific information about environmental risks to the public.

Given the devastation Harvey has incurred among coastal residents in Texas, we
expect that these communities will be shell-shocked in the foreseeable future.
This heightened risk perception will translate into adaption and mitigation
actions. If another big storm hits Texas in the near future, residents will be
more ready. New Orleans, where local officials issued detailed instructions last
week about preparing for Harvey, is a perfect example for Houston to follow.

Wanyun Shao is an Assistant Professor of Geography at Auburn University and
Siyuan Xian is a PhD candidate in Civil and Environmental Engineering at
Princeton University. This article was originally published on The Conversation.
Read the original article.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 The New York Observer, L.P.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 332 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                  The Express

                               September 18, 2004

EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT . . . HURRICANE NAMES

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 406 words


THIS week we've been tracking Hurricane Ivan's devastating progress across the
Caribbean; before that, Hurricane Frances wrought devastation in Florida, but
who gives the Hurricanes these friendly names?

The World Meteorological Organisation has drawn up six lists of names for
Atlantic Hurricanes whose initial letters run through the alphabet.

On each list, male and female names alternate. The 2004 list, for example,
begins Alex, Bonnie, Charlie, Danielle, while next year will start with Arlene,
Bret, Cindy, Dennis.

Do they use all the letters of the alphabet?

All except Q, U, X, Y and Z, though oddly enough the list for Pacific Hurricanes
includes Xavier, Yolanda and Zeke.

Why are there six lists?

To avoid confusing one year's hurricanes with the next, I suppose.

What will they do when they've worked their way through all six lists?

Go back to the beginning and start again.

So the same names repeat on a six-year cycle?

Not quite. If a hurricane is particularly devastating, its name is retired,
though it may be brought back again after 10 years. Agnes, Alicia, Allen,
Allison, Andrew and Anita have all been dropped for causing too much damage and
that's only the ones beginning with A.

How do they choose which names to include? Can we look forward to a Hurricane
Tony or Cherie?

They formed the list by randomly picking names from a list at the National
Hurricane Center in Miami.

There's never been a Hurricane Cherie but Tony's on the list for 2006.

Are they likely to get as far as the letter T?

There was a hurricane Tanya in 1995 but that's the only time they reached so far
down the list.

How long has this been going on?

The male-female alternation has been the pattern since 1979.

However, from 1953 until 1978, the US National Weather Service gave names to
hurricanes but only female ones.

So didn't hurricanes have names before that?

Yes they did. Hurricanes in the West Indies have been named for centuries after
the saint on whose day they struck.

I'm a bit puzzled. You say the names run through the alphabet but we seem to
have had Frances followed by Ivan. What happened to George and Harriet?

Gaston and Hermine, actually. I should have explained that they're given names
when they reach the level of tropical storm - that's with winds from 3973mph.
Hurricanes start at 74mph. Gaston and Hermine never reached hurricane level.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2004

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Newspaper

                       Copyright 2004 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS


                          FOCUS - 333 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                            September 6, 2013 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Weather Eye

BYLINE: Paul Simons

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 67

LENGTH: 325 words


Something odd is happening with the hurricane season in the Atlantic this year -
there have been no hurricanes. This is now the peak of the season and yet the
Atlantic remains remarkably quiet. Forecasters had expected this to be a very
active season, but so far there have been only six named tropical storms - with
weaker winds than a hurricane - but none developed into a full-blown hurricane.

Hurricanes start life on the eastern side of Africa as heavy thunderstorms that
sweep westwards. When the storms move out into the warm tropical waters off the
coast of West Africa, they grow stronger and can turn into tropical storms. If
conditions are Just right, these storms can develop into hurricanes, but
hurricanes are surprisingly easy to kill off. If the winds high above are too
strong they can sheer off the top of the storm and make it collapse, or if sea
waters are too cool the storm runs out of energy. This year's storms have been
choked off by lots of dust carried in on very dry air blowing off the Sahara -
and dry air also chokes off tropical storms. Even if a hurricane does form soon,
the current weather pattern in the Atlantic is likely to send a storm spinning
off into the mid-Atlantic, well out of harm's way.

In fact, there is not much chance of a hurricane before September 7 - and if
none appears by September 11 a record for the latest appearance of a hurricane
would be set in the era of satellite monitoring of tropical storms. Before
satellites, the latest first hurricane of a season was in 1941, when the first
hurricane appeared on September 16. There was no room for complacency, however,
as the rest of that hurricane season was very active, with three MAJOR
hurricanes.

In 2012 the hurricane season seemed to be drawing to a close when on October 22
Hurricane Sandy blew up and went on to devastate much of Jamaica, Cuba and
finally New York and New Jersey, killing 286 people and leaving $68 billion
worth of damage.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2013 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 334 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                          September 9, 2009 Wednesday

Hurricane Fred veers off. Why the US has been spared so far.;
A surprise El Niño effect is disabling oncoming storms from the east and could
make 2009 the first quiet hurricane season in years.

BYLINE: Patrik Jonsson Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

LENGTH: 606 words


The hurricane season may be dead in the water. Hurricane Fred - the second
hurricane and fifth named storm of the 2009 Atlantic storm season - grew into
one of the strongest storms ever in the east Atlantic on Wednesday, but is now
veering off toward the open north Atlantic where it's likely to soon dissipate.
Despite favorable hurricane conditions off the African coast, a surprise El Niño
effect in the Pacific is cutting down oncoming storms from the East, forecasters
say. "We're getting these hurricane seedlings that are trying to make it across
Atlantic ... but they're getting annihilated" by El Niño-spawned westerlies in
the upper atmosphere, says Keith Blackwell, a storm forecaster at University of
South Alabama's Coastal Weather Research Center in Mobile.

The storms, he said, are "getting a crew cut." Predictions about an "active"
hurricane season have dissipated like a late summer thunderstorm since last
month, when hurricane Bill washed beachgoers off some rocks in Maine.
Forecasters have already downgraded the season to "below-average." Going into
this hurricane season, which usually runs until November, US experts had
predicted 12 named storms, with six turning into hurricanes and two becoming
major. But veteran storm predictor William Gray at Colorado State University,
Fort Collins pulled back those predictions last week, calling for a
"below-average" season of 10 storms, including four hurricanes, two of them
major. El Nino's impact The surprise El Niño effect - a warm water system along
the northwestern South American coast - has caused upper atmospheric prevailing
winds (the jet stream) to shift south, weakening hurricanes by shearing off the
their tops. "It's these intense storms that come out of the deep tropics that El
Niño activity tends to weaken a great deal," says Professor Gray. Researchers
typically can't detect the extent of El Niño activity until late spring or early
summer, complicating long-term hurricane predictions. Conversely, the El Niño
has intensified storm activity in the Pacific, giving rise to hurricane Jimena,
which threatened Mexico and California Baja last month, but weakened as it made
landfall. That's not to say El Niño is always a hurricane killer. Hurricane
Andrew, the third-most powerful hurricane to ever hit the US mainland, formed
during an El Niño year in 1992. After being nearly destroyed by westerly wind
shear, Andrew found an oasis of favorable conditions in the Caribbean, building
into a Category 5 storm as it took aim at Homestead, Fla. Moreover, although the
Atlantic basin didn't see any zero storms till August, the last month saw five
storms - Anna, Erika, Danny, Bill and now Fred -- develop into hurricanes. A
mild hurricane season? Researchers say one major landfall storm is still
possible this year - a worry for coastal Americans who have seen a series of
devastating hurricanes in recent years. But most researchers see an early end to
this year's storm activity, most likely by October. This could be the first calm
hurricane season since 1997, as a multi-decade storm trend has been building in
pitch since 1995. "[I] have to admit there have been very few Labor Days
weekends where I haven't been working a storm, and this year I didn't have to,"
says storm forecaster Mr. Blackwell. "Something is dramatically up, and there's
no doubt El Niño is having an impact on a diminishing season." -- Follow us on
Twitter. Healthcare's spending spiral Obama's pursuit of a healthcare overhaul
has put a sharper focus on a central and perplexing issue: how to control
fast-rising costs. Click here for a Q-and-A on the choices ahead.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2009 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 335 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Christian Science Monitor

                          September 9, 2009, Wednesday

Hurricane Fred veers off. Why the US has been spared so far.

BYLINE: Patrik Jonsson Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

SECTION: USA; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 610 words

DATELINE: Atlanta


The hurricane season may be dead in the water.

Hurricane Fred - the second hurricane and fifth named storm of the 2009 Atlantic
storm season - grew into one of the strongest storms ever in the east Atlantic
on Wednesday, but is now veering off toward the open north Atlantic where it's
likely to soon dissipate.

Despite favorable hurricane conditions off the African coast, a surprise El Nino
effect in the Pacific is cutting down oncoming storms from the East, forecasters
say.

"We're getting these hurricane seedlings that are trying to make it across
Atlantic ... but they're getting annihilated" by El Nino-spawned westerlies in
the upper atmosphere, says Keith Blackwell, a storm forecaster at University of
South Alabama's Coastal Weather Research Center in Mobile. The storms, he said,
are "getting a crew cut."

Predictions about an "active" hurricane season have dissipated like a late
summer thunderstorm since last month, when hurricane Bill washed beachgoers off
some rocks in Maine. Forecasters have already downgraded the season to
"below-average."

Going into this hurricane season, which usually runs until November, US experts
had predicted 12 named storms, with six turning into hurricanes and two becoming
major. But veteran storm predictor William Gray at Colorado State University,
Fort Collins pulled back those predictions last week, calling for a
"below-average" season of 10 storms, including four hurricanes, two of them
major.

El Nino's impact

The surprise El Nino effect - a warm water system along the northwestern South
American coast - has caused upper atmospheric prevailing winds (the jet stream)
to shift south, weakening hurricanes by shearing off the their tops.

"It's these intense storms that come out of the deep tropics that El Nino
activity tends to weaken a great deal," says Professor Gray. Researchers
typically can't detect the extent of El Nino activity until late spring or early
summer, complicating long-term hurricane predictions.

Conversely, the El Nino has intensified storm activity in the Pacific, giving
rise to hurricane Jimena, which threatened Mexico and California Baja last
month, but weakened as it made landfall.

That's not to say El Nino is always a hurricane killer. Hurricane Andrew, the
third-most powerful hurricane to ever hit the US mainland, formed during an El
Nino year in 1992. After being nearly destroyed by westerly wind shear, Andrew
found an oasis of favorable conditions in the Caribbean, building into a
Category 5 storm as it took aim at Homestead, Fla.

Moreover, although the Atlantic basin didn't see any zero storms till August,
the last month saw five storms - Anna, Erika, Danny, Bill and now Fred --
develop into hurricanes.

A mild hurricane season?

Researchers say one major landfall storm is still possible this year - a worry
for coastal Americans who have seen a series of devastating hurricanes in recent
years. But most researchers see an early end to this year's storm activity, most
likely by October.

This could be the first calm hurricane season since 1997, as a multi-decade
storm trend has been building in pitch since 1995.

"[I] have to admit there have been very few Labor Days weekends where I haven't
been working a storm, and this year I didn't have to," says storm forecaster Mr.
Blackwell. "Something is dramatically up, and there's no doubt El Nino is having
an impact on a diminishing season."

--

Follow us on Twitter.

Healthcare's spending spiral

Obama's pursuit of a healthcare overhaul has put a sharper focus on a central
and perplexing issue: how to control fast-rising costs. Click here for a Q-and-A
on the choices ahead.

(c) Copyright 2009. The Christian Science Monitor

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2009 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 336 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            September 3, 2010 Friday

Will hurricane Earl rate in Top 10 most expensive hurricanes?;
Hurricane Earl is threatening Cape Cod's expensive real estate. But it takes a
lot more to be one of America's Top 10 costliest hurricanes. Which hurricanes
made the list? Click the right arrow to see.

BYLINE: Elizabeth Fuller Contributor

LENGTH: 729 words


Hurricane Earl is threatening Cape Cod's expensive real estate. But it takes a
lot more to be one of America's Top 10 costliest hurricanes. Which hurricanes
made the list? Click the right arrow to see.

#10 Frances (2004) - $10.3 billion

Lasting from Aug. 25 to Sept. 10, 2004, Frances claimed seven lives as it rolled
up the length of Florida, faded into a tropical depression, and moved across
Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, Kentucky, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, New York,
and Vermont, before blowing itself out over Canada. At the time, it caused $8.9
billion of damage, according to NOAA's Hurricane Center. In today's dollars,
that works out to be $10.3 billion.

#9 Agnes (1972) - $10.9 billion

The only June storm to make the Top 10, hurricane Agnes made landfall as a
Category 1 storm on the Florida Panhandle, marched across the south to Atlanta
and the sea, pushed up the coast and made landfall a second time near New York
City (by then only a tropical storm), and faded out over Pennsylvania and New
York State. Agnes left a swath of property destruction and was linked to 129
fatalities, according to Weather Underground's Hurricane Archive.

#8 Hugo (1989) - $12.3 billion

Hurricane Hugo hit South Carolina with Category 4 winds (up to 160 mph). After
the initial blow, it spun down into a tropical storm that pushed through North
Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York, and then across
Canada and back out to sea. The storm lasted 14 days and claimed 56 lives.

#7 Rita (2005) - $12.6 billion

Hurricane Rita pushed between Cuba and Florida before making landfall near the
Texas-Louisiana border. Although the hurricane started out as a Category 5 in
the Gulf of Mexico, its winds died when it reached land, so the damage to
coastal cities from wind, storm surge and flooding was not as extreme as
expected. It tracked through Louisiana, Arkansas, Missouri, and blew out in
Illinois. It was linked to seven fatalities.

#6 Ivan (2004) - $16.4 billion

Hurricane Ivan is the only Top 10 hurricane - and one of the few storms in
history - to make landfall not once but three times. It first hit between
Pensacola and Mobile as a Category 3 storm, pushed through Kentucky, North
Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, and Delaware, then blew back out into the
Atlantic, where it curled back around to the south, swept across the southern
tip of Florida as a tropical depression, crossed the Gulf of Mexico, and made
landfall the third time at the border of Louisiana and Texas. In its travels, it
was responsible for 92 fatalities.

#5 Charley (2004) - $17.3 billion

Hurricane Charley smashed into Florida with Category 4 winds, but within hours
it lost strength and its wind speeds dropped from 145 m.p.h. to 85 m.p.h.
Charley crossed the state as a Category 1 storm, then raked the East Coast to
Rhode Island after claiming a total of 15 lives.

#4 Ike (2008) - $19.6 billion

Hurricane Ike hit southeastern Texas with Category 2 winds, then drove north
through Oklahoma, Arkansas, Missouri, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Michigan, and
into Canada, claiming 103 fatalities.

#3 Wilma (2005) - $23.0 billion

Hurricane Wilma, the only October storm on the Top 10 list, smashed Central
America with Category 5 winds (reaching 185 mph) before curling up through the
Gulf of Mexico. Wilma blew across southern Florida as a Category 3 hurricane and
caused 22 fatalities before pushing out into into the Atlantic.

#2 Andrew (1992) - $41.2 billion

Hurricane Andrew was the only Top 10 storm to make landfall in the US with
Category 5 winds. It powered across southern Florida, across the Gulf, made
landfall a second time in Louisiana, this time as a Category 3 hurricane, and
then blew across Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, and North Carolina.
Andrew claimed 26 lives. With $41.2 billion in property damage (in 2010
dollars), it was America's most expensive hurricane until...

#1 Katrina (2005) - $90.4 billion

The costliest hurricane ever to hit America, hurricane Katrina was also the
deadliest and the shortest-lived storm of the Top 10. In nine days, it claimed
1,833 lives, first hitting southern Florida with Category 3 winds and then
devastating New Orleans and southern Louisiana. It continued north through
Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky, Indiana, and Ohio. The human and
property toll was so extensive that the rebuilding continues five years later.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2010 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 337 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                              July 4, 2014 Friday

N. Carolina shrugs off hurricane Arthur; storm may glance off Cape Cod;
Hurricane Arthur made landfall near Beaufort, N.C., late Thursday, as a Category
2 storm. It has now weakened to a Category 1 and has veered out over the
Atlantic, possibly to sideswipe Cape Cod.

BYLINE: Patrik Jonsson Staff writer

SECTION: USA

LENGTH: 530 words


Hurricane-hardened North Carolinians mostly shrugged off a Category 2 hurricane
named Arthur Thursday night, taking only a marginal hit before the fast-moving
storm veered out into the Atlantic on its way toward a possible sideswipe of
Massachusetts' Cape Cod.

Arthur made landfall near Beaufort, N.C., late Thursday evening, breaking tree
limbs and causing power outages. But thanks to well-staged utility crews, most
affected areas had lights again by dawn. NC 12, the perpetually
hurricane-wrecked roadway that connects the Outer Banks, took little to no
damage.

The storm's inner wall had tightened through the day Thursday as it approached
Cape Hatteras, meaning that winds around the eye had begun to increase in speed,
with gusts of up to 120 miles per hour. Friday morning, Arthur's atmospheric
pressure stood at about 976 millibars, and it had maximum sustained winds of 90
m.p.h., all while moving north at a 23 m.p.h. clip.

"Arthur weakens as it pulls away from North Carolina," the National Hurricane
Center in Miami reported at 9 a.m. Eastern time Friday. The storm has been
downgraded to a Category 1.

Hurricane watches remained in effect up the East Coast, from the Albemarle Sound
to Nantucket, Mass. According to the National Hurricane Center's storm track
models, the hurricane's easternmost side may glance Cape Cod at 1 a.m. Saturday
morning.

As the storm approached North Carolina, thousands of tourists and locals had
fled the sand spits of the Outer Banks. Those who stayed reported a rough night,
although one North Carolinian interviewed by CNN, Robin Nelson, said her husband
seemed unperturbed. "He's very good at sleeping through hurricanes," she told
the cable news network.

Arthur is the first named hurricane of the 2014 season. The US hasn't seen a
major hurricane strike since hurricane Sandy hit the Northeast in 2012.
(Forecasters had predicted a sluggish 2012 season, but it turned out to be
notably active, ending with the Sandy exclamation point.) Last year's hurricane
season, predicted to have been a busy one, was instead a bust, producing only a
few hard blows and no major landfall hurricanes - the first time that's happened
since 1994.

Forecasters expect an average hurricane year in 2014, with anywhere from one to
six hurricanes coming ashore, and perhaps one particularly powerful storm.
Strong tradewinds and slightly higher-than-usual water temperatures in the
Caribbean and tropical North Atlantic - factors that help to spawn hurricanes -
are likely to be mitigated by slighly cooler-than-normal water temperatures in
the eastern Atlantic.

To be sure, some parts of North Carolina did feel the brunt of the storm.
Downtown Manteo, N.C., is flooded, and a total of 60,000 or so power outages
were reported in the coastal region.

Arthur's back-rotation continued on Friday to push water up on the Outer Banks
from the inshore sounds, but the peak storm surge reached a manageable four feet
in some spots.

As of 9 a.m., there were no confirmed reports of injuries from the storm.

Now, those who battled the storm will see their reward: Several days of cool,
clear, post-hurricane air, a brief respite from the usually hot and muggy summer
weather.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 338 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             August 4, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricane season defying forecasts

BYLINE: John Ritter

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 345 words


So far the 2006 hurricane season has been quiet, but forecasters warn there's
still plenty of time for devastating storms to develop heading into the peak
months of August, September and October.

Last year, the most intense in more than a century of hurricane record-keeping,
was an anomaly, says National Weather Service meteorologist Dennis Feltgen.

There were 28 named storms, more than double the seasonal average. Three reached
the strongest intensity, Category 5, with winds greater than 155 mph. Four hit
the U.S. coast, including Katrina, which devastated New Orleans and the
Mississippi coast.

In the past two years, 13 major hurricanes have struck southern and eastern
coastal regions.

Three tropical storms this year -- most recently the waning Chris -- have failed
to become hurricanes. The National Hurricane Center in Miami predicted Tropical
Storm Chris, with 40-mph winds, would maintain its strength until it reached
Cuba, likely by Saturday.

Thursday, hurricane researcher William Gray at Colorado State University said
the season won't be as bad as he had predicted. Gray and his forecast team
reduced the number of expected hurricanes from nine to seven and said a monster
storm like Katrina is unlikely.

In May, government forecasters predicted 13 to 16 tropical storms, eight to 10
of which could grow into hurricanes, during the six-month Atlantic hurricane
season that started June 1. The hurricane center will update its forecast
Tuesday.

Conditions were favorable for hurricane development much earlier last year than
is typical, and they persisted, producing a record number of storms. Those
conditions -- warmer sea-surface temperatures and the absence of high-altitude,
west-to-east wind shear that breaks up storms as they're forming -- weren't
repeated this June and July.

"All of the ingredients that were in place last year simply weren't this year,"
Feltgen said.  "Now winds are lightening up, sea surfaces are warming, and all
the conditions are becoming quite favorable for activity to really take off like
it's supposed to this time of year."

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, b/w,Alejandro Gonzalez,Source:National Hurricane Center(Bar
graph)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 339 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           October 13, 2010 Wednesday
                                 FIRST EDITION

Hurricane season active as predicted;
U.S. spared onslaught of major storms

BYLINE: Doyle Rice

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 419 words


The extremely active 2010 Atlantic hurricane season has lived up to its fierce
billing, hurricane experts said Tuesday as Hurricane Paula menaced portions of
Central America and Mexico with heavy rain and strong winds.

"There have been 16 named storms this season, of which nine were hurricanes,"
said spokesman Dennis Feltgen of the National Hurricane Center in Miami. Five
hurricanes were classified as "major," carrying wind speeds of 111 mph or
higher.

"This was right within the predicted range," he said of the season, which began
June 1 and ends Nov. 30. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
predicted in May that 14-23 named storms would form in the Atlantic basin this
year while Colorado State University experts forecast 18.

An average season sees 10 named storms, of which six are hurricanes and two are
major hurricanes.

Late Tuesday, Paula had sustained winds of 100 mph and was moving toward
Cozumel, Mexico. Paula could reach the Florida Straits as early as Friday and
the Bahamas this weekend, according to AccuWeather.

So far, the USA has been spared the worst of the season's hurricanes because of
favorable upper-level steering currents over the Atlantic, according to Feltgen.
Several powerful hurricanes that formed far out in the Atlantic moved west
across the ocean, then turned northwest and north and stayed out to sea as they
neared the USA, he said. Only Hurricane Earl grazed the East Coast in early
September.

The season has been deadly for the Caribbean, Central America and Mexico. The
Associated Press reported at least 200 people killed in Hurricanes Alex and Karl
and Tropical Storms Hermine, Matthew and Nicole.

While the Atlantic has been active, the Pacific Ocean is seeing a remarkably
quiet year. In the Western Pacific, meteorologist Jeff Masters of the Weather
Underground reports that the region is seeing its quietest typhoon season on
record, with only 12 named storms so far this year, compared with an average of
21. Typhoons are the same type of storms as hurricanes.

Some other highlights of the Atlantic hurricane season, from the hurricane
center:

*Hurricane Alex was the first June hurricane since 1995 and the first Category 2
June hurricane since 1966.

*Eight named storms formed in September, tying the 2002 and 2007 seasons for the
most ever recorded in that month.

*For only the second time since 1900, two Category 4 hurricanes -- Igor and
Julia -- roared across the Atlantic at the same time. A Category 4 hurricane has
wind speeds of at least 131 mph.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 340 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            November 16, 2012 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Sandy wraps up hurricane season

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY,

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 328 words


Roaring ashore with the power of five atomic bombs, monstrous Hurricane Sandy --
and the superstorm it morphed into -- shattered what had been an  unremarkable
hurricane season until  late October.

Besides Sandy, which technically didn't hit land as a hurricane, the only
hurricane to hit the USA this year was Isaac, which ravaged southeastern
Louisiana in August, killing seven people.

The 2012 Atlantic hurricane season officially ends Nov. 30, but the season is
likely over. Only five hurricanes have hit the USA in November in the past 162
years, according to data from the National Hurricane Center. And "there's
nothing out there now," hurricane center spokesman Dennis Feltgen says.

For the Atlantic season, there were 19 named tropical storms and hurricanes,
well above the long-term average of 12. Of the 19 named storms, 10 became
hurricanes. A tropical storm becomes a hurricane when its sustained winds reach
74 mph.

Preseason predictions from Colorado State University said 13 named storms would
form (of which five would be hurricanes), while the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration predicted nine to 15 named storms, of which four to
eight would be hurricanes.

Neither Sandy nor Isaac reached "major" hurricane status --  winds of at least
111 mph.

The season started vigorously. There were four named storms in May and June, the
first time that had happened since record-keeping began in 1851. After July,
when there were no storms, eight developed in August, tying a record set in
2004.

Isaac  hit in Louisiana on Aug. 28 with 80-mph winds and caused $2 billion in
damage.

Sandy killed 121 in the USA (199 overall) and caused an estimated $50 billion in
damage, the second costliest natural disaster in U.S. history after Hurricane
Katrina in 2005.

At landfall, Sandy's tropical storm-force winds spanned 943 miles of the U.S.
coast, according to Weather Underground meteorologist Jeff Masters, who says
that no hurricane on record has been wider.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, Julie Snider and Doyle Rice, USA TODAY (Bar graph)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 341 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              May 23, 2014 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

When hurricanes hit, new maps will show storm surge

BYLINE: Doyle Rice, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 420 words


Detailed maps of projected storm surge flooding -- typically the deadliest and
most destructive part of hurricanes -- will be coming this season for the first
time from the National Hurricane Center.

The maps will be created for areas along the Gulf and Atlantic coasts at risk of
storm surge from an approaching tropical storm or hurricane. The six-month
hurricane season begins June 1.

"The maps will show the exact areas where inundation from storm surge could
occur and how high above ground the water could reach in those areas," said
hurricane center spokesman Dennis Feltgen.

Though forecasts call for a quieter-than-average season, all it takes is one
hurricane making landfall to wreak havoc and destruction. Storm surge -- the
massive mound of water that builds up and comes ashore as a hurricane moves over
the ocean or Gulf of Mexico -- is the single biggest killer in hurricanes.

Most of the 1,200 deaths in Hurricane Katrina in 2005 were caused by storm
surge, according to the hurricane center.

In Superstorm Sandy in 2012, storm surge-induced flooding was measured as high
as 9 feet above ground in parts of New York and New Jersey, leading to billions
of dollars in damages.

The damage occurred despite the fact that Sandy was the equivalent only of a
Category 1 hurricane at landfall, with winds of about 80mph, and was downgraded
below hurricane status shortly after that. The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale
categories -- which go from 1 to 5 and measure only wind speed -- are not a good
indicator of storm surge risk. "Tropical storms, Category 1 or 2 hurricanes,
major hurricanes ...  all can cause life-threatening storm surge," according to
the hurricane center.

Every coastal city along the Gulf or Atlantic coasts of the USA is at risk of
storm surge, the hurricane center said, including areas several miles inland.

Storm surge flooding does not include floods caused by the heavy rain from the
hurricane.

Feltgen said the first storm surge map usually will be issued at the same time
as the initial hurricane watch or, in some cases, tropical storm watch. The map
is based on the latest forecast track and intensity for the tropical storm or
hurricane and takes into account likely forecast errors.

Several factors influence the amount of surge a storm will produce. They include
the site of landfall; storm intensity, size, forward speed and angle of approach
to the coast; the shape of the coastline; the width and slope of the ocean
bottom; and local features such as barrier islands, bays and rivers.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphic National Hurricane Center

DOCUMENT-TYPE: WEATHER

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2014 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 342 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 5, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Florida's Luck Runs Out With 2 Hits in One Month

BYLINE: By KENNETH CHANG

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; National Desk; HURRICANE FRANCES: METEOROLOGY; Pg.
21

LENGTH: 793 words


Battered on the west three weeks ago by Hurricane Charley and being battered
this weekend on the east by Hurricane Frances, Florida is a victim of a climate
currently favorable for hurricanes and of simple bad luck.

In 1995, after three relatively unstormy decades, a naturally occurring
oscillation in the Atlantic Ocean started a new active era for hurricanes.

''The number of major hurricanes went up by a factor of two and a half,'' said
Stanley B. Goldenberg, a meteorologist with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's hurricane research division in Miami. ''You have a lot of
arrows, and you have a lot of targets.''

Some hurricane targets like the Caribbean have been hit several times since
then. ''They've been pounded,'' Mr. Goldenberg said. ''They know we've had an
increase.''

Mr. Goldenberg and other hurricane experts said Florida and other parts of the
United States were fortunate that more disastrous storms had not struck in
recent years. Of the 35 major hurricanes -- Category 3 or stronger, with
sustained winds of more than 111 miles per hour -- that have formed in the
Atlantic since August 1995, only four, or less than one in eight, have hit the
United States as major hurricanes. Historically, the odds have been one in
three.

That means most of Florida has been unscathed since the 1960's, when the last
active era of hurricanes ended. In the 38 years from 1966 through 2003, only one
major hurricane, Andrew in 1992, struck southern Florida. In the preceding
active period, the 40 years from 1926 to 1965, the region was hit 14 times.

''I view this year as very unlucky for Florida,'' said Dr. William Gray, a
professor of atmospheric science at Colorado State University who forecasts the
hurricane season, ''but this is within the natural variation of storms.''

Each year, between August and November, about 60 low-pressure systems form off
the western coast of Africa and waft westward. Warm waters and favorable winds
turn some of them into tropical storms; others dissipate and disappear.

Tropical storms acquire names when sustained winds exceed 39 miles per hour;
hurricanes are Atlantic tropical storms with winds of at least 74 miles per
hour. An average hurricane season has 9.6 named storms, of which 5.9 become
hurricanes and 2.3 of them turn into major hurricanes.

But this year, eight named storms formed during August alone -- a record. On
Friday, he increased his forecast for this year's season to 16 named tropical
storms (up from 13), 8 hurricanes (up from 7) and 5 major hurricanes (up from
3).

He predicts that September will remain active, but that hurricane activity will
tail off in October, because of warm water in the central tropical Pacific,
possibly the beginnings of an El Nino climate pattern, which tends to suppress
storms in the Atlantic.

Dr. Gray, Mr. Goldenberg and other scientists reported in 2001 that the severity
of a hurricane season correlated strongly with a decades-long cycle of ocean
temperatures in the Atlantic. When waters in the North Atlantic are cooler, wind
shear, which tears storms apart, is stronger, suppressing hurricanes.

Global warming is not a significant factor in this year's storminess, experts
said. While some climate models predict that warming might eventually mean
somewhat stronger hurricanes, that effect is expected to be very small compared
to the natural hurricane cycle.

Where a hurricane goes depends on the surrounding meteorological conditions. As
they spin like tops across the Atlantic, some barrel straight west, into Central
America or Mexico. Others, after passing a semipermanent high-pressure system
that sits over Bermuda in the summer, take a sharp right to the north, missing
land entirely. And some veer into the United States.

Although the number of hurricanes has been up for years, most have either headed
straight west, like Hurricane Mitch in 1998, which killed 10,000 people in
Honduras and Nicaragua, or turned north, harmlessly.

When Hurricane Charley formed in August, the high-altitude winds known as the
jet stream, which usually blow near the American-Canadian border, had dipped
much farther south. That created a low-pressure system over the western Gulf of
Mexico, so Hurricane Charley, instead of continuing westward, was steered to the
northeast, into Florida.

This time, with Hurricane Frances, the Bermuda high has stretched westward for
most of the past week almost to Tennessee. That prevented the storm from turning
northward.

Because the active hurricane pattern for the Atlantic will most likely continue
for decades longer, Mr. Goldenberg said disaster planners need to prepare for
years like 2004.

''This is not just a spike,'' Mr. Goldenberg said. ''This is a taste of what we
still have to come.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Andrew Shashy, a meteorologist, works on an extended weather
forecast at the National Weather Service office in Jacksonville under a monitor
showing one predicted path of Hurricane Frances. (Photo by Associated Press)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 343 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Free Press Journal (India)

                                  May 1, 2013

NASA gets close-up views of large hurricane on Saturn

BYLINE: FPJ Bureau

LENGTH: 377  words


Washington : NASA's Cassini spacecraft has provided scientists the first
close-up, visible-light views of a behemoth hurricane swirling around Saturn's
north pole, according to PTI.

In high-resolution pictures and video, scientists see the hurricane's eye is
about 2,000 kilometres wide, 20 times larger than the average hurricane eye on
Earth. Thin, bright clouds at the outer edge of the hurricane are travelling 150
meters per second. The hurricane swirls inside a large, mysterious, six-sided
weather pattern known as the hexagon.

"We did a double take when we saw this vortex because it looks so much like a
hurricane on Earth," said Andrew Ingersoll, a Cassini imaging team member at the
California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. "But there it is at Saturn, on a
much larger scale, and it is somehow getting by on the small amounts of water
vapour in Saturn's hydrogen atmosphere," said Ingersoll.

Scientists will be studying the hurricane to gain insight into hurricanes on
Earth, which feed off warm ocean water. Although there is no body of water close
to these clouds high in Saturn's atmosphere, learning how these Saturnian storms
use water vapour could tell scientists more about how terrestrial hurricanes are
generated and sustained.

Both a terrestrial hurricane and Saturn's north polar vortex have a central eye
with no clouds or very low clouds. Other similar features include high clouds
forming an eye wall, other high clouds spiralling around the eye, and a
counter-clockwise spin in the northern hemisphere.

A major difference between the hurricanes is that the one on Saturn is much
bigger than its counterparts on Earth and spins surprisingly fast. At Saturn,
the wind in the eye wall blows more than four times faster than hurricane force
winds on Earth. Unlike terrestrial hurricanes, which tend to move, the Saturnian
hurricane is locked onto the planet's north pole.

On Earth, hurricanes tend to drift northward because of the forces acting on the
fast swirls of wind as the planet rotates. The one on Saturn does not drift and
is already as far north as it can be. "The polar hurricane has nowhere else to
go, and that's likely why it's stuck at the pole," said Kunio Sayanagi, a
Cassini imaging team associate at Hampton University.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2013 Indian National Press Bombay Ltd, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 344 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              May 23, 2010 Sunday
                             South Pinellas Edition

TAMPA BAY AREA BEEN LUCKY

BYLINE: BRIAN MCCLURE, Bay News 9 Meteorologist

SECTION: 2010 TAMPA BAY HURRICANE GUIDE; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 806 words



HIGHLIGHT: The last hurricane to hit the actual bay was in October 1921, but
there have been close calls since.


Tampa was a small village when a major hurricane blew through in September 1848,
pushing a massive storm surge into Tampa Bay and flooding the entire city.

The tide rose 15 feet above normal. Water covered all the islands in Tampa Bay
and Tampa's Interbay Peninsula. Only the tops of trees could be seen near the
flooded Hillsborough River. Most structures were swept away and huge oak trees
were blown down. The massive change in topography the storm wrought rendered
navigation charts almost useless.

It may have been the strongest storm ever to strike Tampa Bay.

I say may have been because it's not easy to know for sure how many hurricanes
have hit the region, since most of Florida was uninhabited until the early 1800s
.

After the September 1848 hurricane - big storms weren't named then - another
hurricane hit a few weeks later, in October. It wasn't as big but it was strong
enough to create a 10-foot storm surge in Tampa, resulting in more flooding for
settlers still recovering from the first hurricane.

Some people left and never returned.

The last hurricane to hit Tampa Bay roared through in October 1921, causing
widespread damage and a storm surge of 10.5 feet. The center of the storm came
ashore in northern Pinellas County, near Tarpon Springs. In Tampa, water swept
across DeSoto Park and over the seawall along Bayshore Boulevard. There were
numerous reports of debris high in treetops the next day.

Many hurricanes have come close to Tampa Bay but have stayed far enough away to
spare the area from severe damage. The Labor Day storm of 1935 struck the
Florida Keys as a Category 5 (156 mph and above) but just missed Tampa Bay.
Still, it caused a storm surge of 5.3 feet.

An October 1946 hurricane hit Bradenton but lost intensity as it made landfall,
so damage was light.

In September 1950 Hurricane Easy moved on a slow path west of Tampa but pushed a
storm surge of 6.5 feet into Tampa Bay. Water washed away roads and homes close
to the waterfront along the Pinellas beaches. The storm came to a standstill
west of Tarpon Springs and then intensified dramatically, with winds up to 125
mph. Easy made a small loop just off the coast before making landfall near Cedar
Key. The storm then made another loop, reentered the Gulf of Mexico, and came
ashore again near Homosassa Springs. In northern Citrus County, the storm
dropped a record 38 inches of rain.

In September 1960, Hurricane Donna passed well east of Tampa, producing wind
gusts of 120 mph in Manatee County and 150 mph in Polk County.

In October 1968, Hurricane Gladys made landfall between Bayport and Crystal
River. Hurricane-force winds were reported from Pinellas to Citrus counties. A
storm surge of 6 to 7 feet produced extensive damage.

In 1985, Hurricane Elena provided a perfect example of how chaotic storms can
be. Elena was moving directly toward Citrus when it stopped, turned around, and
headed directly for Biloxi, Miss. Still, high seas eroded Tampa Bay area
beaches. Eight-foot waves caused two barges in Tampa Bay to break free from
their moorings and slam into the Gandy Bridge and streets flooded in low-lying
areas of Tampa, such as Davis Islands.

In recent memory the 2004 season was very busy with Hurricanes Charley, Frances,
and Jeanne all moving through the area. Polk County was hit hardest in our area,
with all of those storms sparing Tampa Bay from the worst weather.

It's common for our area to see a tropical storm in the early part of the
season.

This is because the Gulf of Mexico is usually warm and small low pressure areas
can intensify enough to produce a tropical storm. These events are not always a
bad thing because they can provide our area with beneficial rains in the early
part of summer. Large hurricanes are rare from June to the first part of July
because water temperatures are just starting to warm up in the Atlantic.

September is the peak of the hurricane season but not for the Tampa Bay area.
Our area can be hit in September but it usually comes from a weakening storm
coming across the state from the east. October is actually the most dangerous
month for Tampa Bay. The water temperatures are still warm enough to produce a
large hurricane in the Caribbean and the wind patterns are much more conducive
for a storm to move north into the Gulf and then be pushed eastward into our
coastline.

Tropical activity typically drops off dramatically in November as water
temperatures cool and wind patterns work against any developing storms.

There is a message in all this history: We've been lucky. Areas to the east,
south, and northwest of Tampa Bay all get hit more often, yet we can't predict
when the next big hurricane will strike.

* * *

Prepare for hurricane season: tampabay.com/specials/2010/reports/hurricane-guide

In the event of a hurricane: Visit tampabay.com for complete and ongoing
breaking news coverage.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The popular Gulfport Casino took a heavy hit from the hurricane
that swept through the Tampa Bay area in March 6, 1932. Hurricanes don't usually
materialize that early in the year as the ocean waters aren't warm enough to
provide them fuel.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 345 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        Tahlequah Daily Press (Oklahoma)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 18, 2008 Thursday

Hurricanes sometimes raise Cain in Northeastern Oklahoma, too

BYLINE: Josh Newton, Tahlequah Daily Press, Okla.

SECTION: LIFESTYLE

LENGTH: 566 words


Sep. 18--Oklahomans generally know how to deal with tornadoes, but this year,
many were introduced to the idea of hurricanes sweeping across the state.

By the time hurricanes hit Oklahoma from the Gulf of Mexico, they're usually not
"hurricanes," but rather tropical depressions. Although still often powerful,
wind gusts have lessened from their highest strength while on the waters of the
coast.

Once on land, hurricanes can often spawn severe weather patterns, bringing flash
flooding or tornadoes.

"With [Hurricane] Ike, if it had shifted to the west, we would have had stronger
winds, stronger rains," said Tahlequah-Cherokee County Emergency Management
Director Gary Dotson. "In my years, I can't remember ever having to fire up a
tornado warning [because of a hurricane]."

Ike, which left a path of destruction once it hit the Texas coastline last
weekend, passed over parts of Oklahoma, prompting flash flood warnings, flood
warnings and leaving signs that, indeed, hurricanes can and do affect Oklahoma.

"Official wind gusts, I believe, were 38 mph, and the official measurement was
3-1/2 inches of rain [in Cherokee County]," said Dotson.

Just days before, Hurricane Gustav also brought rain to the area. Area emergency
services personnel Kyle Kuhns, Tahlequah City Hospital EMS director; and EMT
David Carroll, were sent to Louisiana to assist the victims of that hurricane,
while other locals were placed on standby.

Dotson said Oklahoma has been affected by hurricanes largely due to evacuations
from areas along the coast. Residents from those areas poured into Oklahoma
during and after Hurricane Katrina's destruction, many of them in or near
Cherokee County. Local emergency services personnel were called on in 2005 to
help the victims of a ravaged New Orleans.

"Ever since the lesson learned in Katrina, they've evacuated earlier," said
Dotson.

Before Gustav hit earlier this month, residents from Louisiana and some from
Texas moved north, trying to beat the storm's path. Some took shelter in
Oklahoma City.

"The way FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency] is set up, neighboring
states are responsible for providing assistance," said Dotson.

Dotson is part of a disaster task force, and area coordinators contact members
to set up teams for helping during hurricanes and other natural disasters.

"We know a week or two ahead of time if we're going to send anybody," he said.

In over 20 years as a part of the local EM, Dotson can recall about five
hurricanes that have noticeably affected Oklahoma.

The Climate Prediction Center's 2008 Atlantic Hurricane Season Outlook Summary
indicates an "85 percent probability of an above-normal hurricane season... ."
The CPC estimated a 67 percent probability for 14-18 named storms and seven to
10 hurricanes, three to six of which could be major hurricanes, between June and
November.

The Atlantic hurricane region defined by the CPC includes the northern Atlantic
Ocean, the Caribbean Sea, and the Gulf of Mexico.

To see more of the Tahlequah Daily Press or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.tahlequahdailypress.com/. Copyright (c) 2008, Tahlequah Daily Press,
Okla. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20080918-TD-Hurricanes-sometimes-raise-Cain-in-Northeastern-Oklahoma-too-0918

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TD


                                 Copyright 2008


                          FOCUS - 346 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                          September 10, 2011 Saturday

Many storms, yet few pack wallop

BYLINE: KATE SPINNER

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 642 words


IN THE SEASON: Thus far, only two have intensified enough to be hurricanes

Sept. 10 rarely passes without at least one tropical storm or hurricane cruising
through the Atlantic. And today -- the pinnacle of the hurricane season -- there
are three.

Nate, the season's 14th storm, is forecast to become a hurricane this afternoon
in the southern Gulf of Mexico; Maria is approaching the Leeward Islands as a
tropical storm and Hurricane Katia is merging with a cold front in the chilly
waters near Newfoundland.

But even though 2011 has already brought more storms in three months than an
average six-month hurricane season, by Friday only two had grown into
hurricanes.

Although warm tropical seas are powering up plenty of storms, the atmosphere has
been too dry and stable to keep most of them going.

The recent development of La Niña, a hurricane-boosting weather pattern caused
by cooler seas in the Pacific, may also be causing more storms to emerge farther
north, where they do not have much chance to strengthen.

Scientists say storms should start to get stronger over the next couple of
weeks. Historically, the most active part of a season runs from late August
through the third week of September. Sept. 10 is the busiest day, on average.

Hurricane season ends Nov. 30.

Warm seas and relaxed west to east winds should lead to more storms over the
coming weeks. At least one new tropical storm may form in the Atlantic next
week, according to the latest outlook from the Climate Prediction Center.

By numbers alone, the Atlantic this year almost matches 2005 -- the busiest
hurricane season. At 14 storms, so far, it is one short of that year's pace.

But many of the 15 storms that formed by this time in 2005 were much stronger.
Eight were hurricanes, including deadly Katrina. The total wind power those
storms produced was roughly double the power generated by this year's storms.

But it is still early.

"There is plenty that can happen," said Ryan Maue, a hurricane scientist whose
research focuses on global hurricane activity.

The 2011 hurricane season so far still ranks above average, even if it does not
quite rival 2005. The amount of wind energy produced is about one-third higher
than normal and on par with this time last year -- the third-busiest season.

By this time last year, nine storms had formed, but four were hurricanes.

A typical hurricane year brings 11 named storms, six of which become hurricanes.
Two of those hurricanes typically rank as major storms, with winds stronger than
110 mph.

This year has already met the average for major storms, with nearly three months
to go. Irene became a Category 3, topping out at 120 mph, and Katia became a
Category 4 for a few hours, with 135 mph winds.

Nate is forecast to become a Category 2 hurricane, with maximum winds of 100
mph, before hitting Mexico.

Atmospheric conditions help explain why the other 11 storms this year did not
become hurricanes.

Plenty of robust thunderstorms have rolled off the African continent into the
unusually warm Atlantic. While the seas are warm enough to make those storms
stronger and the lower atmosphere moist enough to support them, higher in the
sky conditions are less favorable.

The middle of the atmosphere is drier than normal, said Phil Klotzbach, a
research scientist with Colorado State University's Tropical Meteorology
Project. That dryness caps storm activity and makes the atmosphere too stable to
support big hurricanes.

La Niña, which began to take hold in August, is another factor, Maue said.
During La Niña years, more storms tend to form farther north, where frontal
systems, wind shear, drier air and cooler seas take a toll.

Six storms -- Bret, Emily, Jose, Gert, Cindy and Franklin -- fit that pattern.

Three other storms -- Harvey, Don and Lee -- might have reached hurricane
strength had they not developed so close to land, Maue noted.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 347 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                              May 22, 2012 Tuesday

For GOP convention, a worst-case scenario

BYLINE: LLOYD DUNKELBERGER

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1078 words


HURRICANE: Odds are low, but emergency managers get ready just in case

TALLAHASSEE - For a hypothetical hurricane, Gispert has the potential to cause a
lot of chaos.

Led by Florida's Division of Emergency Management, state and local workers began
a four-day drill on Monday reacting to the possibility of a major hurricane
striking the Tampa Bay region during the Republican National Convention the last
week of August.

The plan is to prepare for the worst, but hope for the best - a continuation of
the six-year run without a hurricane strike on Florida, following the
multi-storm seasons of 2004 and 2005.

But holding a political convention at the peak of Florida's annual hurricane
season presents both meteorological and political risks. It is something that
neither party has chanced since 1972, when both the Republicans and Democrats
held their national conventions in Miami Beach.

State, local and federal officials say they are prepared for the convergence of
a hurricane and the GOP convention.

Republicans are planning "for every potential contingency - including those
related to weather - and to ensure the health and safety of convention
delegates, guests and visitors, and the Tampa Bay community at large," James
Davis, a spokesman for the GOP convention, said in a statement.

Bryan Koon, director of Florida's Division of Emergency Management, which is
conducting the Hurricane Gispert drill, said the exercise - named after a
retired Hillsborough County emergency official - was designed to prepare the
system for a worst-case scenario.

"The probability is low but the consequences are tremendous," Koon said. "That's
a very challenging scenario, but we want to consider the possibility of that
occurring."

A hurricane is just one of the scenarios that the emergency managers could face
at the national convention.

But a direct hit from a hurricane - which has not occurred since 1921 in Tampa -
could be particularly devastating in the most vulnerable metro region in the
state for wind-driven storm surge.

Surge there can raise the seas as much as 17 feet above ground - meaning 17-feet
deep with crashing waves on top. Some areas could see water surging three miles
inland.

The Tampa Bay Times Forum, where the convention will be held, is in an area that
would have to be evacuated if winds exceed 96 mph.

Evacuating the Tampa Bay metro region has long been a nightmare for disaster
planners, who, in addition to dealing with the regular population, must
contemplate an estimated 70,000 additional visitors, delegates and journalists
at the convention.

On the positive side, forecasters are predicting an average to below-average
year for hurricane activity, following last year's busy season.

'Very low' chance

of major hurricane

Most August hurricanes in Florida move from the east to the west, meaning Tampa
is not a likely target - though there have been exceptions, including Hurricane
Charley, a Category 4 storm that struck south of Tampa Bay, on Aug. 13, 2004.

Jill Trepanier, who just earned her doctorate in geography from Florida State
University and has studied hurricane patterns in Florida, rated the chances of a
direct strike, particularly from a major hurricane, during the convention as
"very low."

Her research showed that since 1851, the general vicinity of Tampa - within a
100-kilometer radius - has never been struck by a Category 4 or 5 hurricane. She
found only 20 hurricane events in that more than 160-year period, with half
being Category 1 and only four being Category 3.

"In our record, hurricane winds in Tampa have only been seen with 20 events, and
many of those were not direct hits, but were instead pass-bys in the ocean or
crossovers from the eastern edge of the peninsula," she said.

But even without a direct hit, Florida officials, political leaders and
emergency workers may have to deal with another more likely scenario: a strike
elsewhere in the state during August.

Category 5 Hurricane Andrew hit Miami-Dade County with devastating consequences
on Aug. 24, 1992. Overall, Trepanier, whose dissertation was on "Statistical
Models of Extreme Hurricane Risk in the North Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico," said
her research showed the annual probability of a hurricane hitting Florida during
the June-November season was 46 percent, based on historical records.

"This means there is about a 50-50 chance one will strike every year," she said.

Hurricanes have impacted past political conventions, even when they were more
than 1,000 miles away.

In 2004, Gov. Jeb Bush did not attend the Republican National Convention in New
York - where his brother was being nominated for a second term - because he was
in Florida dealing with the aftermath of Charley.

Many other state officials also stayed behind or limited their convention
attendance.

The storms and the response to them have increased in political importance since
then - most notably with the after Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans in 2005.

The Democrats this year face their own hurricane risk in North Carolina, where
they will hold their convention a week after the GOP gathering in Tampa.

Steve Schale, who ran Barack Obama's 2008 campaign in Florida, said historically
hurricanes in Florida have brought the state together more than dividing it.

"I don't foresee it turning into any sort of partisan political thing," Scale
said. "Response to hurricanes in Florida have been what's best for the people
who are impacted - not what's best for one political party or another."

Susan MacManus, a political scientist at the University of South Florida in
Tampa, said the risk of a hurricane was weighed when Tampa sought the convention
site.

"It was a gamble that the party was willing to make," MacManus said. "It has the
potential to disrupt all of the euphoria of a convention, the balloon drops and
final speeches and all of that."

Along with her mother, MacManus co-authored a book of pioneering families in the
Tampa Bay region, with many of those early settlers recalling the 1921
hurricane.

"It was terrible," she said. "A hurricane is a no-win situation no matter how
you cut it - politically, socially, culturally, you name it."

But MacManus said she remains optimistic that Florida can avoid a major storm
during that period.

"Every Floridian and certainly every Tampan is holding their breath, crossing
their fingers and pulling out the rabbit's foot, doing whatever they can do to
ward it off - that's what they're doing."

Staff writer Kate Spinner contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Tampa Bay Forum, site of the Republican National Convention, would
be evacuated if winds exceed 96 mph. HERALD-TRIBUNE ARCHIVE/2006 Michael
Whitehead, right, state mass care coordinator with the State Emergency Response
Team, speaks during a training exercise at the State Emergency Operations Center
Monday. PHOTO BY COLIN HACKLEY State Emergency Response Team leaders work Monday
during "Hurricane Gispert," a training exercise at the State Emergency
Operations Center in Tallahassee. The exercise simulated a Category 4 hurricane
striking Tampa during the Republican National Convention. PHOTO BY COLIN HACKLEY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 348 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             August 7, 2015 Friday

NOAA: 90 percent chance of quiet season | But damaging storms are still
possible, forecasters say.

BYLINE: Harold Bubil

SECTION: A; FL News; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 542 words


HURRICANE OUTLOOK

The summer's relatively quiet hurricane season is likely to linger, said Gerry
Bell, lead hurricane forecaster for NOAA's Climate Prediction Center in College
Park, Maryland.

With no hurricanes and little to investigate in the way of tropical waves so far
this year, NOAA released its updated Atlantic Hurricane Season outlook Thursday.
It calls for a 90 percent chance of a below-normal hurricane season, up from the
70 percent predicted in late May, just before the season began June 1.

Bell predicted 6 to 10 named storms through Nov. 30, the end of hurricane
season. There have been three tropical storms of limited impact. The updated
forecast said 1 to 4 of the remaining 7 storms - if they occur - are likely to
become hurricanes, with no more than 1 major hurricane.

In a normal year, he noted, the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico see 12 tropical
storms, six hurricanes and three major hurricanes.

Bell said El Nino, the large area of warm surface water in the Pacific Ocean off
South America, is sending upper-level winds eastward across the Atlantic. El
Nino also causes a sinking motion in the atmosphere. This "double whammy" is
inhibiting the formation of hurricanes off the western coast of Africa by
shearing the tops of storm clouds before they can coalesce into a tropical
storm, Bell said.

"El Nino has strengthened, as we predicted in May," he added. "El Nino is
expected to continue through the season, and is already affecting wind and
rainfall patterns throughout the global tropics."

On top of that, he said, "atmospheric conditions are already exceptionally
nonconducive to tropical storm and hurricane formation. These conditions include
strong vertical wind shear and enhanced sinking motion in the atmosphere across
the Atlantic and Caribbean."

A third factor working against hurricane formation is below-average sea-surface
temperatures, "much cooler than the rest of the global tropics. Cooler sea
surface temperatures reduce the ability of storms to form and gain strength over
the Atlantic," Bell said.

But forecasters note that the historically destructive Hurricane Andrew, which
hit Dade County in 1992, was the first hurricane of the season and made landfall
Aug. 24. "We are not expecting the season to be dead," Bell said, "so the threat
is there for the coastal U.S. You need to be prepared. A good website for
preparedness information is Ready.gov."

In a call with reporters, Bell was asked if the trend is toward decades of
lesser storm activity, a phenomenon known as the Atlantic Multi-Decadal
Oscillation. Activity has been high since 1995.

"For a low-activity era," he said, "we would have a cooler Atlantic for quite a
while. This year it is linked to El Nino.

"We don't look at the number of hurricanes to determine whether an era is
active. We look at the atmospheric and oceanic conditions. The last two years,
the reduced hurricane activity was caused by middle-latitude weather patterns
that really were not linked to this longer-term climate signal. This year it is
linked to El Nino.

"These three years are not linked to the change in climate patterns that
controls these periods for decades at a time. It is still not clear if we are
getting out of the high-activity era, or if this is a short blip."

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: HURRICANE OUTLOOK The summer's relatively quiet hurricane season is
likely to linger, said Gerry Bell, lead hurricane forecaster for NOAA's Climate
Prediction Center in College Park, Maryland. With no hurricanes and little to
investigate in the way of tropical waves so far this year, NOAA released its
updated Atlantic Hurricane Season outlook Thursday. It calls for a 90 percent
chance of a below-normal hurricane season, up from the 70 percent predicted in
late May, just before the season began June 1.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 349 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                              May 30, 2016 Monday

Region has a history of dodging hurricanes | But how about the state? Let's test
your knowledge

BYLINE: Harold Bubil

SECTION: A; FL News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1521 words


HURRICANE QUIZ

A map of Florida's hurricane landfalls over the past 50 years shows a gap over
Sarasota and Manatee counties.

So when a Sarasotan brags about his house having survived "all the hurricanes,"
ask for specifics. Sarasota County's last direct hit by the eye of a hurricane
was in 1944, a Category 3 cyclone that hit north Casey Key and Osprey. That was
the only one since 1842, and the county's only "major" hurricane in recorded
history, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

The eye of the famous October 1921 storm that swamped Sarasota's then-seedy
bayfront with a storm surge was more than 100 miles west of the city when it
passed and made landfall around Tarpon Springs.

It illustrates the lesson that hurricanes are large and can cause significant
damage and loss of life far from where the eye comes ashore.

The region has had dozens of near-misses, including at least a dozen instances
of hurricane-force winds, according to the website HurricaneCity.com. But that
has happened only twice since 1960, the last being the passing of Hurricane Alma
in the Gulf in 1966.

In 1946, the eye of an unnamed Category 1 storm passed over northern Longboat
Key and just west of downtown Bradenton.

For whatever reason, the Sarasota-Manatee area has had a long streak of good
fortune when it comes to hurricanes. Including the two hurricanes, 10 tropical
storms and three tropical depressions have directly hit either of the two
counties since 1842, and damaged coastal areas, but nothing on the scale of
Hurricane Charley's devastation in Charlotte and DeSoto counties in 2004.

How many of you have had first-hand experience with that?

Still, Florida is notorious for its hurricane history, of which we will test
your knowledge in this quiz:

1. The Galveston Hurricane of 1900 was the deadliest weather disaster in U.S.
history with more than 6,000 deaths, and as many as 12,000, most from storm
surge. What was the second-deadliest hurricane?

a. Hurricane Katrina

b. The Great Miami Hurricane

c. The San Felipe Hurricane

d. Hurricane Andrew

2. Which hurricane, in essence, ended the Florida Land Boom?

a. Ivan

b. "Great Miami"

c. Wilma

3. Which hurricane dramatically raised property insurance rates and prompted
governments across the state to stiffen their building codes?

a. Charley

b. Betsy

c. Andrew

d. Katrina

4. Which storm, in "normalized damage," was the costliest hurricane (in dollars)
in U.S. history?

a. Andrew

b. "Great Miami"

c. Floyd

d. The Long Island Express

5. From this list, choose the four hurricanes that crisscrossed Florida in 2004,
giving rise to the expression "hurricane fatigue."

a.Charley

b. Wilma

c. Frances

d.Camille

e. Betsy

f. Ivan

g. Ignatius

h. Jeanne

6. How long has it been, in hurricane seasons, since Florida received a direct
hit from a hurricane?

a. 10

b. 5

c. 12

d. 9

7. This storm in 1960 stands out in the memory of longtime Floridians because it
covered nearly the entire peninsula with hurricane-force winds.

a. Camille

b. Betsy

c. Gladys

d. Donna

8. This hurricane in 1985 could not make up its mind and circled around in the
northeastern Gulf of Mexico, swamping Sarasota's bayfront marina with a minor
storm surge.

a. Elena

b. Floyd

c. Hugo

d. Kate

9. A legendary hurricane pulled the water out of the Manatee River and drowned a
pioneer and his horse when it flowed back in. This hurricane happened in which
decade?

a. 1920s

b. 1840s

c. 1910s

d. 1880s

10. More than 400 people, including hundreds of World War I veterans, drowned
when the Florida Keys were inundated by a hurricane storm surge in 1935. With
which holiday is this hurricane associated?

a. Memorial Day

b. Independence Day

c. Labor Day

d. Thanksgiving Day

Answers

1. c. The San Felipe Hurricane is also known as the Okeechobee Hurricane. In
1928, it passed over the lake and sent a storm surge of 20 feet over a small
earthen levee and into the towns on its southern shore, including Pahokee, South
Bay and Belle Glade. At least 1,800, and as many as 2,500, people died. Many
were migrant farm workers and could not be identified. In response, the state
and federal governments built a complex dike system around the lake in stages
from the 1930s to the 1960s.

2. b. The Great Miami Hurricane of September 1926 was the final nail in the
coffin for a real estate boom that had been deflating for months. Making
landfall south of Miami, the "right" side of the storm devastated Miami Beach
and killed nearly 400 people. Florida did not need the bad press in northern
newspapers, and the real estate speculators, developers and investors went
broke, giving Florida a head start on the Great Depression.

3. a. Andrew hit Homestead, south of Miami, on Aug. 24, 1992, and caused about
$26 billion in damage. Insurance rates skyrocketed, and the Florida Legislature
created insurance funds to make up for the 11 overexposed insurance companies
that went out of business because of Andrew-related claims. Building scientists
determined that well-built houses survived while weakly constructed houses blew
apart. A new statewide building code, passed in 1998, required the installation
of steel fasteners to tie roofs and walls to foundations, better roofing
materials, the bracing of gable ends and either impact-resistant windows or
shutters to protect the envelope of new houses. Manufacturers of some building
materials now brag that their products are "Miami-Dade certified."

4. b. Great Miami. Although the real estate boom had built up Miami for several
years, there was nowhere near the density and amount of development in Dade
County that exists today. Experts use "normalized damage" analyses to estimate
the amount of damage if a particular hurricane struck the same area today,
accounting for inflation, population growth and wealth concentration. In
normalized dollars, the Great Miami Hurricane, which was estimated to have
caused $100 million in damage in 1926, would cause at least $164.8 billion in
losses today, according to NOAA.

5. Charley, Frances, Jeanne and Ivan. Frances and Jeanne and Charley each passed
over Bartow in Polk County within 44 days of each other in September 2004. Ivan
walloped Penscacola.

6. a. After a decade without hurricanes, Floridians are at risk of "hurricane
complacency," says director Rick Knabb of the National Hurricane Center. "It
only takes one" to cause you a lot of pain, so be prepared.

7. d. Hurricane Donna was tracked by Sarasota schoolchildren, most of whom were
born in northern states, after it formed near the Cape Verde islands off Africa
in late August. Barreling westward at 20 mph, it reached Category 5 strength
before diminishing to Category 4. On Sept. 10, it struck Marathon in the Florida
Keys, and, as coastal communities from Tampa southward prepared for the worst,
made landfall south of Naples. This large storm swept up the interior of the
peninsula, hitting Arcadia directly and delivering 90 mph winds to Sarasota.
But, the Herald-Tribune reported in a headline, "This Area Spared Main Blow."
Half the state's grapefruit crop was destroyed, and all damages reached $350
million in value.

8. a. From Aug. 28 to Sept. 4, 1985, Hurricane Elena treated forecasters the way
Donald Trump has treated political pundits - constantly deviating from the
predicted path. First it was supposed to hit the central Gulf Coast. Then it
turned eastward, and stalled about 50 miles west of Cedar Key. For two days. It
looped a bit, and the counterclockwise winds had plenty of time to push water
into harbors in Southwest and West Central Florida. It eventually made landfall
in Mississippi and caused $1.3 billion in damage, but its frustrating twists and
turns prompted the largest evacuation in U.S. history up to that time.

9. b. In 1846, a strong hurricane known as the San Francisco de Borja hurricane
passed just off the coast and sucked the water out of the Manatee River,
according to legend and historical accounts. The unfortunate pioneer was
plantation owner Hector Braden, who was found, according to legend, still
upright on the horse and clutching the reins. Perhaps he tried to cross the
river during the eye of the storm and his horse became stuck.

10. c. Labor Day. There is no legend here. This storm is considered the most
intense hurricane ever to hit the nation, by wind speed and central pressure at
landfall, and was the first of three Cat-5 storms to hit the U.S. mainland in
the 20th century (Camille, 1969, and Andrew, 1992). With 185 mph winds, a storm
surge of 18 feet and a barometric pressure of just 892 millibars (Andrew was 922
mb, Donna and the Great Miami 930 mb), it is no wonder that it had the power to
knock a train off its track near Islamorada in the Florida Keys. Unfortunately,
that train, dispatched from Miami, was carrying World War I veterans who were
working on the Overseas Highway. Hundreds of veterans died in the storm surge.
Other victims were blasted by wind-blown sand. In sweltering heat, the
decomposing bodies of the dead were retrieved from the mangroves and had to be
burned or hastily buried in whatever soft ground could be found. It tracked
north in the Gulf, passing about 20 miles west of Lido Key.

(FACT BOX AVAILABLE ON PDF)

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: In this August 15, 2004, file photo, President George W. Bush, aboard
Marine One, flies over Charlotte County, which was hammered by Hurricane
Charley. H-T ARCHIVE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 350 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Telegraph-Journal (New Brunswick)

                              May 23, 2014 Friday

Average to below-average hurricane season predicted

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 332 words


HALIFAX * The Canadian Hurricane Centre says residents in Eastern Canada can
expect an average or below-average level of hurricane activity this year.

Hurricane season runs from June to November, but the centre's director says
tropical storms have been known to form in the North Atlantic in May.

Chris Fogarty says the El Nino effect typically suppresses the formation of
tropical storms.

However, Fogarty says that regardless of the seasonal forecast, Canadians should
prepare for heavy weather.

He says one or two tropical storms typically affect the Canadian land mass every
year, regardless of the level of hurricane activity over the ocean.

Fogarty says last year was a particularly light hurricane season, but two
tropical storms - Andrea in June and Gabrielle in September - prompted the
hurricane centre to issue bulletins.

The forecast in Canada mirrors what U.S. federal forecasters said Thursday as
they expect it to be a slower-than-usual Atlantic hurricane season, also citing
an expected El Nino.

The El Nino, which warms part of the Pacific every few years and changes rain
and temperature patterns around the world, will likely reduce the number and
intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration said in New York City.

Officials in the United States expect about eight to 13 named tropical storms
and three to six hurricanes. Just one or two major hurricanes with winds over
177 kilometres an hour are forecast.

Forecasters in the U.S. got it wrong last year when they predicted an unusually
busy hurricane season. There were just 13 named storms and two hurricanes,
Umberto and Ingrid, both of which were Category 1, the lowest on the scale that
measures hurricanes by wind speed. There were no major hurricanes.

In 2012, storm surge was devastating to the New York area when Superstorm Sandy
slammed the East coast, killing 147 people and causing US$50 billion in damage.
Sandy lost hurricane status when it made landfall in New Jersey.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 The Telegraph Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 351 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                           October 20, 2005 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

Wilma morphs from meek to monstrous

BYLINE: MIKE TONER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 704 words


Hurricane Wilma on Wednesday became the most intense Atlantic hurricane ever
recorded, growing with astonishing speed from a so-so storm in a very long
season to a Category 5 with sustained winds of 175 mph.

Even though the storm was downgraded to a Category 4 late Wednesday, veteran
hurricane forecasters were stunned by the speed at which the central pressure of
the season's 21st named storm --- and 12th hurricane --- plunged to levels never
before seen in the Atlantic basin.

"If this was an ordinary hurricane season, this might be the event of the year,"
said National Hurricane Center Director Max Mayfield.

The outlook for the next few days is uncertain. Some computer models predict
landfall on the Yucatan Peninsula today or Friday. Others call for Wilma to turn
sharply to the northeast, crossing the Florida Keys and landing along Florida's
southwest coast over the weekend, prompting Floridians on Wednesday to begin
preparing to evacuate and the White House to announce it was monitoring the
storm.

Wilma could weaken because the course toward Florida would carry the storm over
water at least two degrees cooler than where it was spawned. And as it moves
northward, it will encounter upper-altitude winds that could further weaken it.

"Conditions will be less favorable," National Hurricane Center specialist Stacy
Stewart said. "But there's still plenty of opportunity for this storm to make
landfall as a Category 3 or even a Category 4 storm."

Still, in a hurricane season already the most active and destructive on record,
the sudden drop in Wilma's central pressure --- and the corresponding jump in
wind speeds as it churned through the Caribbean --- lent a new element of
notoriety.

On Tuesday, a hurricane hunter plane investigating Wilma had found what was
barely a hurricane, with sustained winds of around 80 mph and a central pressure
of 970 millibars. The storm warranted watching, but didn't appear to be anything
to get excited about.

By dawn Wednesday, it had gusts in excess of 200 mph and a central pressure of
882 millibars --- lower than any forecasters had measured before in an Atlantic
storm and surpassing the most destructive hurricanes on record, including
mega-disaster makers like Katrina, Andrew (1992) and Camille (1969).

Although Wilma's sustained winds had slowed to 160 mph by later Wednesday,
National Hurricane Center experts said the spike in intensity was the fastest
strengthening of a storm ever witnessed.

Because wind speeds are highly variable and often hard to measure directly,
barometric pressure is the gauge experts usually use to determine a hurricane's
intensity.

Surrounding air rushes to fill an area of low pressure, so the speed of
hurricane winds is closely related to the air pressure in the eye of the storm.

Normal sea surface pressure is 1,013 millibars. On Wednesday morning, Wilma's
central pressure was 882 millibars, roughly equivalent to the air pressure at
3,000 feet above sea level.

A lower air pressure had been recorded in only one other tropical cyclone in
history --- Typhoon Tip, which formed in the Northwest Pacific in 1979. Tip,
which had sustained winds up to 190 mph, had a central pressure of 870
millibars.

Wilma also provides living proof that size isn't the only thing that can make a
mighty hurricane.

"Every tropical cyclone has the potential to become a Category 5 hurricane,"
Stewart said. "It doesn't happen that often because the necessary ingredients
--- warm water, the absence of wind shear and no dry air getting in --- usually
aren't all in place at the same time."

Wilma had it all. As it formed from a tropical depression in the Caribbean south
of Cuba, sea surface temperatures were running at least 2 degrees above normal
--- optimal conditions for rapid strengthening.

Equally important, high-altitude winds that could shear off the top of a
developing storm were well to the north --- courtesy of a high-pressure area
that brought cool, clear autumn weather to the Southeast during the past week.

And Stewart said that by Wednesday morning, Wilma had something else going for
it --- an unusually small eye, only about five miles in diameter, which made the
storm extremely efficient in its uptake of energy from the Caribbean waters.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: MICHEL FORTIER / Associated PressMark Bragg pushes a cart with
plywood and his son Zachary, 1, while buying hurricane supplies Wednesday in
Bonita Springs, Fla., where Hurricane Wilma poses a "significant threat."
Graphic: MOST INTENSE ATLANTIC/GULF HURRICANES.............Lowest pressure
Hurricane....(millibars)......Year....LandfallWilma........882 mb
..........2005....?Gilbert......888 mb ..........1988....Jamaica,
YucatanUnnamed......892 mb ..........1935....Florida KeysAllen........899 mb
..........1980....TexasKatrina......902 mb
..........2005....Louisiana/AlabamaCamille......909 mb
..........1969....MississippiAndrew ......922 mb ..........1992....Florida
Map: Associated PressHURRICANE WILMAMap shows Hurricane Wilma's projected path
and position as of 11 p.m. Wednesday.Sources: NOAA, Weather Underground, ESRI

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 352 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                          September 10, 2008 Wednesday
                                  Main Edition

HURRICANE SEASON: Warming revs into action

BYLINE: J. MARSHALL SHEPHERD; For the Journal-Constitution

SECTION: @ISSUE; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 673 words


As I write this, tropical storms and hurricanes are lined up across the Atlantic
Ocean like aircraft on final approach to Hartsfield-Jackson International
Airport. Tropical Storm Fay produced prodigious rainfall, and Hurricane Gustav
prompted the largest evacuation in Louisiana's history. With six to eight weeks
left in the hurricane season, storm activity has reignited a debate that began
after the 2005 hurricane season on whether global warming is fueling stronger or
more numerous hurricanes.

The 2007 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change stated that "warming of the
climate system is unequivocal." Unlike previous reports that treaded carefully
on the side of scientific caution, the nonpartisan panel of scientists
established a strong degree of certainty in the most recent report on climate
change. Special interest groups and provocative media coverage continue to
suggest a widespread skepticism among climate scientists that does not exist.

A warmer atmosphere and ocean impact global weather patterns. This will almost
certainly result in global changes in floods, droughts and hurricanes. Such
events have profound implications for agricultural productivity, energy supply,
human health and the economy.

At the 2008 Georgia Climate Summit in May, Peter Webster of Georgia Tech noted a
link between warmer ocean temperatures after 1970 and increased hurricane
activity. Webster also highlighted recent findings that future hurricanes will
have stronger winds and produce more rainfall.

Research led by James Elsner of Florida State University found that since 1981
winds have become stronger in the strongest hurricanes.

Bill Lau and colleagues at NASA, presenting findings at the American
Meteorological Society's annual meeting, showed that major hurricanes, greater
than a category 3, are producing more rainfall.

Along with colleagues at UGA, I conducted research showing that major hurricanes
produce the most rainfall at or near landfall, although weaker storms contribute
more to seasonal totals. Inland freshwater flooding is often a greater safety
threat than high winds and storm surge.

Because of natural cycles, it is often difficult to establish if these storms
are increasing over time. Indeed, leading National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration scientists continue to note that we have been in an active
hurricane phase since the mid-1990s. Atmospheric phenomena, such as El Nino and
dust blowing over the Atlantic Ocean from Africa, may affect storm activity.

But hurricanes are like car engines, and their fuel supply is warm water. In a
warmed climate, hurricanes are running on what might be considered high-octane
gasoline, rather than regular. Elsner estimated that every 1-degree (Celsius)
increase in ocean temperature causes a 31 percent rise in the number of category
4 and 5 hurricanes. Some climate models project that sea surface temperatures
could rise 2 to 3 degrees (Celsius) by the year 2100.

A few cautionary notes: First, no individual study should be considered to be
the final word. Second, a lack of hurricane data before 1900 reduces our ability
for meaningful comparisons with the most recent 30-year period. Third, global
warming causes other changes in jet stream and wind patterns. Do such changes
enhance or suppress the hurricanes and tropical storms? We have very little
understanding of how African dust affects hurricanes. New aircraft, satellite
and ocean observations of heat content, dust and winds will help tremendously
here.

Finally, it's shortsighted to only study storms affecting the United States. In
a so-called "quiet" year such as 2006, when fewer storms made landfall here,
many other storms raged in the Atlantic and in other ocean basins around the
world.

But make no mistake: As global temperatures rise, we'll be on hurricane watch
for decades to come.

* Dr. J. Marshall Shepherd is associate professor and meteorologist in the
geography department at the University of Georgia. Dr. Thomas L. Mote, a UGA
climatologist and professor of geography, also contributed.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2008 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 353 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                            September 8, 2008 Monday

Hurricane claimed 4,000 lives in 1775

BYLINE: Charles Perry

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 416  words


With the active hurricane season this year, most recently featuring Hurricane
Hanna. Atlantic Canadians have had a first-hand look at the force from just the
remnants of these tropical storms.

But the Atlantic region has seen more than just the remnants of tropical storms.

It has experienced large casualty numbers and tremendous property damage after
being hit by major hurricanes over the years, including Juan which made a direct
hit on Halifax a few years ago, and the infamous Escuminac Hurricane in 1959.

Eight people died as result of the Halifax hurricane and 35 persons perished in
the Escuminac disaster.

But neither of them remotely could be compared to the Newfoundland Hurricane
(sometimes called the Independence Hurricane) of 1775. The storm, in quick
order, claimed an astounding 4,000 lives.

Tomorrow is the 233rd anniversary of what could only be termed a catastrophe of
tremendous magnitude.

On Sept. 9, 1775, the Independence Hurricane struck the eastern coast of
Newfoundland with powerful winds and torrential rainfall, creating towering
storm surges. Some of the surges reportedly reached heights of six to nine
metres (20 to 30 feet).

Approximately 4,000 sailors, most of them from England and Ireland, were
reported to have been drowned in the raging waters created by the hurricane.

In one outport alone, 300 squid fishermen were killed. All 300 were later buried
in a mass grave.

Losses from the hurricane also included two armed schooners of the Royal Navy,
which were on the Grand Banks in Newfoundland to enforce British fishing rights.

"Newfoundland fisheries received a very severe stroke from the violence of the
wind which almost swept everything before it," the colonel governor Richard Duff
wrote shortly after the hurricane struck.

"A considerable number of boats with their crews have been totally lost (and)
several vessels wrecked on the shores," he added.

"Ocean levels rose to heights scarcely ever known before and caused great
devastation," reported Duff.

The Newfoundland Hurricane was Atlantic Canada's first recorded hurricane,
Canada's most tragic natural disaster in terms of lives lost and by far, the
deadliest hurricane to ever hit the country. In fact, it was the eighth
deadliest hurricane reported anywhere in the world.

A few days earlier (Aug. 29, 1775), reports show the same hurricane was
responsible for at least 163 people being killed in Virginia before moving up
the eastern coastline toward Atlantic Canada.

* Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 354 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                            September 8, 2008 Monday

Hurricane claimed 4,000 lives in 1775

BYLINE: Charles Perry

SECTION: NEWS;NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 416  words


With the active hurricane season this year, most recently featuring Hurricane
Hanna. Atlantic Canadians have had a first-hand look at the force from just the
remnants of these tropical storms.

But the Atlantic region has seen more than just the remnants of tropical storms.

It has experienced large casualty numbers and tremendous property damage after
being hit by major hurricanes over the years, including Juan which made a direct
hit on Halifax a few years ago, and the infamous Escuminac Hurricane in 1959.

Eight people died as result of the Halifax hurricane and 35 persons perished in
the Escuminac disaster.

But neither of them remotely could be compared to the Newfoundland Hurricane
(sometimes called the Independence Hurricane) of 1775. The storm, in quick
order, claimed an astounding 4,000 lives.

Tomorrow is the 233rd anniversary of what could only be termed a catastrophe of
tremendous magnitude.

On Sept. 9, 1775, the Independence Hurricane struck the eastern coast of
Newfoundland with powerful winds and torrential rainfall, creating towering
storm surges. Some of the surges reportedly reached heights of six to nine
metres (20 to 30 feet).

Approximately 4,000 sailors, most of them from England and Ireland, were
reported to have been drowned in the raging waters created by the hurricane.

In one outport alone, 300 squid fishermen were killed. All 300 were later buried
in a mass grave.

Losses from the hurricane also included two armed schooners of the Royal Navy,
which were on the Grand Banks in Newfoundland to enforce British fishing rights.

"Newfoundland fisheries received a very severe stroke from the violence of the
wind which almost swept everything before it," the colonel governor Richard Duff
wrote shortly after the hurricane struck.

"A considerable number of boats with their crews have been totally lost (and)
several vessels wrecked on the shores," he added.

"Ocean levels rose to heights scarcely ever known before and caused great
devastation," reported Duff.

The Newfoundland Hurricane was Atlantic Canada's first recorded hurricane,
Canada's most tragic natural disaster in terms of lives lost and by far, the
deadliest hurricane to ever hit the country. In fact, it was the eighth
deadliest hurricane reported anywhere in the world.

A few days earlier (Aug. 29, 1775), reports show the same hurricane was
responsible for at least 163 people being killed in Virginia before moving up
the eastern coastline toward Atlantic Canada.

* Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 355 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                           November 30, 2010 Tuesday

Atlantic sees active hurricane season; n There were 19 named storms and 12
hurricanes

BYLINE:

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 546  words


With the 2010 hurricane season officially ending today, experts look back on
what has been a very active year for Atlantic-based hurricanes.

There have been 19 named storms this year, 12 of which developed into
hurricanes, said Chris Fogarty of Halifax, manager of the Canadian Hurricane
Centre.

He noted that five of the 12 - Danielle, Earl, Igor, Julia and Karl -
strengthened into major hurricanes. To be designated a name, a disturbance has
to reach tropical storm status, the level just below that of a hurricane.

Probably the most severe named storm hitting Atlantic Canada this year, said
Fogarty, was Hurricane Igor, which devastated much of Newfoundland, particularly
the Burin Peninsula. He said it caused one death and massive amounts of property
damage.

Igor also resulted in large-scale power outages and washed out a number of roads
in Newfoundland, leaving hundreds of people stranded, said the manager of the
Canadian Hurricane Centre. And based on the magnitude of the wind and rain, he
said the damage could have been a lot worse, still

Just a slight variation in direction and Igor could just as easily swept through
all of Atlantic Canada, he said.

Fogarty said Hurricane Tomas, most likely the last tropical storm for this year,
made itself known in the province in late October and early November.

He said Tomas was responsible for torrential rainfall, much of it in the form of
downpours, in southeastern New Brunswick (which includes Moncton) and western
Nova Scotia.

But the heavy rains were not coming directly from the hurricane, said Fogarty.
He said a cold front was drawing the moisture from the storm and feeding it
northward to the Maritimes.

"In effect, the front had created a conduit of moisture from the tropical
storm," said the Canadian Hurricane Centre manager.

As a result, Metro Moncton ended up being deluged with a whopping 75 to 95
millimetres (three to 3.7 inches) of rain in a three to four-day period, he
said.

Fogarty said 2010 is a La Niña year, which is conducive to the formation of
tropical storms. He said that, along with the Atlantic waters being warmer than
normal this year, is a very good combination for a busy hurricane season.

Although tropical storms can form in late November or even December in the warm
waters of the Caribbean and travel north, he said it is not very common.

There are a lot of cold fronts moving south this time of the year, said Fogarty.
He said they disrupt the atmospheric pattern needed for the development of
hurricanes.

The official hurricane season in the Atlantic runs from June 1 to Nov. 30.

Meanwhile, prognosticators were pretty close to the mark in their tropical storm
predictions earlier this year.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, had predicted that there
would be 14 to 20 named storms forming this year during the hurricane season in
the Atlantic.

Of the 14 to 20 tropical storms, NOAA anticipated that eight to 12 of them could
be hurricanes with wind of 119 kilometres (74 miles) an hour and another four to
six of them could be major hurricanes.

A major hurricane would be Category 3 or higher, requiring minimal winds of 179
kilometres (111 miles) an hour. There are five categories of hurricanes with
Category 5 being the most severe.

n Charles Perry's Weather appears daily.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 356 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                       September 1, 2017 Friday 00:00 EST

Hurricane Irma Looms, but It's Too Early to Predict Landfall

BYLINE: CHRISTINE HAUSER

SECTION: US

LENGTH: 431 words



HIGHLIGHT: The thought of a Category 3 hurricane approaching, as thousands reel
from Harvey, is daunting. But experts are days away from understanding its
impact.


A week after Hurricane Harvey made landfall in Texas, another powerful storm
system is looming. But forecasters say it is too early to determine where
Hurricane Irma, a Category 3 storm with 115-mile-per-hour winds that was moving
west in the Atlantic Ocean early on Friday, would have any impact on land, if at
all.

"Right now it is more than 2,500 miles away from the U.S. mainland, or at least
seven to 10 days away," Dennis Feltgen, a meteorologist at the National
Hurricane Center in Miami, said in a telephone interview on Friday.

"Everybody breathe," he said. "We are O.K."

The hurricane center said early on Friday that Irma was more than 800 miles west
of the Cabo Verde Islands, and was expected to move west over the next few days
-- a typical weather pattern of storms in tradewinds off the coast of Africa.

The prospect of a new hurricane making landfall so soon after Harvey drenched
entire cities with record rainfall and flooding may fill Americans with dread.
An enormous aid effort is still underway, trying to help entire communities
recover.

But when a hurricane is more than five days away, the reliability of tracking
models diminishes, which means that weather forecasters advise being more
watchful of Hurricane Irma than fearful.

"It gets people's attention, sure," Mr. Feltgen said. "It is a major hurricane.
But whether it threatens any part of the Caribbean islands, or Bahamas, or the
U.S. mainland, we do not have a path on it. It is far too early to determine."

In June, when the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced the
start of hurricane season, there were predictions of as many as five major
hurricanes.

Harvey, the first to hit, has been called a 500-year flood, but that term may be
misleading, because it means that there is a one-in-500 chance of such a flood
occurring in a single year, and not that one such flood will occur every 500
years. So a similar storm may not be as far off as you might think.

The idea of consecutive blows to coastal American communities has precedent. On
Aug. 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina made landfall near the Louisiana-Mississippi
border as a Category 3 storm, followed by Hurricane Rita on Sept. 25, whichhit
the Texas-Louisiana border as a Category 5 storm.

As for Hurricane Irma, Mr. Feltgen said only time would tell.

"We have just got to see how things shape up," he said. "But early to the middle
part of next week, we will have a better idea what impacts, if any, will be
felt."

Related Articles


     ·    How Does Harvey Compare With Hurricane Katrina? Here's What We Know
     ·    Deadly Hurricanes Are Nothing New to Texas


LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 357 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                      October 11, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST

10 Hurricanes in 10 Weeks: With Ophelia, a 124-Year-Old Record is Matched

BYLINE: MAGGIE ASTOR

SECTION: CLIMATE

LENGTH: 900 words



HIGHLIGHT: With Tropical Storm Ophelia's transition to Hurricane Ophelia, 2017
became the first year since 1893 in which 10 Atlantic storms in a row reached
hurricane strength.


With Tropical Storm Ophelia's transition to Hurricane Ophelia on Wednesday, 2017
became the first year in more than a century -- and only the fourth on record --
in which 10 Atlantic storms in a row reached hurricane strength.

Franklin. Gert. Harvey. Irma. Jose. Katia. Lee. Maria. Nate. Ophelia.

Ophelia, far out in the Atlantic, does not pose a threat to the United States,
though it may affect Ireland. But it puts this year in the history books by at
least one measure. The last time 10 consecutive Atlantic storms became
hurricanes was in 1893 -- and because tracking technology was far more primitive
then, meteorologists say, some weak tropical storms or tropical depressions may
have gone undetected within that streak.

There were also 10-hurricane runs in 1878 and 1886, said Bob Henson, a
meteorologist for Weather Underground. But since modern records began in 1851,
there has never been an 11-hurricane stretch.

Since Hurricane Franklin formed on Aug. 7, Mr. Henson said, there has been
"maybe a week total without a named storm roaming the Atlantic somewhere." Two
of the 10 hurricanes in that period, Irma and Maria, reached the highest level,
Category 5. Two others, Harvey and Jose, reached Category 4. Within a single
month from mid-August to mid-September, six hurricanes developed.

The number of named storms -- 10 hurricanes and five tropical storms, for a
total of 15 -- has already made the 2017 Atlantic hurricane season one of the
busiest on record, and there is still more than a month and a half to go before
it officially ends.

But what really stands out is the intensity and duration of the storms,
reflected in a measure known as accumulated cyclone energy, or A.C.E. By that
index, 2017 ranks eighth since modern hurricane records began in 1851, and its
position is likely to rise before the season is over. The A.C.E. measurement for
the incomplete season is already more than twice the average for a full season,
Mr. Henson said.

This year, he added, the Atlantic has experienced 18.75 major hurricane days:
the total number of days logged by Category 3, 4 and 5 storms. While there is
significant variation from year to year, this is nearly five times the
full-season average of 3.9 days.

All of this leads to one question: Why?

The link between climate change and hurricanes is not as simple as the link
between climate change and other extreme weather events, like heat waves and
droughts, scientists say -- in part because, compared with those other events,
the sample size of hurricanes is small. But climate change is one factor.

Katharine Hayhoe, a climate scientist at Texas Tech University, told The New
York Times in August that climate change might not increase the number of
hurricanes, but that higher ocean temperatures could "have a role in
intensifying a storm that already exists," because warmer waters provide more
fuel for hurricanes to grow.

That fits with what we have seen this year: a remarkable number of the strongest
storms.

"Any given season could have waters that are warmer or cooler than average," Mr.
Henson said, but these ordinary seasonal variations are occurring on top of a
long-term warming trend. These two elements can combine to produce monstrous
storms like Hurricane Irma -- which wasone of only five known to have reached
wind speeds of 185 miles per hour, and which sustained those winds for a record
37 hours.

Generally, hurricanes can develop when the water beneath them is about 79
degrees Fahrenheit or higher, Mr. Henson said, and climate change is increasing
both the number of days that present those water temperatures and the size of
the areas that have them.

Joel Myers, the founder and president of AccuWeather, emphasized that "we don't
have enough data" to attribute the intensity of this year's hurricane season
specifically to climate change as opposed to ordinary variables, like water
temperature cycles that occur over 20 to 40 years. And he noted that in the
northwestern Pacific Ocean (where hurricanes are known as typhoons), activity
has been below average.

What is clear is that this year, warm waters have combined with atmospheric
conditions to produce an exceptionally destructive Atlantic hurricane season.
Wind shear has been very low, Mr. Henson said, which has allowed tropical
systems to intensify "without being tilted, sheared, torn apart by stronger
winds." And steering currents have tended to drive storms over land rather than
pushing them out to sea, creating an enormous human toll.

Mr. Myers pointed to the same factors, plus two more. A high-pressure area in
the Atlantic has been farther north than usual, he said, essentially expanding
the tropics and creating a larger space in which conditions are favorable for
hurricanes. And above-average rainfall in parts of Africa resulted in less dust
in the air over the Atlantic, which allowed for larger rain droplets.

Simply put, virtually every factor that fuels hurricanes has been in place. But
Mr. Myers cautioned against taking that as evidence that future seasons will be
similar.

"Just because we had these statistics this year when everything was lined up,"
he said, "doesn't say anything about next year, or the next five or 10 years."

Follow Maggie Astor on Twitter: @MaggieAstor.

Related Articles


     ·    The 2017 Hurricane Season Really Is More Intense Than Normal
     ·    The Relationship Between Hurricanes and Climate Change
     ·    Deadly Hurricanes Are Nothing New to Texas


LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 358 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             March 8, 2005 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hurricane Forecasters Say Season To Be Busy

BYLINE: NEIL JOHNSON, njohnson@tampatrib.com

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 588 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


GRAY PREDICTS 11 STORMS, 2 MAJOR

By NEIL JOHNSON

njohnson@tampatrib.com

TAMPA -- Hurricane season forecasters agree that the 2005 season could be an
active one.

The best known of the forecasters, Colorado State University Professor William
Gray, is calling for the season to generate 11 tropical storms, with six
becoming hurricanes and two growing to major storms with winds exceeding 111
mph.

The average season has nine tropical storms, with six becoming hurricanes and
two reaching major storm strength. An even less cheery outlook comes from a
group based at University College London. It started issuing hurricane season
forecasts in 1998.

That group, called Tropical Storm Risk, expects 14 tropical storms. Eight will
become hurricanes, with four growing to major storms of Category 3 or higher.

Unlike Gray, who does not predict where storms will hit, Tropical Storm Risk
predicts the United States will be struck by two tropical storms and two
hurricanes this year.

"That is similar to what we forecast last year," said Mark Saunders, lead
scientist for Tropical Storm Risk.

The number of storms hitting this country is based on records dating to 1950,
comparing the number of storms that formed and the number striking the United
States.

Two main climate conditions indicate an active hurricane season, June 1 through
Nov. 30, Saunders said.

The water in the tropical Atlantic is warmer than normal. Winds high in the
atmosphere blowing from east to west are weaker than normal. Both, he said, make
conditions better for hurricane formation.

Warmer water strengthens hurricanes. Weaker winds help create more spin for the
forming storms, Saunders said.

Gray and Saunders agree that climate conditions are ripe for more hurricanes.

"Since the mid-1990s, the pattern has favored increased hurricane activity,"
Saunders said.

Gray thinks such patterns last decades, then change to favor less hurricane
activity.

Though offering a slightly different forecast, Florida State University also
sees a 2005 season with more than the normal number of storms. The long-term
average is one or two storms a year hitting Florida.

FSU issues forecasts for the next six seasons but doesn't pinpoint a number of
storms.

The forecast for the coming season is for six to seven hurricanes to form.

"It's slightly above average," said Jim Elsner, FSU professor of geography.

No one is predicting four hurricanes hitting Florida this year.

"It's highly unlikely, but the probability is not zero," Elsner said.

An active season does not mean more storms will hit Florida, but a quiet season
is no guarantee the state will be spared, said Frank LePore, spokesman for the
National Hurricane Center in Miami.

There were only four hurricanes in 1992, but one was Hurricane Andrew.

The hurricane center and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will
issue their forecast May 16.

Gray and Tropical Storm Risk will revise their forecasts before the season
begins.

LePore said the forecasts increase people's awareness of hurricanes but that
they shouldn't base preparations on the number of expected storms.

"It's best to prepare for one storm, then you're prepared for all the storms,"
he said.

(CHART) 2004 PREDICTIONS VS. REALITY

Named Hurricanes Major

storms* hurricanes

William Gray: 14 8 3

TSR: 13 7 3

2004 season: 14 8 6

* The National Hurricane Center gives tropical storms a name when winds reach 39
mph.

Reporter Neil Johnson can be reached at (352) 544-5214.

Copyright © 2005, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO CHART
Colorado State University Professor William Gray says conditions are right for
more Atlantic storms.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 359 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            August 3, 2005 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Forecasters Predict Torrent Of Storms

BYLINE: NEIL JOHNSON, njohnson@tampatrib.com

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 705 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


7 TO 9 MORE 'CANES EXPECTED THIS SEASON

By NEIL JOHNSON

njohnson@tampatrib.com

TAMPA -- Hurricane experts said Tuesday that a near record 18 to 21 tropical
storms could form this season.

With an unprecedented seven storms so far, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's forecast calls for 11 to 14 more tropical storms in the
remaining four months of the hurricane season.

Seven to nine hurricanes could develop from those tropical storms, NOAA
scientists said. Three to five of the hurricanes could become major, with winds
more than 111 mph.

A tropical storm may form today -- the National Hurricane Center identified the
season's eighth tropical depression off Bermuda on Tuesday. The storm would be
named Harvey. Forecasters expect it to remain at sea and pose no threat to the
United States.

"We've already had a remarkable season with June and July. Everything indicates
it should be busy for the rest of the season," said Max Mayfield, director of
the National Hurricane Center in Miami.

The prediction does not say how many storms could hit Florida or the United
States. Conditions that change daily affect a hurricane's path.

An average of two or three storms hit the mainland during seasons with a high
number of storms, said Gerry Bell, hurricane expert with the National Center for
Climate Prediction.

If the forecast proves accurate, the 2005 hurricane season would produce twice
the number of storms seen in a typical year.

The prediction comes about two weeks before the start of the hurricane season's
busiest two months.

"The peak of the season is the middle of August to the middle of October,"
Mayfield said.

Conditions in the tropical Atlantic are nearly perfect for hurricanes.

Ocean temperatures are in the mid-80s, or 2 to 3 degrees above normal, providing
fuel for hurricanes. Also, the jet stream that can disrupt hurricane formation
is far to the north and not affecting growing storms.

"We keep looking for some unfavorable conditions and can't find any," Mayfield
said.

Five tropical storms and two hurricanes have formed this year. Both hurricanes
grew into intense storms.

Hurricane Dennis struck the Florida Panhandle in July. Last year, four
hurricanes hit Florida.

The latest prediction is a sharp increase from NOAA's forecast in May of 12 to
15 tropical storms.

If scientists are right, 2005 would be the most active season since 1995, when
19 named storms formed.

Hurricane experts think the 1995 season marked the start of 20 to 30 years of
increased hurricane formation. That followed a period of fewer storms in the
1970s, '80s and first half of the 1990s. On average, Bell said, "we can
certainly expect to see more hurricane damage" as the active cycle continues for
the next 10 to 20 years. "We expect more hurricanes striking the United States."

Major climate conditions, including salinity, ocean temperatures and winds high
in the atmosphere, fluctuate over decades. The changes produce periods favoring
the formation of hurricanes, then switch to periods generating fewer storms. The
NOAA forecast is close to the record for the number of named storms, hurricanes
and major hurricanes.

In 1933, before storms were given names, 21 formed. The season in 1969 had 12
hurricanes, and in 1950, eight major hurricanes formed.

Twenty-one storms would exhaust the list of storm names available for this year.
Once Wilma forms, the hurricane center would turn to the Greek alphabet with the
season's 22nd storm called Alpha.

"It's easy to humble a forecaster, and I hope I am," Mayfield said. "I hope the
media folks come back and ask me why we blew the forecast. I'll take the blame."

(CHART) STORM FORECAST

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicts 11 to 14 more
tropical storms, of which seven to nine could become hurricanes, by the end of
November. Seven storms have formed so far this season.

95' - 19

96' - 13

97' - 8

98' - 14

99' - 12

00' - 14

01' - 15

02' - 12

03' - 16

04' - 15

05' - 7*, 18-21 projected

* Through Aug.

Tribune graphic; Source: National Hurricane Center

Information from The Associated Press was used in this report. Reporter Neil
Johnson can be reached at (352) 544-5214.

Copyright © 2005, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CHART

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 360 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             May 23, 2007 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

NOAA Also Sees Busy Season

BYLINE: NEIL JOHNSON, The Tampa Tribune

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 797 words


By NEIL JOHNSON

The Tampa Tribune

TAMPA - After last year's lull, the Atlantic, Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico could
again become a fertile breeding ground for hurricanes, scientists with the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said Tuesday.

NOAA's prediction calls for 13 to 17 named storms popping out of the tropics
with seven to 10 becoming hurricanes. Of those, forecasters expect three to five
to grow into major hurricanes with winds of 111 mph or higher.

That forecast is close to the one made in April by William Gray and a team of
scientists at Colorado State University that predicts 17 named storms including
nine hurricanes.

Both predictions envision a year far more active than normal hurricane seasons
that on average produce nine named storms, six hurricanes and one or two major
hurricanes.

Though it is impossible to predict where individual storms will go, in years
with more storms than normal, an average of two to four hurricanes hit the
United States.

The same forecast teams called for above-average activity last year, but 2006
produced only 10 named storms.

Don't expect that again, said Gerry Bell, NOAA's lead hurricane forecaster at
the Climate Prediction Center.

Conditions in the tropics are ripe for storms. Water across the Atlantic where
hurricanes begin forming is about 1 degree warmer than average. Hurricanes use
warm water as fuel.

Also, winds blowing from the east will be moving at about the same speed from
the ocean's surface to eight miles in the atmosphere. Hurricanes thrive on
uniform wind speeds and directions.

As if those factors weren't enough, we are a dozen years into a cycle of active
hurricane seasons that can last an additional decade or more.

Those reasons would be sufficient to produce an above-average season, but the
possibility of a La Niña forming in the Pacific could kick the season up a
notch, Bell said.

A La Niña forms when water over a large portion of the tropical Pacific Ocean
cools to a few degrees below normal. That dampens winds in the jet stream that
can disrupt hurricane development in a normal year.

It is the opposite of an El Niño that forms when water grows warmer than normal.
A quickly forming El Niño this past year blunted storm development and caused
the relatively tranquil season.

The presence of a La Niña would only improve things for hurricanes and likely
mean a season closer to the high end of the government's forecast range, Bell
said.

"It's a set of conditions all working together," he said.

The main factor, though, is the climate cycle that swings between relative quiet
in the tropics and hyperactivity. Conditions now are similar to those in the
1950s and 1960s, which saw a lot of storms.

The seasons from the 1970s through 1995 were relatively quiet. The seasons from
1995 through 2005, though, averaged 15 named storms, nine hurricanes and four
hurricanes rated Category 3 or higher.

"This is not new. We've seen these conditions before," Bell said.

Rainfall half the planet away largely determines the cycles. The monsoon seasons
in western Africa and in the Amazon create the climate shifts that result in
active and inactive periods.

During active decades, rainfall is abundant in Africa and scant in the Amazon
basin, Bell said.

Reverse that, and you get calm seasons.

Regardless of the forecast, Florida residents should get ready for the June 1
start of the season, said Craig Fugate, director of Florida's Division of
Emergency Management.

"Every hurricane season, on June 1, regardless of the forecast, have a plan and
be prepared," Fugate said.

NOAA will issue another forecast in early August as the season enters its peak
months.

"The climate patterns will really take effect in August," Bell said.

Gray and his team will put out another forecast May 31.

(CHART) PREDICTING HURRICANES

Storm predictions are anything but a certainty as the past few seasons have
proven. Here are the predictions of the experts compared with the actual results
of the past few hurricane seasons. The chart shows the number of named storms,
the number of those storms that became hurricanes and the number of those that
developed into major hurricanes of Category 3 or stronger.

2003 Storms Hurricanes Major

William Gray 12 8 3

NOAA 11-15 6-9 2-4

Actual 16 7 3

2004 Storms Hurricanes Major

William Gray 14 8 3

NOAA 12-15 6-8 2-4

Actual 15 9 6

2005 Storms Hurricanes Major

William Gray 13 7 3

NOAA 12-15 7-9 3-5

Actual 27 15 7

2006 Storms Hurricanes Major

William Gray 17 9 5

NOAA 13-16 8-10 4-6

Actual 10 5 2

2007 Storms Hurricanes Major

William Gray 17 9 5

NOAA 13-17 7-10 3-5

Actual NA NA NA

Tribune graphic; Source: Tribune Research

Reporter Neil Johnson can be reached at (352) 544-5214 or njohnson@tampatrib.com

Copyright © 2007, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CHART

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 361 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                            August 31, 2006 Thursday
                                 First Edition

Absence of an ill wind blows some good news at petrol pump

BYLINE: MALCOLM MAIDEN

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 806 words


GLOBAL warming's failure so far to produce a repeat of last year's serial
hurricane assault and battery of the oil-rich Gulf of Mexico is the swing factor
in the suddenly soft price of oil.

A year ago today, New Orleans was inundated by floodwater, and oil refineries on
the Gulf coast and rigs and platforms offshore were shut and damaged after the
assault of hurricane Katrina, one of a record 15 hurricanes and 28 named storms
that year in the Atlantic Basin. There were four highest-level category 5
hurricanes in the Atlantic Basin in 2005 - Emily, Katrina, Rita, and Wilma - and
Wilma, Rita and Katrina were the most intense and third and fourth most intense
ever. Emily, which developed in mid-July, was the earliest category 5 hurricane
in history, and by this time last year a record five hurricanes had emerged.
Another five, including hurricane Rita, which slammed into the Texas oil
refining coast, blew in in September.

Oil supplies were already stretched by strong global demand when the Atlantic
hurricanes began to roar in 2005, and the oil price soared as they multiplied.
Between mid-July and the end of August, the price of West Texas Intermediate
crude leapt from $US54.93 a barrel to $US69.81 a barrel. It fell in September as
OPEC nations stepped up production in response to shutdowns in the Gulf, and the
hurricane-assisted price of late August was not reached again until April this
year, when Nigerian oil supplies faltered and tensions about Iran and the Middle
East grew. The oil price peak of just over $US77 occurred in July, as concerns
about Iran's nuclear plans and the West's response mounted, and as America's
hurricane season began.

Oil is still historically high today, but it is 10 per cent lower, at $US69.85,
and climatic calm is a key reason.

America's National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) originally
predicted between eight and 12 Hurricanes including up to six major hurricanes
in the Gulf in 2006, effectively a repeat of the 2005 season that some saw as
evidence of the onset of extreme weather conditions caused by global warming. On
August 8 it downgraded its prediction to between seven and nine hurricanes,
including up to four major hurricanes, still worse than a normal season, which
produces between one and three major hurricanes.

NOAA has consistently avoided blaming increased hurricane activity on global
warming. Higher sea temperature spawns hurricanes, as do stable air flows, but
sea and ocean temperatures have actually fallen in the region this year, and
this was one reason NOAA downgraded its forecast earlier this month.

Sea and ocean temperatures in the Atlantic region are still higher than normal,
however, and the link to global warming is being investigated. So too, however,
is the influence of the multi-decadal signal, a long term cyclical fluctuation
in sea temperatures that is currently pointing to increased hurricane activity,
and the Pacific Ocean temperature warming and cooling cycles, El Nino and La
Nina.

But even NOAA's downgraded forecast is beginning to look shaky. The government
agency warns that the peak of the Atlantic hurricane season has only just begun,
but so far there have been only four tropical storms and one hurricane, Ernesto,
which had itself turned into a 72 km/h tropical storm by the time it limped
across the Florida coastline yesterday.

And without the drama and destruction of last year's Gulf of Mexico hurricanes,
the oil price is missing a catalyst. Supply lines are tight in the face of
demand swollen in recent years by the emergence of China as an industrial
super-power, but the Middle East situation is no more tense than it was a year
ago, and growth and demand for oil in the US has eased.

Oil production has marked time at about 85 million barrels a day this year, and
this is one fact cited in the peak oil hypothesis that oil supplies have topped
out. But the supply tightness in mainly in refining, and oil reserves are still
relatively healthy.

Over the last decade, proven oil reserves have risen by 174 billion barrels to
1201 billion barrels - less than an expansion of 257 billion barrels in the
previous decade, but enough to keep up with demand, which has risen by about 10
million barrels a day since 2002. Global oil reserves equalled 39.9 years of
production in 2005, and have fluctuated between 39.6 years and 41.5 years since
1988. An assumption that world reserves are correctly estimated is, however,
critical and some experts doubt it.

Faster than ideal production from the giant Saudi Arabian fields may have
stranded huge amounts of oil, according to oil expert Matt Simmons, author of
Twighlight in the Desert, which predicts a Saudi oil supply shock that would
make the current $US69.85 a barrel look cheap, and the $US42 a barrel price that
applied at the start of 2005 an impossible dream.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPH: OIL'S TROUBLED WATERS; PHOTO

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 362 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        The Augusta Chronicle (Georgia)

                             May 31, 2007 Thursday
                                  ALL EDITION

Only a matter of time? In recent years destruction has spared Florida

BYLINE: McClatchy Newspapers

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 533 words


MIAMI - Jacksonville: 127 years. Tampa: 86 years. Sarasota: 63 years. Fort
Lauderdale: 57 years. Miami: 15 years.

That's how long it has been since those major metropolitan areas of Florida -
the state most vulnerable to hurricanes - have been hit by a Category 3 or
higher storm.

It cannot last. All are historically overdue for an assault by a major
hurricane, with sustained winds above 110 mph and even stronger gusts.

"It's just a matter of time," said Eric Blake, a hurricane specialist at the
National Hurricane Center in West Miami-Dade. "Whether it's 10 years, 20 years,
50 years or tomorrow, we just don't know."

The six-month hurricane season begins Friday, but the next deadly hurricane
catastrophe is developing right now, forecasters and emergency managers say. And
Florida is most at risk.

Enormous numbers of people who have never experienced the colossal,
life-threatening power of hurricanes are flocking to coastal cities around the
state. More than 17 million Floridians live along the coast.

"Katrina showed us that a large loss of life is still possible in a hurricane,"
Mr. Blake said of the 2005 storm that slapped south Florida, then strengthened
and wrecked New Orleans and much of the upper Gulf Coast.

Forty percent of all U.S. hurricanes hit Florida, according to records at the
hurricane center. All five of the costliest hurricanes in history hit Florida,
in some cases along with other states. Five of the 10 most intense U.S.
hurricanes hit Florida.

And even with all of that, most Florida cities - with ever-rising populations -
are long overdue for a strike by a major Category 3, 4 or 5 hurricane.

Since reliable record-keeping began in 1851, a major hurricane has blasted or
approached Miami-Dade County an average of once every nine years, Broward County
once every 10 years, Tampa once every 23 years, the Sarasota-Bradenton area once
every 19 years and the Jacksonville area once every 28 years.

But Miami-Dade hasn't been pummeled by a major hurricane since Andrew ravaged
the southern part of the county in 1992, Broward has avoided that horror since
1950, Tampa since 1921, the Sarasota-Bradenton area since 1944, and Jacksonville
since 1880.

Florida dangles into the hurricane zone like a giant kick-me sign, and its 1,200
miles of coast produce an inviting target for storm surge, the dome of water
that accompanies a hurricane's core ashore and poses the greatest threat to
life.

Sooner or later, Mr. Blake said, every city - every spot - along Florida's coast
will get hit by another major hurricane. "It's inevitable," he said.

Mr. Blake is the lead author of a recently updated study that examines the
nation's history of hurricanes and its current vulnerability.

It found that the danger stretches across the entire Gulf and East coasts, from
Brownsville, Texas, to the northeastern tip of Maine.

Millions of people have moved to those coasts in the last 50 years, and 85
percent of current coastal residents have never experienced a major hurricane,
according to several studies.

"It's quite a demographic challenge," said Bill Proenza, the veteran National
Weather Service forecaster and manager who replaced Max Mayfield in January as
hurricane center director.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2007 Southeastern Newspapers Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 363 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                          November 23, 2016 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Rare late hurricane in Caribbean;
Otto, 7th storm this year, latest to form since 2005's Epsilon.

BYLINE:  By Kimberly Miller   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 453 words


Hurricane Otto took advantage of a pocket of atmospheric opportunity Tuesday,
becoming a rare late-November hurricane in the southwest Caribbean Sea.

Otto, which poses no threat to the U.S., is the latest-forming hurricane since
2005's Epsilon, which developed Dec. 2 far west of Bermuda. Hurricane season
runs June 1 -Nov. 30. Otto is the seventh hurricane this year.

As of 5 p.m., Otto had 75 mph winds that are expected to strengthen to 90 mph
before the storm makes landfall near the border of Nicaragua and Costa Rica on
Thursday.

"This is the favored area in November for development," said Carl Parker, a
hurricane expert with the Weather Channel. "The water temps are probably in the
mid-80s, and when the atmosphere is right, it's entirely possible to get
something going down there."

Costa Rica has never experienced a direct hurricane landfall, according to James
Franklin, chief of the National Hurricane Center's hurricane specialist unit.

Franklin said he's not ruling out the possibility that Otto could strengthen
beyond Category 1 , and expects it to maintain tropical cyclone strength as it
travels over Central America and into the Pacific Ocean. If Otto does
disintegrate over land and reform in the Pacific, it would be renamed Virgil.

"To impact Costa Rica, it really has to form right where it's forming now, and
that doesn't happen very often," Franklin said. "It's quite a rare event for a
storm to maintain tropical cyclone status all the way across into the Pacific."

There have only been three November hurricane landfalls in Nicaragua in 129
years of records kept by the National Hurricane Center.

Franklin said Otto formed from an area of low pressure that has been idling for
more than a week. With light upper-level wind shear and deeply warm waters, it
was bound to form, Franklin said.

A hurricane watch is in effect for from the Costa Rica-Panama border to
Bluefields, Nicaragua.

Forecasters are concerned about "life-threatening flash floods" from rainfall
amounts that could total 12 inches, and up to 20 inches in isolated areas.
Tropical-storm-force winds could already be hitting Panama Wednesday, with
hurricane conditions beginning in the hurricane watch areas on Thursday.

Hurricane-force winds extended out 10 miles from the center Tuesday night, with
tropical-storm-force winds reaching out 70 miles.

While storms such as Otto that tend to linger in one place for an extended
period can bring up cooler water that reduces intensity, the southwestern
Caribbean Sea has deep, warm waters to draw from, Franklin said.

AccuWeather hurricane expert Dan Kottlowski agreed that Otto could become a
Category 2 hurricane.

"It's got plenty of room to intensify," Kottlowski said.

kmiller@pbpost.com

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2016 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 364 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                            October 17, 2005 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

Storm ratings don't tell story;
As some experts talk about downgrading Hurricane Katrina, others say the current
scale is incomplete.

BYLINE: By CATHY ZOLLO cathy.zollo@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1512 words


The death toll stands at more than 1,200, and the tally of damage could reach
$200 billion, making Katrina the most destructive hurricane to hit the United
States.

Yet hurricane researchers are already talking about downgrading the storm to a
Category 3 based upon its wind speed at landfall in Louisiana.

It's an assessment that seems at odds with the widespread devastation the storm
wrought. And it raises questions about whether the Saffir-Simpson scale, the
hurricane scale introduced in 1969 to rate hurricane strength, is too
simplistic.

Saffir-Simpson ratings don't take into account a hurricane's size, which
contributes to the amount of damage caused by a hurricane.

The same National Weather Service report that describes Katrina as "one of the
most destructive hurricanes to ever hit the United States' coast" also shows
that the highest wind speed recorded during the storm was 114 mph at sites in
Grand Isle and Lake Ponchartrain.

The 114 mph winds make Katrina a Category 3.

But the storm's central pressure was 918 millibars, making it the third lowest
-- thus the third strongest hurricane in terms of pressure -- ever to hit the
U.S.

Katrina's storm surge, due mostly to its size, was between 10 and 30 feet --
among the highest on record -- and swept clean a 200-mile stretch of the
northern Gulf coast.

The ambiguity in rating storm intensity has troubled hurricane expert William
Gray, head of the University of Colorado's Tropical Meteorological Project. He
says the size of the storm should be a factor in figuring what damage it will
do.

"I've been thinking for years about trying to devise something where you'd
combine the inner core with the outer winds," Gray said. In other words,
considering how far hurricane-force winds extend from a storm's center.

Officials at the National Hurricane Center say they annually conduct public
surveys about their services to learn how to better make people understand the
danger.

They say people should look beyond the category rating to understand the power
of a storm.

"A lot of people want to focus just on the winds, and they can't do that," said
Stacy Stewart, hurricane forecaster and national warning coordinator for the
National Hurricane Center. "The larger the wind field, the higher the storm
surge. That's really what did considerable damage.

"Maybe our graphics aren't getting the point across. We'll assess that."

Big storm, big impact

Some people who didn't flee Category 4 Katrina said they were staying because
they'd survived Category 5 Hurricane Camille in 1969.

The difference was that Camille's hurricane-force winds only extended 60 miles
from the storm's center. That's compared to Katrina, a Category 4 (perhaps 3
upon re-analysis), with hurricane-force winds that reached out 105 miles.

A hurricane's core winds are the most destructive, but how wide a swath a
hurricane cuts says even more about how much damage it will do.

Herbert Saffir, a structural engineer who with meteorologist Robert Simpson
developed the hurricane scale, said he sees Gray's point.

"The size of the storm is certainly very important. There's no question about
it," Saffir said. "I don't know exactly how you factor that into the category
without eventually getting too complex."

Saffir said an informed public is the missing piece, "so that people in
hurricane-prone areas are aware of what can happen."

It's not just those who live along the coast who need informing.

Critics of the current rating system point to low-grade storms that have pounded
coastal and inland areas with rain and caused flooding and damage that reached
billions of dollars. Tropical Storm Allison flooded Houston in 2001, causing
$2.4 billion in damage.

And they point to storms like Hurricane Dennis that forecasters feared would be
another Ivan for the Florida Panhandle.

Dennis wasn't an Ivan rerun, even though both were Category 3 storms. As with
Katrina and Camille, size was a factor.

Hurricane-force winds extended 40 miles from the center of Dennis, and the
estimated cost of the storm was $4 billion. Hurricane winds reached 105 miles
from Ivan's center. Estimated cost for Ivan: $13 billion.

"There are different types of Category 4s and different types of Category 5s,"
Gray said. The scale "is just a crude type of thing that gives the center
maximum winds."

Birth of the scale

Before the Saffir-Simpson scale -- with hurricanes such as "major" Donna in 1960
-- forecasters used adjectives to convey the threat to people in a hurricane's
cross hairs.

A storm was major or mild, catastrophic or likely to down power lines rather
than tear off roofs.

Engineer Saffir came up with the first version of the scale while working under
contract for the United Nations.

He set out to design a building manual for areas prone to powerful storms but
realized there was no way to rate such storms to clarify the danger. He created
one based on wind destruction.

Saffir also worked with Simpson, then head of the National Hurricane Center, and
showed him the scale.

It was a godsend to Simpson, who didn't have a way to convey expected need after
a storm to aid agencies.

"When I got into trouble trying to answer all the questions of these agencies
with specialized requirements, I got together with Herb (Saffir) and said,
"We've got to modify your scale to apply to these people.'"

They started over. Saffir figured the damage different levels of hurricane winds
would deliver. Simpson worked on the storm surge and air pressure part of the
scale.

From its beginning, Saffir-Simpson wasn't designed for general consumption,
Simpson said.

"It was made originally to help people like the Red Cross and the Salvation Army
and the governmental people who have to bring in supplies and be prepared to
help the recover effort as well as decide on extreme measures for evacuations,"
Simpson said.

After Simpson left the National Hurricane Center, it became the yardstick by
which forecasters warn the public.

While the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale includes ranges for a storm's central
air pressure and potential storm surge, it's upon the wind speed that
forecasters base their intensity calls.

Stewart at the National Hurricane Center said that's because the effect of
central air pressure on wind speed in a storm varies, that the effect of
pressure on storm surge is slight in comparison to what the wind does.

"Everything ultimately points back to the wind speed being the most important
and objective criterion to be used to classify hurricane categories," Stewart
said.

But getting an accurate wind speed can be hit and miss, Gray said.

Hurricane hunters seek the highest wind in a given storm, but they may not
always find it.

"That's why we need this outer wind thing," Gray said. "... To put all this
emphasis on the category is not so good."

Simpson said he didn't want the scale widely disseminated when it was first
devised and included air pressure and storm surge as parameters.

"You can't get any one scale that is not so complicated, it can't be explained
and have it used effectively," he said. "... But I think it has served a useful
purpose, providing there is further explaining."

Simpson and Saffir called for simpler advisory discussion so that laymen can
more easily understand the factors that go into making a hurricane dangerous.

Both believe that the National Hurricane Center online discussions are a place
to start, "but perhaps on a more comprehensive, less technical basis," Simpson
said.

The jargon-laced, part code and somewhat technical discussion can be daunting to
the uninitiated. When major storms threaten, the discussions are posted on the
National Hurricane Center's Web site several times a day.

"The best way would be in the advisory of the hurricane center, to actually
describe for the layperson an idea as to the extent of the storm," Saffir said.
"That's certainly an important indication."

All parties agreed on the need for a more informed public. People also need to
know that the Atlantic has entered a more active period for the storms that
could last another twenty years, they say.

Katrina may have recalibrated public understanding about the danger of
hurricanes.

The reaction to Hurricane Rita shows that, Stewart said: On top of the ordered
evacuations, there were shadow evacuations, people far inland who should have
stayed put but just wanted nothing to do with the storm that was heading their
way.

At the very least, Gray said, the public should understand the limitations of
the scale. Expectations of damage from a particular category of storm are based
on averages.

"The individual storms deviate tremendously from this average," Gray said.

(Graphic text below)

Hurricane Hurricane

Katrina Camille

Size: Radius of

hurricane force winds: 105-mile 60-mile

Wind: 125 mph 165 mph

Pressure: 918 mb 909 mb

Storm surge: 30 ft. 25 ft.

Damage: $200 billion $9.2 billion**

Deaths:* More than 1,200 256

Hurricane Hurricane

Dennis Ivan

Size: Radius of

hurricane force winds: 40-mile 105-mile

Wind: 105 mph 105 mph

Pressure: 943 mb 909 mb

Storm surge: 10 ft. 15 ft.

Damage: $125-2.5 billion $13 billion

Deaths:* 10 57

* U.S. deaths only

** In 2005 dollars

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC
 NOAA Hurricane Katrina's winds might have been 114 mph at landfall, but those
winds extended more than 105 miles from the storm's center, making it more
destructive than a typical Category 3 hurricane. STAFF GRAPHIC / JACOB BENISON
(See graphic text at end of story) (Graphic available on microfilm)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2005 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.


                          FOCUS - 365 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                           September 6, 2007 Thursday
                                  ALL EDITION

HARBINGER OR HAPPENSTANCE?;
For the first time in recorded history, two Category 5 storms hit land in one
season

BYLINE: By ANNA SCOTT anna.scott@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1089 words


Hurricane season doesn't peak until this weekend, but already 2007 has been one
for the record books: When Hurricane Felix roared into Central America this
week, it marked the first time in recorded history that two Category 5
hurricanes made landfall in a single year.

Making sense of the twin Category 5s -- Felix and Dean -- is an exercise in
remaining calm.

What might have happened if the hurricanes had veered north into the United
States instead of churning on similar paths west through the Caribbean?

Does the first-ever occurrence of two of the strongest storms on record to make
landfall, striking less than a month apart, point to an overabundance of
man-made greenhouse gases?

On both fronts, scientists caution against putting too much stock in the
significance of the double hit. While the happening reaffirms predictions for an
active hurricanes season, it is, for now, a fluke -- one unlikely to be repeated
in the United States.

In fact, of the dozen top-strength hurricanes to make landfall in recorded
history, only three have ever come ashore here.

The depth of warm water in the Caribbean Sea propelled Felix and Dean headlong
into the coasts of Nicaragua and Mexico, respectively. Not only were wind
conditions ripe, but the warm water stretches down more than 200 feet, making it
difficult, if not impossible, for hurricanes to churn up the weakening cool
temperatures at the bottom.

If similar storms track to the Gulf of Mexico, where the warm water reaches only
about 30 feet, they would have drawn cooler water and made landfall at a lesser
strength, said Chris Landsea, meteorologist with the National Hurricane Center.

The Caribbean water sometimes flows into the Gulf and creates a "loop current"
that propels hurricanes to Category 5 strength, but hurricanes tend to lose that
strength as they reenter the normal Gulf waters near the shore.

Hurricane Katrina, for example, grew to a Category 5 in the loop current. But it
shrank to a Category 3 before reaching land.

Hurricane Rita dropped similarly before hitting Louisiana. So did Wilma.

"Typical hurricanes going across the ocean will bring up the cold water below,"
Landsea said. "The central and western Caribbean water is so deep, any hurricane
going over there has an unlimited amount of energy to pull from."

Even so, two Category 5 hurricanes striking in succession has fueled the debate
over whether global warming is causing more intense storms. Mexican President
Felipe Calderon sided with those who blame climate change.

"Today hurricanes are becoming increasingly violent. For example, water from the
Caribbean, the ocean, is two degrees hotter than before," Calderon said Tuesday.
"This makes steam rise off the ocean more quickly: Hurricanes form faster and
are more violent."

Scientists remain conflicted on those points, however, with some citing
improvements in technology that allow more hurricanes, and more details about
hurricanes, to be reported.

Landsea said that before the 1960s, when hurricane hunter airplanes became
strong enough to fly into Category 5 storms, there was no way to be sure of a
storm's category when it reached top strength. And satellite images that also
help were not available until 1966.

He called the double hit a matter of "bad luck," not evidence of global warming.

Politicians and pundits, not scientists, were claiming a link between the two
recent storms and global warming, said Kerry Emanuel, a scientist studying
climate change at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

"We like to look at three, four, five years of activity combined to see a
relationship," Emanuel said. "As odd as it may be for them both to be Category
5, statistically it doesn't make sense to talk about such small numbers."

However, wind speeds are higher than they were 15 years ago, potentially making
Category 5 storms more probable and giving some scientists cause to see man-made
greenhouse gases as the link.

Whatever the cause, conditions for hurricanes are expected to become more
favorable this month, traditionally the peak of hurricane season.

The United States has been protected from Dean and Felix by a shield of high
pressure, often called the Bermuda High, that is sitting over the southeastern
United States. Storms travel along its outer ridge -- in the case of Dean and
Felix, this steering mechanism pushed them due west.

That high-pressure balloon is expected to shift and break apart in the next
month, creating pathways for storms to travel upward toward the United States.

In addition, the hurricane-friendly La Nina system that forecasters expected to
develop this season is just beginning to strengthen.

La Nina is a weather event that creates an area of cold water in the Pacific
Ocean that determines wind patterns in the Atlantic. It is responsible for
creating a smooth wind pattern in the Caribbean that allowed Dean and Felix to
grow.

If La Nina continues to strengthen, it could create favorable winds for tropical
Atlantic hurricanes by October, allowing storms to start growing earlier after
coming off the coast of Africa. What that means for the United States depends on
the location of the Bermuda High when the storms approach land.

A wild card will be water temperature in the Atlantic Ocean. While still warm
enough for hurricanes, it was cooler than expected this year and could have a
chilling effect on certain hurricanes in their infancy.

Still, forecasters predict an above-average remainder of the season. Colorado
State University forecasters, who are among the most credible, tweaked their
forecast this week to seven remaining hurricanes this year, two of them Category
3 or greater.

As for the power pair, Felix and Dean, meteorologist Dennis Feltgen of the
National Hurricane Center offered this parting advice:

"It means absolutely nothing."

COMING STORMS

Forecasters predict an above-average remainder of the season. Colorado State
University says to expect seven remaining hurricanes this year, two of the
category 3 or greater.

CATEGORY 5 HURRICANES

Of the dozen land-falling Category 5 hurricanes on record, only three have
struck the United States. Category 5 hurricanes have sustained winds above 155
mph. Following are the hurricanes and where they struck:

1928 "Okeechobee,"* Puerto Rico

1932 "Bahamas,"* Bahamas

1935 "Labor Day,"* Florida Keys

1947 "Fort Lauderdale,"* Bahamas

1955 Janet, Mexico

1969 Camille, Mississippi

1971 Edith, Honduras

1977 Anita, Mexico

1988 Gilbert, Mexico

1992 Andrew, Bahamas and Florida

2007 Dean, Mexico

2007 Felix, Nicaragua

*Unofficial name

Source: National Hurricane Center

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: THE SCIENCE OF HURRICANES | FOURTH IN A SERIES

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC 2
 ASSOCIATED PRESS/ ESTEBAN FELIX CURRENT STORMS A man hands a baby to her mother
during an evacuation Wednesday after flooding caused by Hurricane Felix in the
outskirts of San Pedro Sula, eastern Honduras. STAFF GRAPHIC/ NICOLE SNEED Warm
water feeds hurricanes (Graphic available on microfilm) STAFF GRAPHIC/ NICOLE
SNEED Powered by warmth (Graphic available on microfilm)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 366 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                            November 28, 2008 Friday
                                  ALL EDITION

In a hard season, Florida got off easy;
HURRICANES: 2008 saw major storms coming in a relentless pattern

BYLINE: By ANNA SCOTT anna.scott@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 871 words


The 2008 hurricane season ends Sunday, leaving behind assurances that the era of
pumped-up storm activity is still alive and spinning.

While the previous two hurricane seasons were relatively quiet, this year's
season ranked in the top 20 percent for most storm activity over the past 50
years.

"It has been a busy year by any measure," said Chris Landsea, science and
operations officer at the National Hurricane Center in Miami. "Overall, it's
suggestive that we're still in an active period."

Scientists have tracked a steady uptick in Atlantic basin hurricane activity
since 1995. The prevailing thought has been that the increase is part of a cycle
of above-average storm activity that will likely last another 10 to 25 years.

But the 2006 and 2007 hurricane seasons broke with the trend -- each was
below-normal -- and cast doubt on the theory.

For the first time since then, the level of hurricane activity has returned to
the average for the period starting in 1995. The last six months brought 16
named storms, eight of them hurricanes and five of them major hurricanes.

The duration of the storms -- there were 84 days when a named storm was
swirling, and 29 hurricane days -- was double that of 2007.

The season was also significant for Floridians in particular.

While 2008 marks the third year in a row the state has avoided a hurricane
strike, Tropical Storm Fay did nearly as much damage, making a record four
landfalls on the state -- more than any other Tropical Storm or hurricane ever
recorded.

Fay slowly zigzagged across the state, crossing Key West on Aug. 18, making
landfall in Cape Romano, south of Naples, leaving the east coast near Melbourne,
re-entering near Flagler Beach and again making landfall near Carabelle in the
Panhandle.

It spawned 15 tornadoes, caused 15 deaths, and pushed flood waters above 3 feet
in northern and eastern parts of the state.

One benefit: The flooding brought relief from drought. Fay restored Lake
Okeechobee from 9.3 feet in June back to 15 feet by the middle of September.

Nearly two-thirds of Florida counties received government recovery aid or were
declared federal disaster areas after Fay. Insured damages are $246 million.
Estimated assistance payments top $250 million.

In addition, the three hurricanes that made landfall in the U.S. -- Dolly, Ike
and Gustav -- enveloped Florida in the cone of uncertainty, where landfall was
possible. They all landed on the Gulf Coast as Category 2 storms.

Hurricanes Dolly and Ike struck Texas, and Gustav, which prompted former
presidential candidate John McCain to postpone the Republican nominating
convention, made landfall in Louisiana.

Other storms that amounted to near misses for Floridians meant mayhem to
residents of Haiti and Cuba. Hundreds of Haitians died and crops were washed
away when four tropical storms blasted the island in less than a month.

"This was the most active and deadly hurricane season since 2005," noted Mike
Stone, spokesman for the Florida Department of Emergency Management. "Between
the Caribbean nations and the U.S. we had nearly 900 fatalities."

The 2008 season as a whole did not match the intensity of the record-breaking
2005 season, when 27 named storms spun through the Atlantic. But the month of
July came close.

With three named storms, two hurricanes and one major hurricane, only July of
2005 showcased a higher level of hurricane activity in the period starting in
1995.

This period of increased Atlantic hurricane activity is a result of a period of
busier monsoon seasons in Africa. It contributes to warmer ocean temperatures,
calmer winds and more rain over west Africa, which creates more tropical waves
that eventually become hurricanes.

In 2006, when only 10 named storms formed, the El Nino weather pattern was
thought to have driven them away. In 2007, unexpected bouts of wind shear tore
most of them apart within a few days.

"When you're in an active era it doesn't mean every season is going to be very
active, it means the conditions are going to be in place every year," said Gerry
Bell, NOAA's lead seasonal hurricane forecaster.

"Even in 2006 and 2007 the base conditions for active seasons were in place.
This year they popped up again. It's a good reminder to people -- expect these
conditions to last."

HOW THE 2008 SEASON STACKS UP STATISTICALLY Every hurricane season ushers in a
new round of record-breakers. Here is a look at what made 2008 special: Tropical
Storm Fay was the first system in U.S. history to make four landfalls in the
same state, breaking the record of three landfalls set by Hurricane Gordon in
Florida in 1994. The 2008 season is the first on record to have a major storm in
each of five consecutive months, July through November. With six storms making
U.S. landfall in a row, the 2008 hurricane season broke the record number of
consecutive storms to land here. The six storms were Hurricane Dolly, Tropical
Storm Eduoard, Tropical Storm Fay, Hurricane Gustav, Tropical Storm Hanna, and
Hurricane Ike. The previous record was five storms in 2004. Tropical Storm Marco
became the smallest on record, with winds estimated to extend only 10 nautical
miles from the center of the system. The previous record was in 1974. SOURCE:
Tropical Meteorology Project

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  (Map available on microfilm or pdf)

GRAPHIC: MAP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2008 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 367 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                              April 6, 2018 Friday

Busy storm season expected

BYLINE: Dinah Voyles Pulver dinah.pulver@newsjrnl.com

SECTION: FL NEWS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 780  words


For local residents like Diane Melvin and Cassandra Montanez, the latest
forecast for the 2018 Atlantic hurricane season has little good news.

The homes of both women suffered damage during Hurricane Irma last September and
they're still waiting to complete repairs. Many residents across the area are in
the same situation, still recovering from Irma and even from Hurricane Matthew
in October 2016. Melvin, who lives in DeBary, and Montanez, who lives in
Deltona, don't even want to think about the arrival of another hurricane season,
much less a season forecast to be busier than normal.

The tropical meteorology team at Colorado State University, where Bill Gray
pioneered hurricane season forecasting, released its April forecast Thursday,
calling for a slightly above-average hurricane season.

Now led by research scientist Phil Klotzbach in the university's Department of
Atmospheric Science, the team calls for 14 named storms during the season that
starts June 1 and ends Nov. 30. The long-term average is 12. Of the 14 storms,
the tropical meteorology project team expects seven to become hurricanes and
three to reach major hurricane strength, which means winds in excess of 110 mph.

No one knows just where those hurricanes will go, but Montanez hopes they don't
head toward Florida.

"My roof is gone. I have my roof completely covered with blue tarp," she said.
"I'm scared."

Melvin hadn't even thought about hurricane season until asked about it on
Thursday. "I'm still dealing with last year," she said. "I'm not looking forward
to hurricane season. Normally it doesn't bother me but with the house still not
fixed, it's bothering me."

The Colorado State forecast, based on more than 60 years of historical data,
cited a low likelihood of a significant El Nino this summer. When an El Nino
brings warmer than normal waters to the equatorial Pacific off the coast of
South America it can stir up wind patterns that create a strong shear in the
Atlantic Ocean and tear storms apart, reducing the risks of strong hurricanes.

However, sea surface temperatures in the tropical Atlantic are near their
long-term average, so that's considered a neutral factor this year, unlike last
year, when the ocean was much warmer than normal. The ocean is slightly warmer
than normal in the western Atlantic, but cooler than normal in the eastern
Atlantic, where many of the most massive and powerful hurricanes form. Cooler
sea surface temperatures provide less fuel for tropical cyclone formation and
intensification, stated the news release from Colorado State. They're also
associated with a more stable atmosphere and drier air, which can both suppress
the thunderstorm activity that contributes to developing hurricanes.

So far, the 2018 hurricane season is exhibiting characteristics similar to the
seasons of 1960, 1967, 1996, 2006 and 2011, Klotzbach reported.   "The years
1960, 1967 and 2006 had near-average Atlantic hurricane activity, while 1996 and
2011 were both above-normal hurricane seasons."

The team predicts that 2018 hurricane activity will be about 135 percent of the
average season. By comparison, hurricane activity in 2017, which included Harvey
and Maria, was about 245 percent of the average season.

Across the region, local residents and governments are still working to recover
from Hurricane Irma which roared through Sept. 10-11, and in some cases from
Hurricane Matthew on Oct. 7, 2016.

Both Montanez and Melvin have experienced delays in trying to get their repairs
completed.

Montanez did not have insurance and said she does not have the money to make the
repairs to her leaking roof. She received $1,500 from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and she applied for a low-cost loan, but said she was denied.
She has appealed and is waiting to hear.

Now, she's also working with a non-profit that might be able to make the needed
repairs.

Melvin and her husband, James, have insurance but experienced delays in getting
the money from her insurance company to cover all the damages. Her neighbor's
tree fell into her home during the middle of the night during Hurricane Irma
damaging the walls and/or roof in at least three rooms and possibly one of the
trusses.

"It's been forever to get a check," she said. "Now we've finally got the check
and we're waiting on a contractor. I hope we'll be finished by the end of next
month."

Local contractors are having to wait on subcontractors and fencing contractors
are scheduling four to five weeks out, she said. "Everyone is so busy."

Along the beaches, erosion has continued in many locations along the coast,
including in Flagler Beach, where city officials had a meeting about erosion on
Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2018 News-Journal Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 368 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Huntsville Item (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 12, 2009 Tuesday

It's time to prepare for hurricane season

BYLINE: Jay Ermis, The Huntsville Item, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 687 words


May 12--The Texas hurricane season officially begins June 1 and Walker County
residents are urged to start preparing for it.

Butch Davis, county emergency management coordinator, told Commissioners Court
during its special session Monday morning at the courthouse that weather
forecasters are predicting 12 named storms, six actual hurricanes and two of
those will reach the 3 to 5 category.

The court approved a proclamation designating May 24-30 as Hurricane Awareness
Week in Texas and Walker County.

"We always do this each year to get the general public aware of what's coming up
during hurricane season and to be prepared," Davis said, especially after
Hurricane Ike struck Walker County in September 2008, leaving residents without
electricity and water.

Hurricane season continues through Nov. 30.

For the first hurricane season, the Walker County Storm Shelter will be
available to house evacuees from other counties and those along the coast.

Walker County is the first shelter hub outside the Texas Coast.

Davis said Hurricane Awareness Week is a time "just to let people know that it
is Hurricane Awareness Week, to start getting their plan for hurricane season,
to get their kits together for water and medical supplies."

"The best defense is preparedness and public education about the dangers of the
high winds, storm surge, flooding and tornadoes that may occur for hundreds of
miles in conjunction with a hurricane or tropical storm," Davis said.

"The 624-mile Texas coastline, our area in particular, and areas of hundreds of
miles inland are vulnerable to the devastating effects of a hurricane or
tropical storm," Davis said.

Also Monday, the court:

--Approved minutes for May 4, 2009

--Approved monthly report for April 2009

--Passed on Racial Profiling Report for 2008

--Approved Letter of Agency for Intrado 911 Database Management

--Approved proclamation 2009-16 "Hurricane Awareness Week"

--Approved Memorandum of Understanding to use the Huntsville Fire Station Number
One as a Push Site

--Approved bill paying

--Approved Investment Reports for June 2008 -- March 2009

--Approved budget amendment

--Approved claims/invoices submitted for payment

--Approved disposal of items from auction that did not sell

--Approved change order #3 for Bid #C2360-9-003 -- Complete Construction of the
Walker County H.E.A.R.T.S. Veterans Museum of Texas in the amount of $18,910

--Approved Contract for Services for Jurden Bruce -- Brucepro.net for
development of Web site-

--Passed on Request for Proposal #C2360-9-003-RFP for Roof Repair -- Justice
Center

--Approved Request for Proposal #C2360-9-004-RFP for Roof Repair -- DA Building

--Approved using RFP #11033-07 / Records Management System Software to MCCi per
Interlocal Agreement with Collin County

--Approved equipment for the Records Management project to include software,
scanners and a server.

--Discussed the benefits the community receives from the YMCA Teen Center
Outreach Program

--Approved the H-GAC Summer Jobs for Youth Program

--ApproveD agreement between Walker County and the Department of State Health
Services for office space

--Passed on scoring committee and scoring criteria for ORCA grant funds
distributed under the Disaster Recovery Program

--Approved variance on the Eugene A. McCaffety Property Subdivision

--Approved minor plat on the Eugene A. McCaffety Property Subdivision

--Held public hearing on the replat of Lot 18 Division, Huntsville Country
Estates in A-542, the Wm. Tom Survey on Paula Lane

--Approved variance on the replat of Lot 18 Division, Huntsville Country Estates
in A-542, the Wm. Tom Survey on Paula Lane

--Approved replat on the replat of Lot 18 Division, Huntsville Country Estates
in A-542, the Wm. Tom Survey on Paula Lane

To see more of The Huntsville Item or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.itemonline.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Huntsville Item, Texas
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090512-IH-It-s-time-to-prepare-for-hurricane-season-0512

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IH


                                 Copyright 2009


                          FOCUS - 369 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 28, 1999 Friday

Brutal storm season forecast

BYLINE: Reuters; REUT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B21

LENGTH: 244 words

DATELINE: Miami


With memories of killer hurricanes Mitch and Georges still fresh, another brutal
storm season could be on tap for the Caribbean and southeast U.S. coasts this
year, forecasters said yesterday.

The 1999 season, which officially starts on June 1, is likely to see more than
the usual 10 tropical storms and five to six hurricanes, the U.S. National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said.

The worst horror in a year that saw 14 tropical storms and 10 hurricanes was
Hurricane Mitch, which killed 11,000 people last October as it dumped two metres
of rain in Honduras and Nicaragua, devastating their economies.

Hurricane Georges killed more than 500 people on its march through the Dominican
Republic and Haiti in September.

A normal Atlantic hurricane season includes nine to 10 tropical storms, of which
five to six are hurricanes and two are "intense" hurricanes with maximum
sustained winds of at least 178 kilometres an hour.

Colorado State University William Gray, a widely followed hurricane forecaster,
also had bad news for coastal residents.

He said he expected 14 tropical storms this season, of which 10 will reach
hurricane strength and three will become intense hurricanes.

Tropical storms become hurricanes when their top sustained winds reach 119
kilometres an hour.

Citing the forecast, federal emergency officials announced Project Impact, a
program to encourage homeowners and businesses to make their buildings stronger,
even if it costs more to do so.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1999 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 370 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 18, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

After Pinpoint Tracking, Forecasting Turns to Intensity

BYLINE:  By ANDREW C. REVKIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1016 words


For a dozen days, Hurricane Isabel has seemingly rolled on tracks laid out by
government weather forecasters.

Its neatly predicted ride toward a collision with the mid-Atlantic coast today
reflected enormous advances in computer modeling of the atmosphere's vagaries
and growing understanding of the forces that steer such giant storms.
Forecasters say a five-day tracking forecast now has the same reliability as a
three-day forecast 15 years ago.

But forecasters have been far less successful in predicting the strength of
hurricanes, a characteristic almost as important as the storms' routes in
determining their destructive potential.

"We've listed that as our No. 1 priority for the research community as an area
where we need help," said Max Mayfield, the director of the National Hurricane
Center.

Better prediction of intensity is important, he said, because an increase in
winds of just 20 or 30 miles per hour can vastly increase the scale of damage
and threat to life. And a drop in the barometric pressure at the heart of a
storm can greatly broaden the geographic spread of those winds as it makes
landfall.

The challenges were evident yesterday. An advisory issued for the hurricane by
the National Hurricane Center could say only that "the intensity forecast
remains very problematic."

An audacious research effort, though, has begun to plumb hurricanes for clues
that could improve intensity forecasts. The storm and its Atlantic Ocean
predecessor, Hurricane Fabian, are the first test subjects.

The five-year project, by a team of several dozen government and academic
researchers, has sent two specially equipped airplanes, augmenting the aircraft
that routinely track all hurricanes, skimming just above the cresting waves in
clear areas between the storms' spiraling canyons of thunderclouds.

The research is risky but it is the only way to gather needed data, scientists
say. One hazard is the rapid buildup of salt on the airplanes from lofted sea
spray, which made the low-level flights "like flying through sandpaper," said
Michael L. Black, a meteorologist who flew into the hurricane last weekend.

The intensity of the hurricane has proved unpredictable for days. On Sunday,
when it had winds of 155 m.p.h., nearly as powerful as a hurricane can get,
federal forecasters said that "only minor fluctuations in intensity are expected
for the next couple of days." But by Tuesday, its winds had dropped by 50 m.p.h.

Warm water still could energize the storm, which had 105 m.p.h. winds last
night, but dry air and other atmospheric conditions could sap its strength. And
no supercomputer could calculate the result, leaving residents ashore with a
disquieting unease.

Since early September, scientists have been flying into the two hurricanes,
recording air and sea conditions in repeated passes as low as 200 feet above the
ocean and also dropping dozens of instrument-laden probes into the storm and
into the sea in its path.

The most recent flight into the current storm was on Sunday, and one more is
planned as it comes ashore today, said Dr. Peter G. Black, the chief scientist
leading the project for the Hurricane Research Division of the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration.

Some of the collected data were transmitted within minutes from the planes to
government climate-analysis centers to be plugged into computer models.

Much more information will be assessed for months to come to refine the murky
picture of how interactions between a hurricane and the surrounding air and sea
can cause it to rev within a day or less into a Florida-size bulldozer or fall
apart like a moth-eaten sweater.

Even in the best computer models now, Dr. Black said, some of those interactions
are estimated based on data gleaned from small storms with winds of 20 or 30
m.p.h. "We know that's crazy but haven't had a better way to do it until now,"
he said. "With Isabel and Fabian, scientists can sink their teeth into this
now."

Perhaps the biggest gap in understanding, experts say, concerns the interface
between a hurricane and the ocean waters beneath. The warmth in tropical waters
fuels a storm as energy is transferred from ocean to air through evaporation.
But once a hurricane has formed, friction between the air and water can weaken
it.

In a storm with winds far beyond the speed of fast-lane highway traffic, the
wind rips at the ocean so violently that it becomes impossible to neatly define
which is which, said Dr. Kerry A. Emanuel, who is involved in the new research
project and is a longtime researcher of hurricane behavior at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.

"You go from bubble-filled water to spray-filled air," Dr. Emanuel said. "You
can't point your finger and say 'there is the surface of the ocean.' "

Designers of computer models simulating hurricanes readily acknowledged that
they could not yet replicate that blinding brew of conditions.

Another limit on intensity predictions is the lack of data on temperatures
beneath the surface of waters ahead of an approaching hurricane. A churning
hurricane can pull cold water to the surface, rapidly stifling its own growth by
turning off the flow of energy from warm-water evaporation, experts say.
Satellites constantly monitor the sea's surface temperatures but cannot
determine temperatures of deeper layers.

The team that flew into the hurricane focused on both of these data gaps. The
low-level flights recorded variations in moisture, temperature and winds from
near the surface upward into the storms, a region never before methodically
studied.

The researchers also seeded the waters ahead of Hurricane Fabian with buoys and
submerged sensors that provided profiles of water temperatures in different
layers. Some of those buoys recorded the passage of Hurricane Isabel, as well.

Eventually, all hurricanes with the potential to strike the shore may have their
paths monitored in this way, Dr. Black said. Meantime, he said, the data
collected on the two hurricanes will provide scientists refining hurricane
computer modelers with new details on the workings of the real thing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 371 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                          November 15, 2017 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SCIENCE FILE;
Hurricanes are expected to soak Texas more often

BYLINE: DEBORAH NETBURN

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; SCI; Science Desk; Part B; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 467 words


So much for the storm of the century.

A new study suggests that massive hurricanes like Harvey will strike Houston and
Texas with much greater frequency in the future than they do now.

Why?

Blame our changing climate.

According to a study published Monday in PNAS, the odds of Harvey-like rains
drenching the city of Houston will grow from 1 in 2,000 at the beginning of the
21st century to 1 in 100 at the end of the century.

For Texas as a whole, the outlook is even worse.

The frequency of hurricanes with rains in excess of 20 inches occurring anywhere
in the state will jump from a once-in-100-years event at the end of the 20th
century to a once-in-5.5-years occurrence at the end of the 21st century.

The new work was led by MIT atmospheric scientist Kerry Emanuel, who specializes
in hurricanes.

To come to these conclusions, Emanuel relied on models that are used by the
National Hurricane Center to forecast hurricanes in real time.

He also used an array of six global climate models that take into account a
standard, business-as-usual greenhouse gas emission scenario.

"I wanted to be as open-minded as possible, so I didn't apply this technique to
just one climate model, but rather to as many climate models as I could lay my
hand on," he said.

Currently about 90 hurricanes a year occur somewhere on the globe, Emanuel said.
That overall number is not expected to change as the planet heats up, and in
fact it might even go down.

But modeling shows that even if the total number of hurricanes decreases, the
number of really intense hurricanes -- like Maria, Harvey and Irma -- will
increase in most places.

"We are confident about that," Emanuel said. "And what we are really confident
about is that a given hurricane will produce much more rain in a warmer
climate."

He added that there are three primary reasons why a warming climate would
produce more severe hurricanes in Texas in particular.

For one, the data show a slight uptick in the number of strong hurricanes that
will move into that region. More important, however, is that each given
hurricane will produce more rain because warmer air can hold more water.

Finally, the models suggest that hurricanes will likely move more slowly,
allowing them to dump more water over a particular area of land.

"We'll see more cases of stalling, where hurricanes kind of meander around,
which is what Harvey did," Emanuel said.

The techniques used in the paper are not new, but Emanuel said the significance
of the paper is to alert city planners to the changing probabilities of
large-scale hurricanes in Texas as soon as possible.

"It is important for those people who will rebuild Houston and rethink its
infrastructure to understand the magnitude of the risk and how it will change
over time," he said.

--

deborah.netburn@latimes.com

Twitter: @DeborahNetburn

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: ABOUT 90 hurricanes a year occur somewhere on the globe. Above,
a residential neighborhood in Houston in the wake of Hurricane Harvey in August.
PHOTOGRAPHER:Marcus Yam Los Angeles Times

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 372 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                              Western Daily Press

                           September 12, 2011 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

West braces itself for tail of hurricane

BYLINE: TRISTAN CORK

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 461 words


The West was warned to brace itself for high winds today as the remnants of a
powerful hurricane slammed into the British coast.

Forecasters were predicting gale force winds overnight, strengthening during
today as what was a tropical hurricane called Katia reaches the region.

The weathermen said yesterday they weren't sure just where the storm would hit,
and although early predictions were for it to pass over Scotland and northern
England, a 'yellow' alert was issued across the whole of the West, with a double
warning for coastal flooding and high winds. Hurricane Katia was a category four
hurricane - far more powerful than Hurricane Irene, which caused such
devastation in the USA a fortnight ago - but it merely skirted the east coast of
north America late last week and headed across the Atlantic towards the British
Isles over the weekend.

Chief forecaster for the Met Office Eddie Carroll said his team were tracking
the deep storm as it crossed the Atlantic quickly yesterday and over night.

As it reached more northerly latitudes, it transformed into a mid-latitude
depression and could no longer be called a hurricane. "This sort of transition
from a hurricane to more of a standard mid-latitude depression is a difficult
one to predict with confidence," he said.

"There's still a fair amount of uncertainty about the track and strength of the
winds.

Although it will be very windy everywhere, it is uncertain as to exactly which
parts of the country will see the very strongest winds. Western coasts could be
vulnerable to flooding," he added.

BBC weatherman Peter Gibbs said hurricanes can't reach Britain - even the great
storm of 1987 was not a hurricane, although it did feature hurricane-force
winds.

"Where it gets messy is when a hurricane heads out of the tropics and into
higher, temperate latitudes. It goes through an identity crisis as the supply of
warmth from below is cut off and cold air is drawn into the circulation,
eventually emerging as an extra-tropical storm," he said.

"Fortunately, the long sea track ensures that any ex-hur-ricanes reaching the UK
have gone through full transition before they arrive," he added.

Experts say the UK sees a storm of this strength around once per year, and the
remnants of a hurricane reach Britain once every few years.

Katia is the second major hurricane of the 2011 Atlantic hurricane season and
was rated as a category four hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson hurricane scale at
its peak.

The early start to the Atlantic storm season could spell bad news for the West's
trees - just like last year.

In 2010, trees were brought down across the region by high winds, because the
early season meant they had not yet shed their leaves.

WEATHER PAGE 17

80mph Wind speed expected in northern parts of Britain today

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WDP


                    Copyright 2011 Northcliffe Media Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 373 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Star-News (Wilmington, NC)

                            October 1, 2016 Saturday
                             NC Wilmington Edition

hurricane;
NWS: Impact on Carolinas still unclear

BYLINE: NC Norton Fran; StarNews Staff

SECTION: 1,A; GateHouse Media GM9; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 546 words


WILMINGTON   Hurricane Matthew rapidly strengthened Friday afternoon,
intensifying into a powerful Category 4 storm. But Matthew s impact on the
Carolinas remains unclear, according to the National Weather Service in
Wilmington and the National Hurricane Center.

Matthew continues to move to the west-southwest, with a turn toward the
northwest and north possible Sunday into Monday. The major hurricane is
southwest of Kingston, Jamaica, and has maximum sustained wind speeds of 150
mph, according to the hurricane center s 8 p.m. Friday update. A hurricane watch
has been issued for Jamaica.

In 1954 this is kind of the area where Hurricane Hazel started up. Also Charley
started up in this area,  Reid Hawkins with the NWS in Wilmington said.  This is
very good breeding grounds for hurricanes to start up and cross our area.

See hurricane,  A6

Hurricane Hazel was the deadliest and costliest hurricane of the 1954 Atlantic
hurricane season.

Hazel struck on Oct. 15 and 16, 1954, as a Category 4 hurricane. Its power,
speed and storm surge tore through buildings, snapped trees, toppled power lines
and shoved moored boats onto land. Nineteen people died in North Carolina and,
by the time Hazel reached Canada, 95 people were dead. The storm did $281
million in damage in the United States   that s almost $2.5 billion in 2016
dollars   and another $100 million in Canada.

Hurricane Charley was the second major hurricane of the 2004 Atlantic hurricane
season. Charley hit in August and was a fast-moving storm that brought lots of
wind to Southeastern North Carolina, but not much rain to the region. Since
Floyd in September 1999, Charley had had the strongest winds to hit Wilmington
with gusts of 70 mph.

Hawkins cautioned the  uncertainty is really high  if Matthew is going to reach
the Carolinas. Its speed also is in question, he said.

The National Hurricane Center s current forecast has Matthew moving
west-southwest through the next 48 hours.

The storm impacts are not expected to begin in our area until next week.

The hurricane center continues to indicate a disparity in the models on when the
storm turns, the forward speed and intensity. There is low confidence among
local meteorologists in impacts at this time.

The uncertainty of the track is high as the models disagree on when and where
the storm will turn northward.

While most models show the storm moving off our coast, the uncertainty is high.
When and where Matthew turns is still uncertain. If the hurricane turns later,
the track may shift to the west and have a greater chance of impacting our area.
It is still too early to become confident this storm will remain off the coast,
according to a briefing from the NWS in Wilmington.

At this time the Tropical Storm and Hurricane probabilities are south of
Southeastern North Carolina through 2 a.m. Wednesday.

We still can t drop our guard because if this storm moves a little father west,
then we may be right into the track of the storm,  Hawkins said.  It s looking
like Matthew is going to be a larger storm. It looks like its going to be bigger
than we ve seen in the last couple of years.

Reporter Hannah DelaCourt contributed to this story.

Reporter F.T. Norton can be reached at 910-343-2070 or
Fran.Norton@StarNewsOnline.com

Continued from A1



LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2016 Star-News, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 374 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                 May 20, 2003 Tuesday 0 South Pinellas Edition

Hurricane center predicts busy season

SOURCE: Compiled from Wire Reports

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 439 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


The National Hurricane Center predicted a busier-than-normal Atlantic hurricane
season Monday: 11 to 15 tropical storms, including six to nine hurricanes, with
two to four of those becoming major storms with winds exceeding 110 mph.

The historical average for the season that runs from June 1 to Nov. 30 is 10
tropical storms, including six hurricanes, two of them major.

Twelve tropical storms and four hurricanes developed last year, including two
major storms.

Hurricanes' severity ranges from Category 1 to Category 5, with anything
Category 3 or higher considered a major storm.

Ocean temperatures higher than normal and other factors will contribute to this
season's increased activity, said James Mahoney, deputy administrator of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Forecasters were especially concerned about what they said is a 70 percent
chance of a recurrence of the La Nina phenomenon this summer. La Nina -
lower-than-normal eastern Pacific Ocean temperatures near the equator - inhibits
the formation of hurricane-destroying crosswinds.

La Nina dominated the 1999 season, when there were 12 named storms, including
eight hurricanes and five Category 4 hurricanes (winds exceeding 130 mph), which
set a record. It also was in effect for the 1998 season, when there were 14
named storms, including 10 hurricanes, of which three were Category 3 or worse.

Two to three hurricanes typically hit the United States in seasons such as the
one forecast. Last year, just one hurricane made landfall.

Officials are warning residents to be prepared.

"We may have gotten lazy and lackadaisical in our preparedness for hurricanes -
get over it," said Michael Brown, director of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.

"Let me put it in layman's terms," Brown said, "it could be really bad."

The government will issue five-day hurricane forecasts this season, replacing
the three-day advisories used since 1964. Forecasters say that will allow
accurate, longer-range outlooks giving more forewarning to increasingly
populated coastal areas.

Colorado State University hurricane forecaster William Gray last month updated
his 2003 prediction to say there would be 12 tropical storms, including eight
hurricanes, three of them major. He will issue another update May 30.

Another private forecaster, the Weather Research Center, predicts eight tropical
storms, including six hurricanes, three of them major.

The storm names for this year are Ana, Bill, Claudette, Danny, Erika, Fabian,
Grace, Henri, Isabel, Juan, Kate, Larry, Mindy, Nicholas, Odette, Peter, Rose,
Sam, Teresa, Victor and Wanda.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Federal Emergency Management Agency director Michael Brown

                    Copyright 2003 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 375 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                  June 1, 2003 Sunday 0 South Pinellas Edition

Unpredictable time: It's hurricane season

BYLINE: MIKE BRASSFIELD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1187 words


Last year's worst hurricane was born thousands of miles east of the Tampa Bay
area and died hundreds of miles to the north.

Yet Hurricane Lili provided some lessons for the 2.5-million people who live
around Tampa Bay.

Today marks the start of hurricane season, which runs through Nov. 30. Plenty of
hurricanes are expected this year, although it's a mystery whether any will
threaten Florida.

That's one of Lili's main lessons: Hurricanes are notoriously unpredictable.

"At first, Lili was going to miss us. Then it came straight at us," said Jan
Comeaux, 36, one of tens of thousands who fled their coastal Louisiana homes to
escape last October's storm. "At first, it was this killer hurricane. Then it
wasn't so bad."

If you live in the Tampa Bay area and history was your only guide, you might
think you don't have to worry about this kind of thing. After all, no hurricane
has scored a direct hit on the area in more than 80 years.

"The Tampa Bay region has hurricane amnesia," said Max Mayfield, director of the
National Hurricane Center in Miami. "Hurricanes have hit there before, and they
will again."

The country's best-known hurricane forecaster, Colorado State University
professor William Gray, predicts that this Atlantic hurricane season will be
much more active than last year, when only four hurricanes appeared.

This year, Gray predicts 12 named tropical storms, with eight becoming
hurricanes, including three intense hurricanes with winds of 111 mph or more.
Gray says the surface of the Atlantic is warmer than usual this year, and the El
Nino weather phenomenon that suppressed hurricanes last year has since
dissipated.

This year already has seen the unexpected, a tropical storm named Ana that
appeared in late April - the first time that's happened since record-keeping
began in 1871. It died harmlessly.

"Hurricanes are nature's weapons of mass destruction," Mayfield said. "It's only
a matter of time before a major one hits a metropolitan area like Tampa Bay,
resulting in a tremendous loss of life."

The bay area has had only close calls and false alarms in recent years. Various
hurricanes threatened the region but veered away.

Many people can recall Hurricane Elena in 1985, the no-name storm of 1993 or
Tropical Storm Josephine in 1996, all of which raked the Tampa Bay area,
flooding thousands of low-lying homes and inflicting tens of millions of dollars
worth of damage.

But before the Tampa Bay area was so densely populated, two hurricanes changed
the landscape.

In 1848, a monster storm inundated much of the Pinellas peninsula with a 15-foot
wall of water. It carved out John's Pass, separating Madeira Beach from Treasure
Island. St. Petersburg didn't exist yet, but the village of Tampa was swamped.

In 1921, a hurricane cut an island north of Clearwater Beach in two, splitting
it into Honeymoon and Caladesi islands. That storm demolished local bridges,
flooded Tampa's waterfront and badly damaged St. Petersburg's municipal pier.

Gray says the U.S. is entering a long-term period of increased hurricane
activity. "The United States has been extremely lucky over the past few
decades," Gray said said.

Most Floridians have never lived through a direct hit from a hurricane. Some
think they did because even storms that come close - Elena, for example, or
Donna in 1960 - can cause major flooding.

Hurricane Lili, born out of a tropical wave off the west coast of Africa, killed
a dozen people in the Caribbean before it entered the Gulf of Mexico, headed
north and roared through Louisiana. It caused about $600-million in damage and
left thousands of people without power for weeks.

But Lili didn't kill anyone in Louisiana.

That's another of Lili's lessons: If you're told to evacuate, do it. But don't
go too far.

By the time the hurricane hit the Louisiana lowlands, few people were there to
feel it. Inland hotels were packed with coastal refugees huddling together
around battery-operated radios. Many had traveled only 30 to 40 miles from their
homes - just far enough to get away from the storm surge.

"We definitely would have had deaths if people hadn't evacuated. Some houses
were totally destroyed. People would have been crushed," said Bob LeBlanc,
emergency manager for Vermillion Parish, a coastal area that took a direct hit.

He estimates that 80 percent of parish residents evacuated. That's a lot of
people, but the fact that Lili was a Category 4 storm - winds between 131 mph
and 155 mph - before it hit made the decision to evacuate an easy one.

In contrast, the most recent evacuation order in the Tampa Bay area was largely
ignored. In 1998, when Pinellas ordered 200,000 people to leave low-lying areas
because of Hurricane Georges, roughly half stayed home. Fortunately, the storm
went elsewhere.

Tampa Bay emergency managers recommend that you keep your evacuation plan
simple. Forget about trying to drive to Orlando or Gainesville because highways
will be jammed. Instead, stay with a local friend who lives in a non-evacuation
area.

"Don't go any farther than you have to," said Gary Vickers, director of Pinellas
County Emergency Management. "There's no reason to evacuate the entire county.
There's plenty of higher ground."

Hurricanes remain unpredictable despite today's high-tech tools. Air Force
planes drop disposable sensors into a storm's inner core, providing
up-to-the-minute data for sophisticated computer models.

In fact, for the first time this year, the public will get five-day hurricane
forecasts instead of the three-day predictions used since 1964.

But that doesn't mean forecasters know where hurricanes will actually go.

"People think we do a better job than we actually do," said Mayfield, the
Hurricane Center's director.

Last October, Lili was a Category 4 hurricane bearing down on Louisiana's coast
with 145-mph wind gusts and a 12- to 16-foot storm surge that would have put
entire towns under water.

As it approached, Lili's forecast track kept changing slightly - only a few
degrees, but enough to make a couple of hundred miles of difference. First New
Orleans was nervous. Then western Louisiana and Texas. Lili eventually hit
central Louisiana but unexpectedly fizzled at the last minute to a Category 2
storm, with 100 mph winds.

This kind of uncertainty has played out before in the Tampa Bay area, and it
will again.

This region's worst-case scenario is a hurricane coming straight into Tampa Bay
from the south, causing substantial flooding from water surging into the bay and
over land.

Wind can be a big problem, too.

When Lili's eyewall came through Louisiana, it rained sideways. But Lili was a
relatively dry hurricane. Its winds were what caused about $800-million in
damage and knocked out power to nearly half a million people.

Police enforced emergency curfews as entire towns went pitch-dark at night.
Nearly a week later, more than 80,000 people still had no electricity.

2003 storm names

Ana, Bill, Claudette, Danny, Erika, Fabian, Grace, Henri, Isabel, Juan, Kate,
Larry, Mindy, Nicholas, Odette, Peter, Rose, Sam, Teresa, Victor, Wanda.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Associated Press; PHOTO ILLUSTRATION, (2); (2002) Desiree Verdin
of Pointe Aux Chenes, La., wades through his front yard, left flooded by
Hurricane Lili last October.; St. Petersburg Times headlines report on the 1921
tropical storm that swept through Pass-A-Grille in the Storm Extra; edition; St.
Petersburg Times headlines report on the 1921 tropical storm that swept through
Pass-A-Grille in the Second Extra edition

                    Copyright 2003 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 376 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                April 10, 2004 Saturday 0 South Pinellas Edition

Florida's a sitting duck, hurricane expert says

BYLINE: TAMARA LUSH

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 415 words

DATELINE: LAKE BUENA VISTA


Hurricane researcher William Gray predicts 14 named storms will form in the
Atlantic basin this year and eight will become hurricanes, three of them major.

Gray also predicted a 71 percent chance that the U.S. coastline will be hit by a
major hurricane - a Category 3 storm with winds of 111 mph or above.

The predictions came Friday at the 26th annual National Hurricane Conference.

Gray said Florida is a "sitting duck" poised on the brink of disaster.

"I don't think the average Floridian knows how lucky they have been," said Gray,
of Colorado State University.

It's become something of an annual ritual. For the  past 15-odd years, Gray has
said essentially the same thing, at least when it comes to Florida and
hurricanes.

"There's trouble on the way," he said.

The hurricane season starts June 1.

Gray and his team of hurricane researchers predict 14 named storms will form in
the Atlantic basin this year. Of those, eight are predicted to become hurricanes
and three will evolve into giant hurricanes of Category 3 or above, Gray said.

He said there is a 71 percent chance of a major hurricane hitting somewhere
along the U.S. coastline this year.

Gray and his researchers analyze different types of data - from temperatures in
ocean waters off  Africa to rain patterns to past hurricane seasons - to make
their predictions. Florida has been relatively hurricane-free over the past
several decades. Hurricane Andrew was the only storm to directly hit peninsular
Florida between 1966 and 2003, he said.

However, Florida was struck by two powerful hurricanes in the 1920s. There
weren't as many people living here during that decade. If those same hurricanes
were to hit now, they would be devastating, especially for South Florida.

"If the law of averages starts working, we're going to see a lot of storms," he
said.

During the conference - which held workshops on obscure facts of weather
patterns and obtuse formulas for calculating hurricanes - researchers said that
regular folks should be prepared for storms, no matter what happens at such
conferences.

But meteorologists such as Gray admit that the public may be sick of his dire
predictions. Every year, he warns this may be the year that Florida is hit by
"The Big One."

He worries that people may have become complacent and aren't paying attention
anymore.

"I feel like I've been appointed by Chicken Little," Gray said.

- Tamara Lush can be reached at (727) 893-8612 or at lush@sptimes.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; William Gray

                    Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 377 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

               October 2, 2004 Saturday 0 South Pinellas Edition

Unwind, but hold on to that plywood

BYLINE: CURTIS KRUEGER

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 546 words


As another weekend gets under way, the forecast offers something different:

No hurricanes bearing down on Florida.

What's more, hurricane forecaster William Gray has predicted a relatively mild
close to this year's killer storm season.

Gray and colleague Phil Klotzbach of Colorado State University predict three
named storms this month, two of them hurricanes of Category 2 strength or
weaker. They see just an 8 percent chance of one or more major hurricanes -
Category 3 or stronger - crossing the U.S. coastline in October.

They also anticipate little activity in November.

But Max Mayfield, director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami, said it's
too early to put away the plywood.

Mayfield said that from 1900 to 2000 only eight major hurricanes - with speeds
of 111 mph or more - have formed in October.

But he pointed out that even less intense hurricanes - Category 1 and 2 with
wind speeds of 75 mph to 110 mph - are dangerous.

"You don't have to have a major hurricane to have a lot of damage and loss of
life," Mayfield said.

In particular, Mayfield said he was concerned to see that hurricanes this season
have torn away many of the sand dunes on Florida's east coast, from Palm Beach
to Cape Canaveral.

A 5-foot dune can help protect a community from a 4-foot storm surge, but not if
it has washed away.

"This is a big, big deal," Mayfield said.

"A lot of that protection is no longer there."

Mayfield said he hopes Gray is right about the milder end to the hurricane
season.

"My point would be we don't want to minimize the month of October," he said.

Weather researchers on Friday were tracking Hurricane Lisa in the Atlantic
Ocean, which was headed northeast and not expected to make landfall.

They also were eyeing a tropical wave in the northwestern Caribbean Sea.

Gray and Klotzbach in May predicted 14 storms would form in the Atlantic basin
this year and that eight would become hurricanes; three of them Category 3 or
stronger.

They haven't been far off. This year's storm season has already seen 12 named
storms, including eight hurricanes - six of them Category 3 or stronger.

"It is not the number of hurricanes in the Atlantic basin that has been so
unusual, but rather the rare combination of high hurricane activity and very
favorable surrounding hurricane steering conditions that drove so many storms
from the deep tropics across Florida in such a short time period," Gray said.
"This year has been a once-in-a-lifetime kind of year.

"Although Floridians should always be prepared for land-falling hurricanes, they
should not expect what we have experienced this year to become the norm," Gray
added. "We have studied more than 100 years of storm data, and this year did not
behave like any other year we have studied."

However, he said busier-than-average seasons and more landfalls are likely to be
in Florida's future. Some researchers believe we may be in the early stages of a
25- to 40-year cycle of more frequent, major hurricanes.

Information from the Associated Press was included in this report.

STORM FORECAST

Predicted    To Date

Named storms (39 mph or more)        14         12

Hurricanes (75 mph or more)           8          8

Major hurricanes (111 mph or more)    3          6

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

                    Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 378 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                 therecord.com

                             May 22, 2014 Thursday

Canadians urged to prepare for hurricane season

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 332 words


HALIFAX - The Canadian Hurricane Centre says residents in Eastern Canada can
expect an average or below-average level of hurricane activity this year.

Hurricane season runs from June to November, but the centre's director says
tropical storms have been known to form in the North Atlantic in May.

Chris Fogarty says the El Nino effect typically suppresses the formation of
tropical storms.

However, Fogarty says that regardless of the seasonal forecast, Canadians should
prepare for heavy weather.

He says one or two tropical storms typically affect the Canadian land mass every
year, regardless of the level of hurricane activity over the ocean.

Fogarty says last year was a particularly light hurricane season, but two
tropical storms - Andrea in June and Gabrielle in September - prompted the
hurricane centre to issue bulletins.

The forecast in Canada mirrors what U.S. federal forecasters said Thursday as
they expect it to be a slower-than-usual Atlantic hurricane season, also citing
an expected El Nino.

The El Nino, which warms part of the Pacific every few years and changes rain
and temperature patterns around the world, will likely reduce the number and
intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration said in New York City.

Officials in the United States expect about eight to 13 named tropical storms
and three to six hurricanes. Just one or two major hurricanes with winds over
177 kilometres an hour are forecast.

Forecasters in the U.S. got it wrong last year when they predicted an unusually
busy hurricane season. There were just 13 named storms and two hurricanes,
Umberto and Ingrid, both of which were Category 1, the lowest on the scale that
measures hurricanes by wind speed. There were no major hurricanes.

In 2012, storm surge was devastating to the New York area when Superstorm Sandy
slammed the East coast, killing 147 people and causing $50 billion US in damage.
Sandy lost hurricane status when it made landfall in New Jersey.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 Metroland Media Group Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 379 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                 Ottawa Citizen

                              June 11, 2006 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Stormy Science: This Atlantic hurricane season is likely to be fierce, but
experts are challenging the widely held belief among environmentalists that the
increased storm activity is tied to global warming

BYLINE: Margret Brady, The Ottawa Citizen

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 3087  words

DATELINE: EVERGLADES CITY, Florida


EVERGLADES CITY, Florida - Broken concrete and debris litter the unkempt grass
outside the once-proud courthouse in Everglades City. The 78-year-old
neoclassical building was pummelled by 200 kilometre-per-hour winds when
Hurricane Wilma crashed ashore just north of the southwest Florida town last
October. The building's foundations sank after the town was flooded by a metre
of sludge and winds tore a chunk from the structure's roof.

Wilma was just one of several hurricanes that cut a swath of death and misery
through Florida and other U.S. Gulf Coast states last year. Hurricane
forecasters predict another fierce season this year.

Many environmentalists contend that the violence of last year's hurricanes was a
direct consequence of man-made global warming. After all, hurricanes are fuelled
by warm water so it's easy to point a finger at this. Last month, photos of
hurricane-caused devastation were shown in presentations at a climate-change
conference in Ottawa, organized by the Engineering Institute of Canada.
Delegates would have concluded logically that recent hurricane activity was
caused by global warming and there was little scientific doubt on the matter.

Yet several leading hurricane experts claim that research has failed to prove a
reliable long-term link between global warming and the frequency and intensity
of tropical storms. Early last year, one climate-change scientist angrily
withdrew from working on a report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) because prominent members of the international panel claimed the
trends were clearly linked. Dissenter Chris Landsea, then with the Hurricane
Research Division of the National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in
Miami, insisted that evidence strongly suggested the impact of global warming on
hurricanes was small. The recent series of bad hurricane years was part of a
natural cycle, he said.

The topic has become a scientific and political hot potato.

"I cannot in good faith continue to contribute to a process that I view as both
being motivated by preconceived agendas and being scientifically unsound," Mr.
Landsea wrote in an open letter to the scientific community on global warming.

Mr. Landsea co-authored an article on hurricanes and global warming that was
published in November by the American Meteorological Society. The assertion that
global warming intensifies hurricanes is scientifically premature, the authors
argued. They concluded that a false assumption could lead to the implementation
of costly and ineffective policies to reduce hurricane impacts. The article did
not, however, question that climate change is under way.

The link between monster hurricanes and global warming was also questioned
recently in an article published in Geophysical Research Letters. Climatologists
from the University of Virginia studied water temperatures along the path of
strong Atlantic hurricanes over the past 25 years. They concluded that increases
in storm intensities must be related to other factors such as wind shear and
atmospheric moisture levels and not only to warmer oceans.

"It is too simplistic to only implicate sea-surface temperatures in the dramatic
increase in the number of major hurricanes," said Patrick Michaels, lead author
of the report. Like Mr. Landsea, he believes that natural oscillations in the
tropical environment are key to any increase in intensity. Although there will
be major hurricanes in the future, he does not expect them to be stronger than
in the past.

-

Chris Landsea is now science and operations officer with NOAA's National
Hurricane Center in Florida, a formidably built structure designed to withstand
Category 5 hurricanes, the highest on the scientific scale. Located on the edge
of the University of Miami's campus, where Mr. Landsea also teaches, the
satellite-dish topped building is dubbed "Bob's Bunker" after the centre's
former director Bob Sheets.

A native of Miami, Mr. Landsea became fascinated with hurricanes as a teenager
when he watched the dramatic cloud formations of Hurricane David as it swept
past the city. In 1992, when he was studying tropical cyclones at Colorado State
University, Hurricane Andrew tore the roof off his family home.

"The whole neighbourhood looked like it was bombed out," he says. "What I was
studying at school became very real to me when I saw the physical destruction
that hurricanes can do."

Last year, Mr. Landsea's home was struck by Katrina and Wilma. Katrina flooded
his house as it lumbered on to New Orleans. Later, Wilma uprooted his trees.
Both hurricanes knocked out power in the Miami area for days, although the
generator at the National Hurricane Center kept going.

Until recently, Mr. Landsea was one of NOAA's Hurricane Research Division's
"storm-chasers." These are the intrepid researchers who fly into or over
hurricanes to evaluate their strength. Even with vastly improved satellite
tracking and methods for cloud analysis, flying into hurricanes remains the most
reliable way to measure barometric pressure and wind speeds, says Mr. Landsea.
Civil authorities need to know if they are anticipating a relatively mild
Category 1 hurricane or an extreme Category 4 storm that could flatten a
mobile-home community. This information is required to decide whether an
evacuation -- a very costly procedure -- is in order. It is also used to study
hurricane behaviour so that forecasting methods can be improved.

Mr. Landsea has flown into or over 20 hurricanes. Interviewed recently, he says
"the view inside the eye or outside the storm is pretty phenomenal." He always
felt safe on hurricane flights despite the turbulence. "Though it's best to be
served drinks after the flight and not during it," he quips.

He believes we are 11 years into a busy period that could continue for another
15 to 30 years in the Atlantic. Not good news for the residents of the Gulf
Coast states, the Carolinas, Mexico and the Caribbean. "Florida sticks out of
the continental U.S. like a sore thumb," he says. "It's no wonder it is hit so
often."

The written history of Atlantic hurricanes goes back at least as far as
Christopher Columbus who experienced at least two of them. Over several
centuries, the Spanish Empire suffered staggering loses from these violent
storms, including the sinking of fleets of gold-laden galleons and entire
armadas. The numbers of dead are unknown, but it is recorded that many vessels
lost all hands.

Many slaves en route to the New World were drowned as well. Hurricanes formed
off the west coast of Africa follow much the same path as the slave ships that
traversed the ocean until the middle of the 19th century.

Compared with the detailed hurricane data now available, records of these
tropical storms are incomplete, but even during the period known as the "Little
Ice Age" (circa 1550 to 1850), hurricane-inflicted damage was clearly immense.

Mr. Landsea and his students at the University of Miami are analysing ship
observations dating back to 1850. They have discovered one or two tropical
storms per year that were missing from the existing hurricane database.

"We know of very distinct swings back and forth in the Atlantic of busy and
quiet periods," he says. These intervals last 25 to 40 years. The late 19th
century was very active and possibly worse than now. The next busy period ran
from 1926 to 1960. From 1970 until 1995, Atlantic hurricane seasons were
unusually quiet. This may have lulled people into a false sense of security. Not
surprisingly, this is when the building boom along the Florida coasts really
took off.

Typically, there are three to five hurricanes during a quiet year. About half of
these are major hurricanes (Category 3 or more). In a busy period those numbers
double.

Recent studies may simply be too short-term to assess global-warming effects
properly. For example, a paper published in last month's Science magazine claims
to prove a link between global warming and hurricane intensity based on the
period 1970 to 2004. Researchers from the Atlanta-based Georgia Institute of
Technology studied data on Category 4 and 5 storms in six ocean basins,
including the North Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans. They concluded that the
rise in sea-surface temperatures was a major influence in hurricane formation.

However, Mr. Landsea says the fierce Atlantic hurricane period that ended in
1960 was excluded so the issue of hurricane cycles was not really addressed.

Hurricane specialists Philip Klotzbach and William Gray of Colorado State
University say that global numbers of hurricanes and their intensity have not
increased over the past three decades except in the Atlantic. They contend that
increases in Atlantic sea-surface temperatures are driven by changes in ocean
salinity unrelated to global warming. This hypothesis proposes a sort of oceanic
conveyor belt that moves at varying speeds. The colder, saltier waters of the
North Atlantic are denser than the less salty waters of the Southern Atlantic.
The colder water sinks because it is denser and the warmer water swells up,
transporting more warm water to the North Atlantic

When recent years are compared with an earlier active period (1950-64), Mr.
Klotzbach and Mr. Gray find little difference in hurricane frequency or
intensity although global surface temperatures were distinctly cooler during the
earlier cycle.

But as Mr. Landsea points out, quiet periods are not necessarily safe. Hurricane
Andrew, which inflicted more economic damage in the U.S. than any hurricane
before Katrina, occurred in a so-called quiet period. So did America's deadliest
storm, the Galveston hurricane of 1900 that killed at least 8,000 people.

Recent global modelling studies suggest that future climate change could
increase wind speeds by about five per cent by 2080. This would suggest a recent
change in wind speed of perhaps one per cent, says Mr. Landsea. If that were the
case, Katrina's peak winds of 285 kilometres per hour would be a few kilometres
per hour faster than average, an amount that would be virtually unmeasurable, he
says.

The economic burden of hurricanes has risen dramatically. Hurricanes in 2004
caused about $40 billion U.S. in damage to the continental U.S. The damage
caused by the great storms of 2005 may be closer to $100 billion. Improving
building codes and controlling urban sprawl in low-lying coastal areas would
limit economic losses far more effectively than trying to stem hurricane
formation by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, Mr. Landsea says.

-

Meanwhile, Everglades City on the edge of Florida's Everglades National Park is
still reeling from last year's hurricane season. On a humid day there recently,
a lone picnic table stood abandoned and broken on the side of the virtually
shadeless town-centre circle. A fetid odour wafted from the portable toilets
nearby.

The small community had not experienced a direct hit since Hurricane Donna
destroyed 50 per cent of its buildings in 1960. That Category 4 storm churned up
half of the ecologically vital mangrove forest and killed 40 per cent of the
park's white heron population. Its impact was far worse than that of Hurricane
Wilma.

Mayor Sammy Hamilton hopes to have the old courthouse, now the city hall, open
in time for the community's Seafood Festival next winter. In the meantime, town
staff work in temporary trailers.

Everglades City is evocative of the small Texas town in Peter Bogdanovich's The
Last Picture Show. It is a town that time and the Florida building boom passed
by. Hurricanes, however, didn't.

Margret Brady is an Ottawa science writer who was recently the 2006 Yves Fortier
Earth Science Journalism Award for a three-piece feature in the Citizen's Weekly
about the Earth's shifting magnetic field.

- - -

The 2006 forecast: 'active'

A tropical depression in the Caribbean headed toward Florida yesterday and was
expected to become the first named storm of the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season.
The depression formed earlier in the day, nine days after the official start of
the season, but the poorly organized system was not expected to become a
hurricane, according to the National Hurricane Center. The system, which had
maximum sustained wind near 56 km/h, would be named Alberto if it reaches the 63
km/h threshold for a tropical storm.

The Department of Atmospheric Science of Colorado State University forecasts 17
Atlantic storms this year. They predict nine will be classified as hurricanes
and five of these will be intense. Euphemistically, this is called an "active
season." It is almost twice as active as the 1950-2000 average of about 10
storms, including six hurricanes, but not quite as busy as last year. However,
the same forecasters underestimated the storminess of 2005.

How hurricanes are rated

The Saffir-Simpson scale was developed in 1972 by Florida-based engineer Herbert
Saffir and Robert Simpson, a former director of the National Hurricane Center in
Miami. Decisions on whether or not to evacuate communities in the paths of
hurricanes are often determined by this rating. Major hurricanes are Category 3
or greater.

Category Pressure Winds Surge Damage

(millibars) (km/h) (metres)

1 980 119-153 1.2-1.7 minimal

2 965-979 54-178 1.8-2.6 moderate

3 945-964 179-210 2.7-3.9 extensive

4 920-944 211-250 4.0-5.5 extreme

5 under 920 250 plus 5.5 plus catastrophic

Recent Category 5 hurricanes

1992: Hurricane Andrew was the costliest Atlantic hurricane before Katrina
swamped New Orleans last year. It killed 65 people, left 250,000 people homeless
and caused $27 billion U.S. in damage, primarily in the Miami area.

1998: Hurricane Mitch killed more than 9,000 people from rain-induced flooding
in Central America. Worst hit were Honduras and Nicaragua.

2003: Hurricane Isabel made landfall in the north Carolinas, killing 50 people
in the U.S. and causing $3.5 billion U.S. in damage. The storm followed a path
similar to 1954's Hurricane Hazel that killed more than 1,000 people, including
81 Canadians.

2004: After causing considerable hardship in the Caribbean, Hurricane Ivan swept
into the southern U.S. from the Gulf of Mexico. The storm killed more than 100
people and caused more than $14 billion U.S. in damage. Add this to the other
major Atlantic hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne that cumulatively caused
$30 billion U.S.. Jeanne alone killed more than 3,000 people in Haiti.

2005: A record four Atlantic hurricanes achieved Category 5 status in one
season:

Emily, Katrina, Rita and Wilma, all of which came ashore -- although not all at
full strength. Total damage is believed to be more than $100 billion U.S.
Katrina killed almost 2,000 people and searchers are still finding bodies in New
Orleans.

- - -

What is a Hurricane?

A hurricane is a massive tropical storm.

In other parts of the world, it's known as a cyclone or typhoon. On average,
about 80 hurricanes rampage about the world's oceans every year.

- Generally, the bigger the ocean the bigger the storm. This is one reason why
typhoons formed in the Pacific and Indian oceans have proved far more deadly on
average than Atlantic hurricanes.

- However, shallow basins of water such as the Gulf of Mexico can give rise to
higher storm surges. Try blowing on a plate full of water versus a deep bowl of
water and see what happens.

- The typical hurricane possesses 10 times the energy released in the 1883
eruption of Krakatoa, the infamous Indonesian volcanic eruption that killed
almost 40,000 people and was heard 5,000 kilometres away. If it could be
harnessed, the energy in a hurricane could keep the streetlights in New York
City ablaze for 27,000 years, according to Michael Allaby's book, Hurricanes
(2003).

- Atlantic tropical storms are formed at latitudes of at least 10 degrees north
of the equator where their distinctive spiralling counter-clockwise motion is
caused by the Earth's rotation. South of the equator these storms spin
clockwise.

- Hurricanes are fuelled by temperatures of at least 26 C, which is why the
Atlantic hurricane season begins in June, when the temperatures of water north
of the equator rise, and runs until the end of December. Atlantic hurricanes are
spawned off the west coast of Africa early in the season and in the Caribbean in
the fall.

- Before the start of last year's hurricane season, mid-Atlantic Ocean
temperatures were 1 C to 3 C warmer than those recorded at the same time in
2004. This year, these temperatures have dropped, but that doesn't mean 2006
will be a quiet year for hurricanes. Whether Atlantic hurricanes make landfall
is largely determined by winds. For example, under the unusual weather pattern
known as El Nino, the normal direction of the Pacific trade winds is reversed so
they blow east across North America rather than west toward Australia. Without
strong easterly winds, as in El Nino, more Atlantic hurricanes come ashore.
These winds can shear off the cloud tops of tropical storms, which tower up to
20 kilometres above sea level, weakening them. Wind shear in the Atlantic is low
this year just as in 2005.

-- Margret Brady

- - -

What's in a Name

How hurricanes are named

(and why some are retired)

Last year's Atlantic hurricane season was the first time the World
Meteorological Organization ran through its predeter-mined list of 21 names for
tropical storms. It supplemented the list with the Greek alphabet, which serves
as its backup list.

With a total of 28 named storms, 2005 was the most active season on record. In
the 20th century, the busiest year was 1933 which experienced at least 21
tropical storms and hurricanes. Since 1950, Atlantic tropical storms have been
given names. Meteorologists first used the Second World War's phonetic alphabet
(Able, Baker, Charlie, Dog, etc.). Since 1953, Atlantic tropical storms have
been named alphabetically from lists created by the National Hurricane Center in
Miami but not using the letters Q, U, X, Y and Z. Until 1979, only women's names
were used.

Other tropical cyclone regions have devised their own lists of names.

Countries can ask the World Meteorological Organization to retire the names of
the most destructive cyclones as Canada did with Hurricane Juan which wreaked
havoc in the Maritimes in 2003. Last year, a record five names were retired --
Dennis, Katrina, Rita, Stan and Wilma.

-- Margret Brady

The list for 2006

Alberto

Beryl

Chris

Debby

Ernesto

Florence

Gordon

Helene

Isaac

Joyce

Kirk

Leslie

Michael

Nadine

Oscar

Patty

Rafael

Sandy

Tony

Valerie

William

- - -

Can a hurricane be stopped?

As storms get worse, the fringe science of weather modification

gets more serious consideration.

See next page

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphic/Diagram: National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
via Getty Images; In this satellite image, Hurricane Katrina roars through the
Gulf of Mexico last August. Katrina's peak winds reached 285 kilometres an hour.
The damage caused by the great storms of 2005 is estimated at more than $100
billion U.S.; Graphic/Diagram: Robert Cross, The Ottawa Citizen; (See hard copy
for graphic.)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2006 Ottawa Citizen, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 380 of 881 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                            August 30, 2005 Tuesday
                            All but Toronto Edition

Southern United States has a long history of getting in the way of hurricanes

BYLINE: Reuters; U.S. National Hurricane Center

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 131  words


DEADLIEST HURRICANES TO STRIKE THE SOUTHERN UNITED STATES SINCE 1900, BY NUMBER
OF CASUALTIES:

1900 Unnamed hurricane, since known as the Galveston Hurricane, slams into
Texas, killing up to 12,000 people.

1928 About 2,500 are killed in Florida by a hurricane that caused a storm surge
in Lake Okeechobee.

1935 Category five hurricane, since referred to as the Labor Day Hurricane and
the most intense storm to hit the U.S. since records began, sweeps over the
Florida Keys, killing 408.

1919 Unnamed hurricane targets Florida and Texas, killing 287.

1957 Hurricane Audrey hits Louisiana and Texas, killing 390. 1915 New Orleans
directly hit by a storm that kills 275.

1969 Hurricane Camille, the second most intense storm to strike the U.S., kills
256 in Mississippi, Virginia and Louisiana.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News; Chronology

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2005 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 381 of 881 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                           September 6, 2005 Tuesday
                                Toronto Edition

Forecasters predict more fierce weather: Hurricane season has only reached its
halfway point

BYLINE: Michael Kuss, National Post

SECTION: SPORTS; On The Weather; Pg. S8

LENGTH: 253  words


In the wake of Hurricane Katrina, there's more bad news for the Gulf region.

Dr. William Gray of the Colorado State University hurricane forecast centre
issued his mid-season hurricane forecast update.

That's right, the season is only half over and the rest of the way will continue
to be very active.

"Unfortunately, we are continuing the bad news by predicting above-average
activity for September and October," Dr. Gray said. "This will be one of the
most active seasons and is already the most destructive hurricane season on
record."

The updated forecast for September calls for five named storms and four
hurricanes, two of those being major hurricanes measured at Category 3 or
stronger.

For October, three more named storms are expected, two of those becoming
hurricanes with one of those hurricanes at least a Category 3.

The additional eight named storms would bring the total for the season to 20,
which is one shy of the record. To this point, there's already been 12 named
storms, four hurricanes, three of those major (Emily, Dennis and Katrina).

In fact, there has already been more named storms and more major hurricanes than
an entire average hurricane season. The 50-year average in the Atlantic basin is
9.6 named storms, 5.9 hurricanes and 2.3 major hurricanes.

With the cleanup from Katrina likely to continue into next hurricane season, the
last thing needed is another storm to make landfall in the U.S.

We can only hope that September and October won't be as severe as Dr. Gray's
latest projection suggests.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2005 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 382 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 25, 2016 Wednesday

Early use of 'hurricane hunter' data improves hurricane intensity predictions

LENGTH: 721  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: American Association for the Advancement of Science has issued the
following news release:



  Data collected via airplane when a hurricane is developing can improve
hurricane intensity predictions by up to 15 percent, according to Penn State
researchers who have been working with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration and the National Hurricane Center to put the new technique into
practice.





 Prior to this study, no hurricane prediction model incorporated the vast amount
of data collected by 'hurricane hunters,' which are NOAA or U.S. Air Force
airborne reconnaissance missions that fly into hurricanes to collect data.

 "Hurricane hunting has existed in the U.S. since the 1940s, and planes have
included on-board radar since the 1970s," said Yonghui Weng, meteorology
research associate, Penn State. "Unfortunately, before our study, only a small
portion of this radar data was being used in predictive hurricane models. Their
main use was to probe the intensity and structure of the storm, and this
information is given to forecasters."



 Hurricane hunters initiate their first mission as soon as the hurricane is
within flying distance, and they continue to fly missions to collect data
throughout the duration of the hurricane. This data is fed into statistical and
dynamical models that generate many variations of possible hurricane paths and
intensity.



 "Typically, aircrews use three different types of equipment -- radar, on-plane
sensors and devices dropped into the hurricane called dropsondes -- to collect
data on the physical structure, wind speed, direction, temperature and moisture
of storms," said Fuqing Zhang, professor of meteorology, Penn State. "Because of
technological advances in data processing, statistical algorithm and scientific
com uting, we are now able to assimilate more of this data into prediction
models than previously."



 For example, prior to this study, the National Hurricane Center's hurricane
prediction model used data collected from the outside portion of the storm but
not the inner core.



 Predicting a hurricane's path has increased in accuracy in the past few
decades, but predicting intensity has been a longstanding challenge for
researchers. Weng and Zhang investigated whether better use of hurricane hunter
data could lead to improved intensity forecasts. They present their findings in
an invited paper in the August issue of the Journal of the Meteorological
Society of Japan, currently online.



 Using Penn State's real-time hurricane prediction system, developed by Zhang's
team, in particular Weng, they 'hindcasted,' or retroactively forecasted, the
intensity and path of 23 hurricanes and tropical cyclones occurring between 2008
and 2012. Using one forecast with reconnaissance data and one without, they com
ared their predictions with the storm's actual path and intensity. Then in 2013
Weng and Zhang tested the use of reconnaissance data in real time with 11
storms.



 For 2008 through 2012, the team found that airborne reconnaissance data reduced
forecast errors by more than 10 percent for both wind speed and sea level
pressure, two major com onents of a hurricane's intensity. In 2013, the Penn
State model reduced forecast errors for wind speed and sea level pressure by
between 5 and 15 percent, com ared to existing models.



 "In our study, we have demonstrated the benefit of integrating or incorporating
reconnaissance data at an early stage into high-resolution weather prediction
models through advanced data assimilation," said Zhang. "Improving forecasts
even 5 to 15 percent could translate to billions of dollars in savings, and this
also could help agencies provide more notice to people if they are in the path
of a storm."

 This is the third major hurricane prediction model improvement Zhang's team has
investigated in recent years that has been transitioning to practice. They also
showed that an ensemble-based approach, in which many variations of models are
run to show uncertainty of predictions, and the use of on-plane Doppler improves
forecasts, could improve predictions.



 The team is now investigating whether better use of satellite data can further
improve hurricane predictions.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com br/>

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 383 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       The Reporter (Tavernier, Florida)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 5, 2011 Friday

Scientists awarded patent for new hurricane intensity scale

BYLINE: David Hawkins, The Reporter, Tavernier, Fla.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 835 words


Aug. 05--Mark Powell, a scientist at a federal research lab in Florida, hopes
that someday people won't be so easily fooled by hurricanes.

Powell, a Ph.D. atmospheric scientist, knows there are problems with the way
forecasters tell the public about hurricane strength. Hurricanes cause damage
and kill people with both wind and water. And of the two, water is often
deadlier. But the familiar hurricane scale -- Category 1 to Category 5, named
the Saffir-Simpson scale for its inventors -- is based on just wind speed,
Powell points out.

Wind speed alone, especially for Category 1 and 2 hurricanes, can make people
think storms are less dangerous than they sometimes are. That kind of
misunderstanding has had tragic consequences.

This summer, Powell and a colleague, Timothy Reinhold, Ph.D, were granted a U.S.
patent for a hurricane strength scale known as IKE. It's designed to rate how
powerful a hurricane is, and provide clear ratings of potential damage from both
wind and storm surge.

"We hope these new scales would do a better job of showing the risk of a
hurricane before it makes landfall," Powell said last week.

Powell works at the Atlantic and Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory of
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Reinhold is senior vice
president of research and chief engineer with the Insurance Institute for
Business and Home Safety, an independent nonprofit organization that works to
reduce damage from natural disasters with improved structural standards and
preparation.

Powell and Reinhold's system calculates the total energy in a storm, the
"Integrated Kinetic Energy" or IKE. The IKE value shows a storm's total power,
something like its horsepower, based on both wind speed and how much area the
winds cover.

The IKE value leads to ratings for potential damage from wind and surge. The
Wind Damage Potential and Surge Damage Potential ratings run from 0 (lowest) to
5.99.

It's a coincidence that Ike is the name of a recent hurricane that is a good
example of how the IKE scale shows the true power of both wind and surge.

Hurricane Ike made landfall in 2008 on the Texas coast as a Category 2
hurricane. But because of its size and the shallow water offshore, storm surge
devastated low-lying areas. Communities on the Bolivar Peninsula were wiped
away. In the United States, 112 people died; 23 were never found, according to a
National Hurricane Center report.

Ike's surge was about twice as high as usually expected from Category 2 winds,
Powell and Reinhold say. The hurricane was incredibly large, with reports of
tropical-storm winds spanning 510 miles.

Powell recalled that the National Weather Service warned Gulf Coast residents
that Hurricane Ike would be extremely dangerous. An official warning said people
who didn't evacuate would "face certain death."

'Major' concern

"In one way you're saying it's significant and you face certain death," Powell
said, "and yet it's not a major hurricane according to the [Saffir-Simpson]
scale."

Hurricanes are called "major hurricanes" by the National Hurricane Center when
they are Category 3 and higher on the Saffir-Simpson scale.

One of the dangers, Powell said, is people thinking, "'Why should I do anything
if it's not a major hurricane?' The public are really familiar with the
Saffir-Simpson Scale. They may not be too interested in looking at the details
of the forecast."

Hurricane Ike caused a huge storm surge "because of the storm's incredible
integrated kinetic energy," Reinhold said in a statement. "Storm surge damage
was terrible, and confirmed that we were on the right path with the new IKE
rating system."

The IKE patent was issued June 28, based on a paper Powell and Reinhold authored
in 2007.

The scientists sought a patent because prediction tools like IKE can be used by
businesses and investors. "Our hope was that if there's some commercial use, the
royalties could support additional research," Powell said. The patent is
assigned to the U.S. Commerce Department.

While the IKE scale is gaining acceptance in the scientific community, it has
not made the leap to an official product of forecasting agencies like the
National Hurricane Center. Powell is hopeful but doesn't know when or if it will
happen.

"I wish I could be optimistic," Powell said. "All I can say is things move very
slowly some times."

Though it's not an official forecast product, you can see analysis of storms
with IKE scale information on the AOML website: www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd
/data_sub/wind.html. The page has background information on related research,
and you can view IKE-based storm information from this year by choosing 2011
from the drop-down menu box and then clicking Go.

To see more of The Reporter or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.keysnet.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, The Reporter, Tavernier, Fla.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20110805-UK-Scientists-awarded-patent-for-new-hurricane-intensity-scale-0805-201
10805

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UK


                          Copyright 2011 The Reporter


                          FOCUS - 384 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                    Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Massachesetts)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 8, 2011 Monday

Hurricane season could be wet, windy and wild

BYLINE: K.C. Myers, Cape Cod Times, Hyannis, Mass.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 457 words


Aug. 08--The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Thursday released
its findings for the 2011 hurricane season, and it is predicted to be a doozy.

The factors are present to make the August-to-October peak season another busy
one, with a "70 percent probability" for 14 to 19 named storms, seven to 10
hurricanes and three to five major hurricanes, according to Gerry Bell, the lead
hurricane forecaster for NOAA's Climate Prediction Center.

The predictions apply to the regions of the North Atlantic, Caribbean Sea and
Gulf of Mexico.

The sea-surface temperatures are the third highest on record, Bell said.

The trade winds have been weak, which increases ocean temperature, he said.
Weather conditions in Africa are also contributing to a potentially stormy
season.

But, Bell said, these conditions don't relate to global warming. Ocean
temperature and wind patterns go in cycles that last for decades, he said.

"The current high-activity era has been in place since 1995," said Bell.

During this time, Hurricane Katrina hit the New Orleans area in 2005. NOAA's
Hurricane History Website called Katrina one of the most devastating hurricanes
in the history of the United States, causing an estimated $75 billion in damages
in the New Orleans area and along the Mississippi coast.

Hurricane seasons since 1995 have averaged 15 named storms, eight hurricanes and
four major storms, according to a NOAA press release.

Prior to 1995, there was a low-activity period from 1971 to 1994, Bell said.
During that time, the U.S. saw an average of 8.5 named storms, five hurricanes
and 1.5 major hurricanes, the release said.

Hurricanes have missed Cape Cod and the South Coast region for two decades.

Last year, Hurricane Earl hit the area in the form of a big rain storm. In 2009,
Hurricane Bill caused little more than heavy surf, and the following weekend,
Hurricane Danny amounted to a lashing of rain.

It was 20 years ago that Hurricane Bob delivered a pummeling blow to the area.

On Aug. 19, 1991, Hurricane Bob, with sustained winds barely over 100 mph,
caused millions in damages. At the time, Bob was listed as the
18th-most-expensive storm in U.S. history, causing nearly $2 billion in damages.

The NOAA team makes the predictions by examining several factors, Bell said. The
outlook does not mean the storms will actually occur and make landfall but
serves as a guide to the expected overall activity.

To see more of the Cape Cod Times, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.capecodonline.com. Copyright (c) 2011, Cape Cod Times, Hyannis, Mass.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110808-CA-Hurricane-season-could-be-wet-windy-and-wild-0808-20110808

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CA


                         Copyright 2011 Cape Code Times


                          FOCUS - 385 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                               walesonline.co.uk

                    September 6, 2017 Wednesday 5:52 PM GMT

Sir Richard Branson takes cover in his concrete wine cellar as Hurricane Irma
approaches;
It is expected Hurricane Irma could bring maximum winds of 185mph

BYLINE: By walesonline

SECTION: NEWS; Version:1

LENGTH: 630 words


The most powerful Atlantic Ocean hurricane on record is approaching the
Caribbean Islands.

And as Hurricane Irma approached, Sir Richard Branson refused to leave his
private Necker Island in the British Virgin Islands.

Instead he and his team will hide in the wine cellar at his luxury estate,
reportsThe Mirror.

Officials warned that Irma will bring hazardous conditions to Puerto Rico and
north-eastern parts of the Caribbean from Wednesday and to Florida on Friday
evening.

It is expected Hurricane Irma could bring maximum winds of 185mph.

Writing in an onlineblog, Sir Richard said: We are expecting to get the full
force of the hurricane in around five hours' time, when we will retreat to a
concrete wine cellar under the Great House.

"Knowing our wonderful team as I do, I suspect there will be little wine left in
the cellar when we all emerge.

"The strength of this hurricane is unheard of. The atmosphere is eerie but
beautiful. Everyone is willing the eye of the storm to veer away from the BVI in
these last few hours.

"Our main concern is safety, for everyone here and for all the people in the BVI
and in the path of the hurricane.

"All of us slept together in two rooms. I haven't had a sleepover quite like it
since I was a kid.

"Strangely, it's a privilege to experience what is turning into possibly the
strongest storm ever with such a great group of young people.

"We were listening to the parrots in their boxes in the next room chattering
away. Watching the tortoises congregating together, as if they sense what is
coming our way."

The stormy night when 47 men lost their lives off the Welsh coast

Yesterday the Virgin boss described how he had survived two hurricanes on the
island thanks to his specialised 'hurricane proof' buildings - but he said
"nothing can withstand" a Category 5 storm.

Branson wrote: "Generally speaking, we have one hurricane in the British Virgin
Islands around every 10 years.

"Fortunately, most of them drift north of us, but this one is coming straight
for us, with the eye of the storm heading straight for Necker, Moskito Island
and Virgin Gorda.

"Obviously things can change - hopefully they do, as a category five hurricane
hasn't hit the BVI [British Virgin Islands] full on before.

"On Necker Island we have constructed really strong buildings (with hurricane
blinds) that should be able to handle extreme weather pretty well, though with a
Category 5 hurricane almost nothing can withstand it.

"We had some lovely guests staying on Necker Island who have cut their trip
short for safety reasons, and another group of guests have also postponed.

"I will be on Necker alongside our team, as I have been on the three times we
have had hurricanes over the past 30 years."

The extraordinary collection of objects Storm Imogen left behind on Porthcawl
seafront

Branson, who said he was on the island in 2010 when it was hit by Hurricanes
Earl and Otto, went on to share his concerns for local residents and wildlife.

The UK Foreign Office (FO) has advised Britons in the hurricane's path to
monitor its website and follow any advice issued by local officials as the
historic storm progresses through the region.

Irma is set to hit Necker Island less than two weeks after Hurricane Harvey,
which caused devastation and flooding in the states of Texas and Louisiana and
left at least 66 people dead.

Hurricane Irma reached the Leeward Islands, east of Puerto Rico, this morning
and will likely batter Florida by the weekend.

The Red Cross has released an initial 120,000 Swiss francs from its Disaster
Relief Emergency Fund to help some of the islands affected and volunteers have
started making their way to Florida.

Walter Cotte, Americas regional director of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, described the forecast as "extremely worrying".

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBWM


                         Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 386 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                              April 3, 2006 Monday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

CONDITIONS RIPE FOR MAJOR 'CANE HERE, PROS SAY

BYLINE: BY LISA MUÑOZ DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

SECTION: SUBURBAN; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 497 words


LONG ISLAND could be in for a big one this hurricane season.

Meteorologists say climate conditions - warmer temperatures in the Atlantic
Ocean and cooler temperatures in the Pacific Ocean - are ripe for the Northeast
coast to be hit by a whopper of a hurricane this year.

Ken Reeves, a meteorologist at the AccuWeather Center in State College, Pa.,
predicted that parts of the East Coast could see a Category 3 hurricane, a storm
that could resemble the devastating systems that struck Long Island and outlying
areas from the 1930s to the 1950s.

When the Pacific is cooler, it "drives the storm track farther to the east in
the Atlantic Ocean basin," he said. "There are some eerie similarities to the
pattern of the 1938 hurricane," which was the worst in Long Island's history.

Richard Rotanz, director of the Nassau County Office of Emergency Management,
said his agency operates "under the assumption that Long Island is overdue for a
major hurricane."

Getting the county and its residents prepared for a major storm or hurricane has
been one of the two main focuses of Rotanz's office. The other is disease
outbreak.

"It's anybody's guess," Rotanz said about the chances of a major storm, adding
that the county is well-prepared to warn, shelter and aid residents. "But could
there be? Sure there's a possibility for a hurricane. But I sure hope not."

A 1938 storm known as the Long Island Express remains the island's worst
hurricane. Its 121-mph winds gusted to 183 mph and caused massive flooding,
power outages and wind damage throughout the region, leaving 600 people dead.

More recently, Long Island was hit with the remnants of storms that battered
other parts of the country: Hurricane Gloria in 1985 and Hurricane Bob in 1991.
Both brought heavy rains, localized flooding and power outages.

In those storms, the flatlands of Nassau County south of Merrick Blvd. and the
barrier islands were among the hardest-hit areas.

For future hurricanes, they remain the areas most vulnerable to flooding, while
the rest of the island would have to contend with the major damage that
high-speed winds would bring.

Although Long Island may face the biggest threat, some experts noted that a
hurricane hasn't hit New England in 50 years and warned that the entire region's
luck is running out because hurricane activity tends to be cyclical.

Phil Klotzbach, an atmospheric sciences research associate at Colorado State
University, said, "Long Island would definitely be the place where a hurricane
would hit," but he added that the possibility of a hurricane hitting Long Island
this year is "minimal."

What nonmeteorologists can say about hurricanes is that after Hurricane Katrina
even those who live in areas not prone to the storms are nervous.

"It's a natural reaction. Everybody's a little jittery after Katrina," Klotzbach
said. "It's like after 9/11. Everybody was talking about terrorism. Now you can
go to the grocery store and everybody's talking about
hurricanes."lmuñoz@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DAILY NEWS PHOTO A chaotic moment from the 1938 hurricane, which was
the worst in Long Island's history. Meteorologists are warning that the area is
long overdue for another gigantic hurricane.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2006 Daily News, L.P.


                          FOCUS - 387 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

             November 29, 2001, Thursday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

Out of storms' way

BYLINE: DAVID BALLINGRUD

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 694 words



If the forecasters at the National Hurricane Center in Miami really knew their
business, they would explain to Hurricane Olga that the 2001 hurricane season is
over at midnight Friday, and therefore the storm's time is up, too.

Olga, however, hasn't taken the hint. Though deep in the Atlantic, the storm was
still pounding the nation's East Coast with big waves Wednesday and probably
won't wind down until sometime after the season's official end.

Whenever that is.

"Can the season really be over with an active hurricane still in the Atlantic?"
wondered hurricane specialist Jack Bevin. "It may be officially over (at
midnight) on Nov. 30, but it's not over for us . . . we're still working our
shifts."

Whatever Olga's fate, the 2001 hurricane season has been active.

There were 15 named tropical storms. Nine of those became hurricanes, and four
of the nine became intense storms with winds higher than 110 mph.

Those numbers are well above the long-term averages: nine named storms, six
hurricanes, two of those intense.

But once again, Florida and the rest of the nation were, for the most part,
fortunate. For the second consecutive year, no hurricane made landfall in this
country.

That doesn't tell the whole story, however.

Three Gulf of Mexico tropical storms - Allison, Barry and Gabrielle - did
affect Florida, and Barry and Gabrielle were just below hurricane strength when
they came ashore.

Barry made landfall Aug. 6 between Fort Walton Beach and Panama City, bringing
heavy rain, flooding and downed power lines.

Gabrielle was another wet storm, slogging ashore between Venice and Sarasota the
morning of Sept. 14, just three days after the collapse of the World Trade
Center. It caused widespread flooding and knocked out power to a half-million
people.

The worst of the three was the first, however. Tropical Storm Allison formed in
the western Gulf of Mexico less than a week into the June-November season, and
quickly moved ashore over the Texas-Louisiana coastline.

It lingered over land for almost two weeks, causing widespread flooding. By the
time it finally moved into the Atlantic, Allison was blamed for at least 47
deaths in six states: 22 in Texas and Louisiana, nine in Florida, nine in North
Carolina, six in Pennsylvania and one in Virginia.

Hurricane forecaster William Gray of Colorado State University has long said
this part of the world is in the midst of a long-term increase in storm
activity.

The last seven years, he said in his final report on the 2001 season, have been
the most active period on record, producing 93 tropical storms that became 57
hurricanes, 27 of them major.

Gray argues that the appearance of four major hurricanes in the Atlantic Basin
this year - Erin, Felix, Iris and Michelle - further supports his contention
there have been more and stronger storms of late.

"This upswing will likely continue for two or three more decades," he wrote,
"and due to the large increase in coastal population . . . the increased
activity will bring unprecedented hurricane-spawned destruction."

Gray plans to issue his first forecast for the 2002 hurricane season on Dec. 7.

Hurricane Olga lingers,

expected to weaken

Hurricane Olga churned far out in the Atlantic with 85 mph winds Wednesday,
sending out huge swells while remaining a direct threat only to shipping,
forecasters said.

Olga, which developed Monday, was moving southwest at 5 mph Wednesday after
making a loop Tuesday far to the east of Bermuda.

It was forecast to keep that southwest motion for at least the next 24 hours,
but is never expected to threaten any land, forecasters said.

"With any luck, in three or four days, it could be gone by dissipating, and we
think that will happen way out to sea," said James Franklin, hurricane
specialist with the National Hurricane Center in Miami.

By Wednesday, swells up to 20 feet had been reported off Bermuda, with 14-foot
breakers off parts of the northeastern Florida coast. Farther north, 6- to
8-foot swells were reported along North Carolina's Outer Banks.

TEXT OF CHART ACCOMPANYING STORY NOT PROVIDED FOR ELECTRONIC LIBRARY. PLEASE SEE
MICROFILM.


LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, (4); PHOTO ILLUSTRATION, NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTER, TIMES ART;
CHART; MAP; William Gray; ALLISON: The storm swamped Texas , but nine deaths
occurred in Florida.; BARRY: Produced heavy rain, flooding and downed power
lines.; GABRIELLE: Near hurricane-strength winds hit the west coast Sept. 14.;
This satellite image shows Hurricane Olga in the Atlantic and the paths of three
storms that affected Florida this season.; chart shows a comparison between
William Gray's hurricane predictions and reality; map locates Hurricane Olga in
the Atlantic Ocean

                    Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 388 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          September 10, 2005, Saturday

Holidaying in hurricane country In the devastating aftermath of Katrina, the
meteorologist Philip Eden answers questions on how, why and where tropical
storms happen

BYLINE: By Philip Eden

SECTION: Travel Pg. 007

LENGTH: 1187 words

Over the past 20 years the number of Britons travelling to the Caribbean,
Florida and the Gulf of Mexico region has risen sharply, with increasing numbers
now going in what were traditionally the "off peak" months of July and August.
At the same time, the number of hurricanes hitting the area - most recently and
devastatingly Hurricane Katrina - has risen sharply. Many people are asking
whether it is now safe to travel to the region.

Is the rise in the number of hurricanes hitting the Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico
region likely to continue and is it connected to global warming?

When we study the climatology of the hurricane season it is difficult to tease
apart those changes that are probably due to global warming from those that can
put down to natural variability. There is some disagreement among experts, but
all agree that the changes in the frequency of hurricanes in the Caribbean over
the past century follow a 30- to 40-year cycle: we have been close to the peak
of that cycle since the mid-1990s, and it mirrors earlier periods of strong
activity in the 1930s and 1960s. Assuming this natural cycle continues, we
should experience a decline in hurricane activity between now and 2020.

However, the changing global climate is likely to have some impact on the
hurricane season. There is no good meteorological reason why these tropical
storms should form more frequently, but a warmer world could cause storms that
do develop to become more intense and to last longer. It is also probable that
the hurricane season will, in future, start earlier and finish later.

Are more hurricanes of the force of Katrina likely?

It is important to understand that, from a purely meteorological standpoint,
Katrina was not particularly unusual. Certainly it was among the 20 most
ferocious hurricanes of the past decade in the Atlantic-Caribbean region, having
acquired Category Five status (the highest category) for two days as it crossed
the Gulf of Mexico, but it had already been downgraded to Category Four when it
struck the Mississippi coastline just east of New Orleans.

Category Four hurricanes occur most years in the Caribbean. The great human and
economic catastrophe that followed Katrina was a consequence of geography as
much as meteorology: the low-lying coastline, the extensive urbanisation and
industrialisation of the area, and the fact that much of New Orleans lies below
sea-level and is surrounded by water. We think of hurricanes primarily as
destructive windstorms, but it is water that kills. More than 99 per cent of
hurricane casualties are victims either of the storm surge (as in Biloxi and
Gulfport), of floods resulting from the breach of sea/river defences (as in New
Orleans), or by flash floods and mudslides in deforested mountain country (as in
Haiti last summer). If Katrina had struck one of the smaller Caribbean islands
there would have been extensive damage, but the loss of life would have been
minimal.

How long does the hurricane season last - and are there any periods when you can
be sure of a storm-free holiday?

The season in the Caribbean/Atlantic sector begins officially on June 1 and ends
on November 30, although the archives do show rare instances of out-of-season
tropical storms. Hurricanes are relatively uncommon in June, early July and
November, so the peak months are August, September and October. But changes in
the planet's climate indicate that the hurricane season may extend in the coming
decades, affecting both May and December, so that by the middle of the century
we may also have to regard July and November as peak months.

However, most of the storms that develop at either end of the season are weak,
and tend to form outside the Caribbean Basin. So, currently, a Caribbean holiday
during any month from December to May is most likely to be hurricane-free, while
June, early-July and late-November holidays are also unlikely to be interrupted
by one of these tropical storms.

If you do travel to the Caribbean in the hurricane season, which are the least
dangerous places to visit?

Most hurricanes form over the North Atlantic between latitudes 10 degrees North
and 20 degrees North. Typically, they then head in a westerly direction towards
the West Indies before turning north towards the Gulf of Mexico and the American
Gulf Coast. Some may turn northwards into the open waters of the Atlantic before
reaching the Caribbean. Trinidad and Tobago lie beyond the southern end of the
Windward Island chain, around latitude 10 to 11 degrees North, and the frequency
of hurricanes here is very much less than in the islands further north. The same
is true of the Dutch islands of Aruba and Curacao.

How long do hurricanes usually last and what is the best thing to do if you are
caught in one?

Hurricanes always appear huge on satellite images, but remember that a satellite
is looking down on the entire cloud system. Although such a vigorous swirl of
clouds often measures 500 or more miles across, the damaging winds and
torrential rain are usually found within a 100- mile radius of the eye of the
storm - sometimes within a 50-mile radius. If you find yourself on the periphery
of a hurricane, the only danger is from the high surf produced by the strong
winds. If your island is in the direct path of a severe hurricane (Category
Three or more) expect a day or so of discomfort, but if you follow the safety
instructions given by local staff you should be in no danger. Modern hotels are
solidly built, and few failures have occurred in the past 10 years, but it would
probably be wise to avoid beach-front accommodation during the peak months of
the season as this will be routinely evacuated should a hurricane approach.

The time it takes for such a storm to pass depends on how quickly it is moving.
In the Caribbean Basin itself, most hurricanes move steadily from east to west,
and the bad weather usually lasts between 12 and 18 hours. A slow-moving storm
may last around 24 hours, but its intensity will diminish.

In addition to the Caribbean/Gulf of Mexico region, where else are holidaymakers
likely to face hurricanes?

Revolving storms occur in all oceanic basins inside the tropics. They are called
hurricanes in the Atlantic/Caribbean sector, off the Pacific coast of Mexico and
California, and around Hawaii. In the north-west Pacific - around the
Philippines, Taiwan and Japan - they are called typhoons, while around Australia
and in the Indian Ocean they are known as cyclones. But they are all essentially
the same beast. In the north-west Pacific the season lasts throughout the year,
although the peak months are between June and November. In Australia, the
tropical coastline of northern Queensland, the Northern Territory and the
northern coast of Western Australia receive occasional hits from cyclones -
generally not as intense as their Atlantic cousins - between January and April.
The holiday islands of the southern Indian Ocean - Mauritius, Reunion, the
Comoros (but not the Seychelles, which are too close to the Equator) - are also
most at risk between January and April.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                     Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited


                          FOCUS - 389 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     May 30, 2002, Thursday, FIRST EDITION

U.S. mainland amid respite from hurricanes

BYLINE: Deborah Sharp

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 1226 words

DATELINE: MIAMI

MIAMI -- Atlantic hurricane season starts Saturday, and the U.S. mainland is
overdue for a hit.

The last several years have been more active than average in terms of the number
of hurricanes forming at sea. Yet more than 21/2 years have passed without one
hitting the U.S. coastline. Forecasters say the uncommon streak of good fortune,
due in part to a stubborn weather trough steering storms away from the East
Coast, can't hold forever.


"We've basically been lucky. And we shouldn't expect to go on being lucky," says
Hugh Willoughby, hurricane research division director for the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration.

The last hurricane to hit the U.S. mainland was Hurricane Irene, which struck
Florida in October 1999. The longest period on record without a U.S. landfall:
from 1980 to 1983 -- three years, seven days.

NOAA experts say the Atlantic hurricane season will have a normal to slightly
above-normal level of storm activity, with nine to 13 tropical storms, six to
eight of which becoming hurricanes. They predict two to three major storms. The
season lasts through Nov. 30.

On Friday, hurricane forecaster William Gray of Colorado State University is
expected to revise downward his April 5 forecast, which called for 12 named
storms, including seven hurricanes. Gray says cooler-than-expected Atlantic
Ocean temperatures may be less favorable for storms.

Hurricane forecasters for the Central Pacific region, which includes Hawaii,
also expect above-average activity, with six to seven storms forming, instead of
the average four to five.

Meteorologists, who speak of hurricane trends over decades, believe we're in a
heightened storm period. Regular changes in ocean temperatures and climate
patterns help shape these active and slower cycles. Since 1995, the number of
storms in every season but one has exceeded the average.

Typically, 10 tropical storms form during the Atlantic hurricane season. Six of
those intensify into hurricanes, storms with winds of at least 74 mph. And, on
average, two become major hurricanes, with winds greater than 111 mph.

The powerful storms inspire both fear and fascination. The Arawak tribes of the
Caribbean called them hurakan, for evil spirit. William McKinley, while
president from 1897 to 1901, said a hurricane was more fearsome than the Spanish
Navy.

Forecasters worry about the potential for more damaging storms because the
coastal population has mushroomed in the past two decades from 40 million to 50
million people. Many coastal residents are hurricane novices.

Yet, one of the biggest hurricane myths is that only coastal residents should be
concerned. Even though storm surge is historically the biggest killer during
hurricanes, far more people have died inland in the past three decades as a
result of flooding triggered by heavy rains associated with hurricanes.

National Hurricane Center researchers studied 600 U.S. hurricane deaths from
1970 through 1999 and found:

 * Flooding from rain claimed 351 lives.

 * High winds killed 71.

 * Six drowned in storm surge.

Another myth is that a tropical storm is a hurricane's puny cousin and easy to
ignore. Last June's Tropical Storm Allison caused 41 deaths in six states.
Damages topped $ 5 billion. The hardest wallop was in Houston, where 45,000
homes and businesses were devastated. Then Allison, which never became a
hurricane, drenched areas from New Orleans to Boston.

Given such destruction, it's no surprise humans have long yearned to curb
hurricanes. Ancient tribes made offerings, and atomic scientists dreamed of
busting them up with nuclear bombs.

Hurricanes release energy equivalent to a 10-megaton nuclear bomb exploding
every 20 minutes, experts say. Dropping a bomb into the maelstrom would be like
tossing marshmallows to stop a freight train -- not to mention the radioactive
fallout. The bomb notion was eventually discarded, as was the idea of towing in
icebergs to cool the warm oceans where hurricanes gain strength.

Homeowners also have some misguided hurricane notions. They crisscross windows
with masking tape, a process that doesn't prevent shattering glass but does
produce sun-baked Xs that are impossible to remove. They stock up with steaks
and other supplies, not realizing power failures mean spoiled refrigerated food.


Throwing hurricane parties as a storm approaches grew less common after the
devastation caused a decade ago by Hurricane Andrew, which hit southern Florida
and Louisiana, flattened 125,000 homes and claimed 26 lives. But such parties
are becoming fashionable again.

The National Hurricane Center's director, Max Mayfield, points to "hurricane
amnesia" if a few years pass without a destructive storm. "It just takes one
hurricane over your community to make it a very bad year," he says.

TEXT OF INFO BOX BEGINS HERE

Be prepared

The benefits of evacuation plans, hurricane shutters and emergency supplies are
obvious. But lesser-known steps also boost safety and comfort during a
hurricane:

* Agree beforehand on a local meeting point if family members get separated.
Appoint a contact outside the storm zone so everyone knows who to check with for
messages.

* Take "before" pictures of home and belongings for insurance.

* Outfit hurricane kit with a whistle to alert rescuers.

* Rely on battery-powered lanterns and flashlights if power is out. Candles can
cause fires.

* Fill your car with gas before the storm hits. Pumps won't work without
electricity.

* Store a minimum of 3 gallons of drinking water per person. Fill bathtub with
water for toilet-flushing and other uses.

* Everyday food and drinks become yearned-for luxuries after power lines go
down: Ice. Brewed coffee. Tuna on toast with mayo. Seasonings and condiment
packets can break the monotony of dry and canned foods. Don't forget the manual
can opener. And instant coffee with water boiled on an outdoor grill has
comforted many storm survivors.

TEXT WITHIN GRAPHIC BEGINS HERE

Atlantic season outlook for 2002

The Atlantic hurricane season is forecast to produce nine to 13 named storms.
Six to eight are expected to reach status (winds of 74 mph or more), according
to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The long-term annual
average from 1950 to 2000 for the Atlantic Basin is 10 named storms and six
hurricanes.

Atlantic hurricane names

Hurricanes carried only women's names until 1979, when male and female names
began alternating. Names for the 2002 Atlantic hurricane season that starts
Saturday:

Arthur

Bertha

Cristobal

Dolly

Edouard

Fay

Gustav

Hanna

Isidore

Josephine

Kyle

Lili

Marco

Nana

Omar

Paloma

Rene

Sally

Teddy

Vicky

Wilfred

Hurricane-related terms

* Tropical disturbance: Unorganized mass of thunderstorms; very little, if any,
organized wind circulation.

* Tropical depression: Sustained winds of 23-38 mph circulate around a center
that later could turn into the eye of a hurricane.

* Tropical storm: Sustained winds are 39-73 mph. A storm is named once it
reaches tropical storm strength.

* Hurricane: Sustained winds of 74 mph or more.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Rob O'Neal, The Key West Citizen, via AP; GRAPHIC, B/W,
Julie Snider, USA TODAY, Sources: National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration; world Meterological Organization; research by Chris Capella and
Chad Palmer, USA TODAY (LINE GRAPH); PHOTO, B/W, Scott Eslinger, Beaumont
(Texas) Enterprise, via AP; Worst storm: Larry and Sandra Donald of Beaumont,
Texas, wade through their flooded driveway in the aftermath of Tropical Storm
Allison in June 2001. Allison was the costliest tropical storm ever to strike
the USA. It caused 41 deaths but never reached hurricane status.<>Breaking the
waves: A Key West, Fla., resident tests the water coming ashore Nov. 4 as winds
from Hurricane Michelle brush the area. The late-season storm packed 135 mph
winds and forced the evacuation of the Florida Keys, but it did not make a
direct hit on the U.S. mainland.

                      Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 390 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                  September 16, 2004, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Ivan batters the Gulf Coast

BYLINE: Patrick O'Driscoll

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 447 words

Hurricane Ivan lashed the Gulf Coast with hurricane-force winds and pounding
surf early today as millions of people fled inland, emptying coastal cities from
New Orleans to Panama City, Fla.

At 1:20 a.m. ET, as the storm roared toward a 300-mile stretch of vulnerable
coast, forecasters said Ivan's eye would crash into the Alabama coast before
dawn at Fort Morgan, at the mouth of Mobile Bay.

Ivan's 135-mph winds make it a Category 4 storm on the 1-to-5 hurricane scale.
Storms that intense can destroy mobile homes, flatten buildings and uproot large
trees. Emergency managers in four states braced for widespread devastation.


The storm's strength is not expected to dissipate quickly. The National
Hurricane Center warned that hurricane-force winds of 74 mph or more could go
150 miles inland after Ivan hits.

Forecasters expect Ivan to slow or stall inland, possibly over the southern
Appalachians. Catastrophic floods could inundate an area already soaked by the
remnants of Hurricane Frances.

Ivan may dump up to 15 inches of rain. Forecasters predicted waves of 20 feet or
more on the Florida Panhandle, where beaches already were eroding Wednesday. In
New Orleans, 1.2 million people were told to flee. The French Quarter, whose
Mardi Gras cocktail is called a Hurricane, was sandbagged. One boarded-up
storefront there still bore the words "We don't run from hurricanes -- we drink
them."

With hurricane-force winds reaching out more than 100 miles from its center,
Ivan was bigger than Frances and as strong as Hurricane Charley, which one-two
punched Florida over the past month. Those storms killed more than 50 people and
caused at least $11 billion in insured losses.

Florida may get still another. Tropical Storm Jeanne, near hurricane force at 70
mph, was churning in the Atlantic. It could reach the Southeast coast Sunday.

In Hattiesburg, Miss., at least 20,000 evacuees inundated restaurants and gas
stations. The exodus "was awful," said David Burghardt, who fled Metairie, La.,
with his wife, two children and dog. In Florida, police barred thrill-seekers
from beaches, where surf pounded sand, piers and bridges. Charlie and Deanna
Smith took a last look at Ivan's approach from the Pensacola Beach pier before
fleeing. They moved into a new home this spring just a block from the beach.
"Our dream home could be washed away," Deanna Smith said. Surf already had
broken through dunes and flooded parts of the beachfront drive.

***

Contributing: Donna Leinwand in Panama City, Fla.; Larry Copeland in
Hattiesburg, Miss.; and Ana Radelat of Gannett News Service and Billy House of
The Arizona Republic in New Orleans

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Jack Gruber, USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, David J. Phillip,
AP; GRAPHIC, Color, Frank Pompa, USA TODAY, Source: National Hurricane Center
(MAP); In Pensacola Beach, Fla.: Alyssa Smith, 13, and Evan Smith, 11, watch the
waves rise ahead of Hurricane Ivan on Wednesday before evacuating with their
parents.<>Empty streets: Louisiana National Guard troops patrol the boarded-up
French Quarter in New Orleans.

                      Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 391 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                  thesun.co.uk

                     September 7, 2017 Thursday 2:16 PM GMT

KAT OUT OF HELL Hurricane Katia - what is its latest path, when did it hit
Mexico and what category is the storm?;
A series of hurricanes developed in the Atlantic Ocean - with the southern US,
Mexico and the Caribbean bearing the brunt

BYLINE: By Felix Allen and David Hughes

SECTION: NEWS; Version:12

LENGTH: 379 words


THREE hurricanes recently formed and travelled across the Atlantic for the first
time in seven years after Tropical Storm Katia was upgraded to hurricane
strength.

After 185mph  Hurricane Irma battered the Caribbean - closely followed by
Hurricane Jose - Katia bore down on the east coast of Mexico, a nation  reeling
from a devastating earthquake.

What is Hurricane Katia and where is its path?

Katia was the eleventh Atlantic storm named so far this year, following on from
Hurricane Harvey, Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Jose.

Weather forecasters tracked the storm as it brewed over the warm waters of the
Gulf of Mexico, close to where  Hurricane Harvey gathered strength as it
approached Texas.

However, Katia took a different direction - southwest towards Mexico.

It was upgraded to a Category 1 hurricane late last week and made landfall north
of Tecolutla, Mexico, on Friday, bringing winds of 75mph.

On Saturday, it deteriorated to the status of a tropical storm, with winds
dropping to around 40mph.

It was predicted that it would bring rainfall of up to 6 inches to a mountainous
area around 145 miles south of Tampico where it has settled, which has a history
of mudslides.

The remains of the hurricane moved off into the Pacific Ocean and by September
11 had weakened to a tropical depression.

What are Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Jose?

The recent period was the first time since 2010 that three Atlantic hurricanes
had existed at the same time. HURRICANE HELL

12 deadliest hurricanes to ever batter America including Hurricane Katrina and
Hurricane Sandy

They followed Hurricane Harvey which  killed about 60 people and caused property
damage estimated at $180 billion after pummeling the coasts of Texas and
Louisiana with torrential rain and severe flooding.

Forecasters warned in August the Atlantic hurricane season would be
"above-normal," with 14 to 19 named storms ahead of the peak season.

An average Atlantic hurricane season - which runs from June 1 to November 30 -
produces 12 named storms, of which six become hurricanes and three major
hurricanes.

figcaption The UN predicts that over 37 million could be affected by hurricane
Irma as it passes through Caribbean, heading towards Florida

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBTSUN


                    Copyright 2017 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 392 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              May 31, 2009 Sunday
                                Hernando Edition

THE SAFFIR-SIMPSON HURRICANE SCALE

SECTION: 2009 HURRICANE GUIDE; 2009 HURRICANE GUIDE; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 767 words


The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale is a 1-5 rating based on the hurricane's
present intensity. This is used to give an estimate of the potential property
damage and flooding expected along the coast from a hurricane landfall. Wind
speed is the determining factor in the scale, as storm surge values are highly
dependent on the slope of the continental shelf and the shape of the coastline
in the landfall region.

Category 1

Winds 74-95 mph. No significant damage to building structures. Damage primarily
to unanchored mobile homes, shrubbery and trees. Some damage to poorly
constructed signs. Also, some coastal road flooding and minor pier damage.
Hurricane Lili of 2002 made landfall on the Louisiana coast as a Category 1
hurricane. Hurricane Gaston of 2004 was a Category 1 hurricane that made
landfall along the central South Carolina coast.

Category 2

Winds 96-110 mph. Some roofing material, door, and window damage of buildings.
Considerable damage to shrubbery and trees with some trees blown down.
Considerable damage to mobile homes, poorly constructed signs, and piers.
Coastal and low-lying escape routes flood 2-4 hours before arrival of the
hurricane center. Small craft in unprotected anchorages break moorings.
Hurricane Frances of 2004 made landfall over the southern end of Hutchinson
Island as a Category 2 hurricane. Hurricane Isabel of 2003 made landfall near
Drum Inlet on the Outer Banks of North Carolina as a Category 2 hurricane.

Category 3

Winds 111-130 mph. Some structural damage to small residences and utility
buildings with a minor amount of curtainwall failures. Damage to shrubbery and
trees with foliage blown off trees and large trees blown down. Mobile homes and
poorly constructed signs are destroyed. Low-lying escape routes are cut by
rising water 3-5 hours before arrival of the center of the hurricane. Flooding
near the coast destroys smaller structures with larger structures damaged by
battering from floating debris. Terrain continuously lower than 5 feet above
mean sea level may be flooded inland 8 miles or more. Evacuation of low-lying
residences with several blocks of the shoreline may be required. Hurricanes
Jeanne and Ivan of 2004 were Category 3 hurricanes when they made landfall in
Florida and in Alabama, respectively.

Category 4

Winds 131-155 mph. More extensive curtainwall failures with some complete roof
structure failures on small residences. Shrubs, trees, and all signs are blown
down. Complete destruction of mobile homes. Extensive damage to doors and
windows. Low-lying escape routes may be cut by rising water 3-5 hours before
arrival of the center of the hurricane. Major damage to lower floors of
structures near the shore. Terrain lower than 10 feet above sea level may be
flooded, requiring massive evacuation of residential areas as far inland as 6
miles. Hurricane Charley of 2004 was a Category 4 hurricane when it made
landfall in Charlotte County with winds of 150 mph. Hurricane Dennis of 2005
struck the island of Cuba as a Category 4 hurricane.

Category 5

Winds greater than 155 mph. Complete roof failure on many residences and
industrial buildings. Some complete building failures with small utility
buildings blown over or away. All shrubs, trees, and signs blown down. Complete
destruction of mobile homes. Severe and extensive window and door damage.
Low-lying escape routes are cut by rising water 3-5 hours before arrival of the
center of the hurricane. Major damage to lower floors of all structures located
less than 15 feet above sea level and within 500 yards of the shoreline. Massive
evacuation of residential areas on low ground within 5-10 miles of the shoreline
may be required. Only three Category 5 hurricanes have made landfall in the
United States since records began: The Labor Day Hurricane of 1935, Hurricane
Camille (1969), and Hurricane Andrew in August, 1992. The 1935 Labor Day
Hurricane struck the Florida Keys with a minimum pressure of 892 mb - the lowest
pressure ever observed in the United States. Hurricane Camille struck the
Mississippi Gulf Coast causing a 25-foot storm surge that inundated Pass
Christian. Hurricane Katrina, a Category 5 storm over the Gulf of Mexico, was
still responsible for at least $81 billion of property damage when it struck the
U.S. Gulf Coast as a Category 3. It is by far the costliest hurricane to ever
strike the United States. In addition, Hurricane Wilma of 2005 was a Category 5
hurricane at peak intensity and is the strongest Atlantic tropical hurricane on
record with a minimum pressure of 882 mb.

Source: National Weather Service, National Hurricane Center

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Melissa Lyttle, Times (2005): Hurricane Wilma, the strongest
Atlantic hurricane on record, darkens the skies on the north side of Lake
Okeechobee.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2009 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 393 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                              May 13, 2016 Friday
                                St. Pete Edition

DON'T LET A DULL DECADE LULL YOU INTO COMPLACENCY

BYLINE: BOBBY DESKINS

SECTION: ST. PETE TIMES; 2016 HURRICANE GUIDE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 643 words


Do you remember Hurricane Wilma?

Wilma rolled across South Florida in late October 2005 with winds in excess of
120 mph. It was directly responsible for 35 deaths, 26 indirectly and caused
more than $20 billion in damage in the state. That was almost 11 years ago and,
amazingly, that's the last time Florida had a direct hit from a hurricane.

That's right, as we enter into this hurricane season, Florida hasn't seen a
hurricane make landfall in 10 years. While this is a great trend, it also brings
challenges as we attempt to prepare for the next potential storm. Many people
may have forgotten what it's like to live through a strong hurricane.

In the past 10 years, the population of Florida has grown by more than 2
million. These people may have never had to deal with a hurricane and may not
know what a strong hurricane can do. Do you remember that Wilma brought multiple
tornadoes with it? Or that it took two to three weeks to restore power for the
nearly 6 million people who lost it? Do you know that it took months, even
years, to rebuild parts of Punta Gorda after Hurricane Charley in 2004? This is
what can happen if a hurricane hits our area, and this is why we want to help
you to prepare for this season.

The 2016 Atlantic basin hurricane season begins June 1 and runs through Nov. 30.

Forecasts for this season are suggesting a near normal amount of storms. On
average, the Atlantic basin sees 12 named storms each year, with six hurricanes,
three of those becoming major (Category 3 or higher) storms. We are closely
watching the Atlantic sea surface temperatures as warmer water can mean more
fuel for hurricanes. We are also closely tracking the El Nino Southern
Oscillation, better known as El Nino or La Nina. This is based on the surface
water temperatures of the equatorial Pacific Ocean. When that water is warmer
than normal, we call it El Nino. When it's cooler, we call it La Nina.

These phases play a large role in global weather patterns, including conditions
that can affect hurricane activity. El Nino means more wind shear, which
generally means lower hurricane activity. La Nina typically means lower wind
shear and thus the potential for increased hurricane activity. We are in a
waning El Nino phase, perhaps the strongest on record, but most modeling is
suggesting that we may be headed into La Nina territory by the fall, the height
of our hurricane season. This suggests the potential for a busier season than
normal.

Having said all of that, remember it's just a forecast. I usually don't put too
much weight on the seasonal forecasts, but I always remember that it only takes
one. We had only seven named storms in 1992, but the first and most devastating
storm that year was Hurricane Andrew, which slammed into South Florida.

I've tracked hurricanes up and down the East Coast and along the Gulf of Mexico.
I know what it's like to have to clean up after 3 to 4 feet of water washes over
a densely populated barrier island. I also know how important it is to be
prepared and just how much that preparation can not only save you time and
money, but also how it can save lives. Have a plan this season and get prepared.

Stay tuned to 10News WTSP for the latest updates as our team tracks the tropics.
If something develops, don't panic. Instead, know that we'll walk you through
the process without the hype and will provide you with useful information that
will make you smarter, better informed and more prepared for the potential
storm. If needed, put your plan into action and stick with us on air, online
(wtsp.com), our app and in the Tampa Bay Times.

Finally, remember what our country's first weatherman, Benjamin Franklin, once
said, "an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure."

Bobby Deskins is a meteorologist with 10Weather WTSP. Follow him @BobbyDWeather,
follow 10News WTSP at @10NewsWTSP or look for #WTSP.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2016 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 394 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                              May 15, 2016 Sunday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

PROS SERIOUS ABOUT HURRICANE RISK

BYLINE: JOSH SOLOMON, TIMES STAFF WRITER

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 512 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


The message from meteorologists was one of near desperation: take hurricanes
seriously.

Just because Florida hasn't been hit by a hurricane in a decade, they said, and
despite projections that this upcoming season will be just average, don't get
complacent.

"This stretch of hurricane-free weather won't continue forever," warned ABC
Action News Chief Meteorologist Denis Phillips.

Phillips was part of a panel of Tampa Bay area television meteorologists who
spoke about the importance of storm readiness Saturday at the Museum of Science
and Industry's Hurricane Expo, which also included free IMAX movies, vendor
tables and emergency response vehicles for kids.

"No matter how active a season is, most people aren't going to be impacted,"
said Phil Klotzbach, research scientist at Colorado State University, who did a
presentation before the panel. "But even in an inactive season, all it takes is
one to make it an active season for you."

Klotzbach authored the university's hurricane season outlook, published last
month, which predicts 12 named storms, five hurricanes and two major hurricanes,
not including Hurricane Alex, which formed in January in the Atlantic Ocean.
That's a near average season.

But, the meteorologists said, even an average season could produce a devastating
storm, and Floridians are more vulnerable than ever.

Since Wilma, the last hurricane to make landfall in Florida during the
hyperactive 2005 hurricane season that included Katrina and Rita, roughly 3
million people have moved to the state, said Steve Jerve, chief meteorologist at
News Channel 8.

"Unfortunately, I think a lot of people in Tampa, since it has been so long,
don't have any idea of the duration and the impacts (of a hurricane)," said Jim
Van Fleet, chief meteorologist at 10Weather WTSP. He said Hurricane Charley,
which hit Florida in 2004, left people in Orlando without power for nearly a
month in the dead heat of summer.

"Charley was a one-day event, but residents were impacted well into the fall,"
Van Fleet said.

A common misconception about hurricanes, said Paul Dellegatto, chief
meteorologist at Fox's WTVT-Ch. 13, is that the wind is the most dangerous
component. But living near water, as many do in the Tampa Bay area, means storm
surges are the No. 1 concern.

"We could have a Category 1 storm sit 40 miles off the coast of Pinellas County
and be the worst storm this area has seen in decades," Dellegatto said, because
the storm surge could be so high. He harkened back to Hurricane Sandy in 2012.
By the time Sandy made landfall in New Jersey, it wasn't even a tropical storm.
What made it devastating was the storm surge, Dellegatto said.

Phillips said in the days of Charley and Wilma, hurricane preparedness was at
the forefront of people's minds. But since the recession, and combined with the
lack of hurricane activity in Florida, it's no longer a priority.

"Sadly," said Bay News 9 Meteorologist Josh Linker, "it's going to be the second
storm people are prepared for."

Contact Josh Solomon at (813) 909-4613 or jsolomon@tampabay.com Follow
@josh_solomon15.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - JOSH SOLOMON - Times: Meteorologists Denis Phillips of ABC
Action News, Paul Dellegatto of Fox's WTVT-Ch. 13, Jim Van Fleet of 10Weather
WTSP, Steve Jerve of News Channel 8 and Josh Linker of Bay News 9 discussed
hurricane readiness Saturday at MOSI.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2016 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 395 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            April 4, 2007 Wednesday

Active hurricane season predicted for East Coast

BYLINE: CHRIS MORRIS, Canadian Press

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 393 words

DATELINE: FREDERICTON


A Canadian storm watcher says it is too early to start battening down the
hatches, but U.S. forecasters are warning of a very active hurricane season on
the Atlantic seaboard this year with as many as 17 named storms.

Researchers at Colorado State University released their forecast yesterday for
the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season, predicting about a dozen tropical storms and
as many as five major hurricanes, including at least one that will make landfall
on the U.S. East Coast.

Peter Bowyer at the Canadian Hurricane Centre in Dartmouth said people living in
Atlantic Canada should not be alarmed by the dire, early warnings.

Mr. Bowyer said predictions for the past two years from U.S. forecasters were
not accurate.

In 2005, U.S. hurricane watchers seriously underestimated the season, which
turned out to be the most destructive on record. Last year, they overestimated
the season, predicting major events that never materialized.

"It's a hard business," Mr. Bowyer said. "I don't think the average person is
shocked to hear that it's a challenge forecasting what it will be like months
from now when we all know that forecasting weather over the next couple of hours
can be a big challenge."

Mr. Bowyer said a more accurate forecast will come in mid-May, when the
U.S.-based National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration releases its
forecast for the coming storm season.

The Atlantic hurricane season, which runs from June 1 to Nov. 30, averages 9.6
named storms, of which 5.9 are hurricanes and 2.3 intense hurricanes.

The 2005 season set a record with 28 named storms, 15 of them hurricanes. Four
of those hurricanes hit the U.S. coast, the worst among them Katrina, which
devastated New Orleans and levelled parts of the Gulf Coast region.

There were nine named Atlantic storms in 2006, of which five were hurricanes,
two of them major, in what was considered a "near normal" season. But none of
the hurricanes hit the U.S. or Canadian coasts.

Still, the Colorado hurricane team is sticking with its prediction.

"We are calling for a very active hurricane season this year, but not as active
as the 2004 and 2005 seasons," Phil Klotzbach said. "Based on our latest
forecast, the probability of a major hurricane making landfall along the U.S.
coastline is 74 per cent, compared with the last-century average of 52 per
cent."

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2007 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 396 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             June 13, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Florida Braces for Early-Arriving Alberto;
State Surprised as Storm Approaches Just After Season Begins

BYLINE: Peter Whoriskey, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A Section; A03

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


Thousands of residents along Florida's Gulf Coast were ordered to evacuate
Monday as Tropical Storm Alberto, which had intensified unexpectedly, threatened
to become the state's earliest hurricane in decades to make landfall.

Gov. Jeb Bush declared a state of emergency and urged residents of low-lying
coastal areas, where the storm surge is estimated to be as high as 10 feet, to
evacuate. He also expressed the widespread sense of surprise at the possibility
of Alberto reaching land so soon after the June 1 start of the hurricane season.

"Good God. Who would have thunk it?" he said. "This potentially could be a
hurricane."

Hurricane aircraft reconnaissance on Monday showed that Alberto had almost
reached hurricane strength, with winds of nearly 70 mph. The storm evolved from
a tropical depression that formed in the northwestern Caribbean on Saturday. It
then  drew strength from the warm waters of the "loop current" in the Gulf of
Mexico.

The storm is large, with tropical storm-force winds extending 160 miles from its
center, and hurricane warnings were in effect for a long stretch of Florida's
Gulf Coast. Storms are deemed hurricanes once sustained winds reach 74 mph.

"We're getting everyone out now," said Maj. Bill Poole of the Wakulla County
Sheriff's Office. "The National Weather Service predicts that we should have a
possible 10-foot surge at 4:47 a.m. That could put us close to the same
situation we had in Hurricane Dennis."

The surge from Dennis last July caused widespread flooding and damage in the
area, he said.

Along the coast on Monday, tourists headed out, and news crews rushed in to
capture what may  be the first Florida hurricane after Hurricane Katrina, which
hit the state in late August.

Grocery stores filled with residents seeking supplies. Marinas were busy with
sailors hauling their boats out, and cars lined up at gas stations as people
topped off their tanks.

Officials with the Federal Emergency Management Agency said they were meeting
with state emergency managers and "mobilizing" 96 trucks with food, water and
ice.

"The tourists are gone," said Stanley Bair,  owner of the historic Island Hotel
on Cedar Key. "If it hits at high tide, which it's predicted to, we could get
some severe flooding."

Eric Blake, a meteorologist at the National Hurricane Center, said that if
Alberto makes landfall as a hurricane, it would be the earliest a hurricane has
struck the state in 40 years.

"Hurricanes making landfall in June are few and far between," he said.

Many residents read the early arrival of Alberto as a portent of a rough
hurricane season. The National Hurricane Center has warned that storm activity
will be above normal, possibly producing  16 named storms. Last year was the
busiest on record.

But Blake played down   Alberto's value as an omen.

"Early-season storms of this type don't tell us much," he said.

Moreover, it was still not clear whether Alberto would attain hurricane status
and maintain it through landfall early Tuesday.

Forecasters were predicting that Alberto's winds would reach 75 mph before
landfall, but hurricane intensity is notoriously difficult to predict.

By the 5 p.m. report from the National Hurricane Center, Alberto had passed by
the warm water of the loop current that had helped it intensify earlier, and
there was  doubt that its winds would reach the 74-mph mark of a hurricane.

"After the sudden strengthening episode observed earlier today, the storm has
leveled off in intensity," the forecasters said. "The cloud pattern has become
rather elongated. . . . Nonetheless, slight strengthening is still possible
before landfall."

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 397 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                            September 2, 2007 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Hurricane on track for Caribbean islands; Category 3 storm forecast for midweek

BYLINE: Matthew Bigg, Reuters

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 405  words

DATELINE: ATLANTA


Tropical storm Felix became the second hurricane of the Atlantic season Saturday
night and is expected to gain strength as it moves through the Caribbean, the
U.S. National Hurricane Center said Saturday.

Felix had maximum sustained winds of more than 120 kilometres an hour with
higher gusts, making it a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson scale, and
was moving west after skirting the island of Grenada.

"Additional strengthening is expected within the next 24 hours," the hurricane
centre said.

The first hurricane of the season, Dean, turned into a monster Category 5 storm
and killed at least 27 people as it roared across the Caribbean and Mexico late
last month.

On its present course, hurricane Felix is expected to pass near or to the north
of the islands of Aruba, Bonaire and Curacao Saturday night or early Sunday
morning.

"We are forecasting it to be a Category 3 hurricane in the northwestern
Caribbean Sea by the middle of the week," said Eric Blake of the hurricane
centre in Miami.

At 8 p.m., Felix's centre was 250 km east-northeast of Bonaire and about 435 km
east of Aruba, the hurricane centre said.

Aruba, Bonaire and Curacao were under tropical storm warnings, alerting
residents to expect storm conditions within 24 hours. The islands could expect
up to four inches of rain.

Jamaica issued a tropical storm watch, but Venezuela discontinued a tropical
storm warning for parts of its northern coast.

There were no indications Felix would would reach the Gulf of Mexico, home to a
third of U.S. domestic crude oil and 15 per cent of natural gas production. But
long-range forecasts are unreliable, the centre said.

Energy markets have watched tropical storms and hurricanes closely since the
devastating Atlantic hurricane seasons of 2004 and 2005, when storms like Ivan,
Katrina and Rita disrupted supplies.

Computer models predicted the sixth named storm of the year in the Atlantic
basin would head into the Caribbean in the general direction of Mexico and
Central America.

Meanwhile, tropical storm Henriette was blamed for the deaths of six people in
Mexico Saturday. Rocks crushed their houses in a landslide caused by heavy rain
in the southern resort town of Acapulco. The hurricane centre has warned that
Henriette could become a full hurricane by today

The 2007 hurricane season, expected to be a busy one, is approaching its peak.
Most storms hit from Aug. 20 to mid-October, with Sept. 10 marking the top.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Claudio Vargas, Reuters; Soldiers work at the site where three
people were killed in Acapulco, Mexico, overnight when heavy rain from tropical
storm Henriette dislodged a boulder and sent it crashing into their home. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2007 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 398 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                October 5, 2005

Insurers braced for new US storm damage

BYLINE: ROBERT LEA

SECTION: A_MERGE; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 385 words


THE Florida panhandle is battening down the hatches for what could be Hurricane
Tammy, Vince or Wilma - or even Hurricane Alpha.

With this year reckoned to be the most destructive hurricane season on record -
the cost of Hurricane Katrina alone is reckoned to be £35 billion - federal
meteorologists say two more major storms are likely during October, with one
hurricane likely to reach category three, four or five.

Researchers from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration are also
saying Americans may as well get used to it as historic ocean cycles suggest
another 10 to 40 years of severe storms.

The meteorologists believe there is a fair chance another major hurricane will
hit the American land mass this month.

Hurricane Stan was yesterday upgraded from a tropical storm to a category one
hurricane and is heading for Mexico.

Though they are not ruling out another hurricane like the devastating Katrina or
Rita hitting the southern US states, experts say late-season storms tend to go
up the eastern coast.

With the season due to end in a month's time, that could put Florida in the eye
of the storm again following the havoc wreaked last year by Hurricane Ivan.

"This has been the seventh hyperactive year since 1995," said the NOAA's Stan
Goldberg. "Not every year is going to be like this one but there's going to be
plenty of active years to come."

William Gray of the respected Colorado State University hurricane forecasting
team said: "We project that October will continue the trend of above-average
activity that we have seen this hurricane season. This year is already the most
destructive hurricane season on record.

"We expect that by the time the 2005 hurricane season is over, we will witness
tropical cyclone activity at or very near record levels."

That is not good news for Lloyd's, which forecasts a £1.4 billion Katrina hit,
and the London insurance market, where underwriters are already revising losses
upwards.

Brit, one of London's largest quoted insurers, has said its bill for Katrina is
set to be £125 million, wiping out its first-year profits, and way above the £80
million it originally indicated. Rita will cost Brit a further £20 million.

Swiss Re has doubled its Katrina cost estimates to £650 million.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2005

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                   Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.


                          FOCUS - 399 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                                   Daily Star

                                 June 13, 2001

DOMINIK DIAMOND; STAR QUALITY TO BLOW YOU AWAY. .

BYLINE: DOMINIK DIAMOND

SECTION: COLUMNS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 600 words


LIKE me, you've probably had a right whinge about the weather recently.

You can always tell it's summer because the English cricket team is getting
beat, it's wet and it's freezing.

Every year it's the same - you can turn the central heating off for that
mini-heatwave we always get around Easter, but make sure it's back on timer for
June.

In fact, the only hot, sunny day I can remember recently was the day of the
election. This just goes to show how far New Labour's control stretches these
days, with Blair obviously promising Mrs M.

Nature a life peerage in return for rays nice enough to get Labour voters out
for the day.

But the complaints always stick in my throat a bit when I hear about what it's
like abroad.

Sure, we only have about a week's sunshine every year, but at least we're
relatively free of hurricanes. And if they ever do crop up, you can be sure that
Michael Fish will make damn sure he gets it right this time.

So spare a thought for the poor folk in America, now suffering storms, flooding,
death, destruction and disaster from Hurricane Allison.

Yes, you heard correctly - Hurricane Allison. What is it with these guys? They
take the most dangerous thing God has invented and they give them such wimpy
names. The three most powerful hurricanes of all time are called Tip, Nancy and
Gilbert. They sound more like characters from The Waltons.

Hurricanes currently being tracked by the Federal Energy Management Agency
include the names Barry, Chantal, Erin, Felix, Humberto, Iris, Lorenzo,
Sebastian and Wendy. Hurricane Sebastian? That one sounds like it might ruffle
the pages of your stamp collection and nothing else.

Maybe they give them wimpy names to stop people getting terrified. I mean, you'd
look pretty stupid if you ran around town screaming, "Head for them there hills
- Hurricane Allison's a comin'!" But I'd still rather have my hurricanes with
real bloke names.

I'm talking about things like Hurricane Sid. Houses could have foundations sunk
to the earth's core and Hurricane Sid would rip them up like he was pulling
carrots. Hurricane Reggie would blow through towns like they were made of paper.
And I can't even imagine the terror that Hurricane Vinnie would unleash.

Alternatively, we could start naming hurricanes after famous people. Hurricane
Tony would fling you up in a euphoric blast then let you down at some point over
the next four years.

Thanks to its tantric weather training, Hurricane Sting would blow for 12 hours.
Hurricane Gazza would huff and puff for a while, then limp away, while just
looking at Hurricane Camilla would make you feel a tad queasy.

Hurricane Becks would strike from 30 yards, curling right round coastal
defences. Hurricane Geri would zip all over the world trying to get noticed, but
would disappear pretty quickly. Hurricane Robbie, on the other hand, would just
keep getting bigger.

Instead of consisting of the usual combination of clouds, heat and inert gas,
Hurricane Bono would just be full of shit.

If they named them after reality TV members (and I use "members" in the truest
sense of the word), then Hurricane Bubble would be deafening, Hurricane Penny
would be crazy but harmless and Hurricane Stuart would get all the other
Hurricanes to gang up on the weakest little town it could find.

Hurricane Amma would annoy you after a while but would look great in a yellow
bikini, Hurricane Paul would just repeat everything Hurricane Bubble or Stuart
did and Hurricane Helen would be extremely dense.

Hurricane Charlotte would shaft anyone.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2001

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Newspaper

                       Copyright 2001 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS


                          FOCUS - 400 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                             August 17, 2007 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Dean poses big threat

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 559  words

DATELINE: MIAMI


MIAMI (Reuters) -- Hurricane Dean strengthened and threatened to become a
dangerously powerful storm as it plowed toward the Caribbean and aimed for
Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula or the Gulf of Mexico beyond, forecasters said
Thursday.

More immediately in the path of the 2007 Atlantic storm season's first hurricane
were the Lesser Antilles, in particular the islands of Dominica and St. Lucia
and the French territories of Martinique and Guadeloupe, the U.S. National
Hurricane Center said.

The hurricane's top sustained winds had reached 100 miles per hour by 5 p.m.
Thursday, making it a Category 2 storm on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale of
hurricane intensity, the Miami-based hurricane centre said.

Computer models showed the hurricane could become an extremely dangerous
Category 4 storm as it passed just south of Jamaica early next week.

Category 3 to 5 hurricanes, such as Katrina, Rita and Wilma in the devastating
2005 Atlantic storm season, are potentially the most destructive storms but a
Category 2 hurricane can still cause some damage to buildings and create a six-
to eight-foot storm surge.

"Preparations to protect life and property should be rushed to completion," the
hurricane centre said in an echo of warnings that rang out repeatedly in 2004
and 2005, when a series of hurricanes struck the United States, the Caribbean
and Central America.

Energy markets in particular have been on edge since 2004 and 2005, when
hurricanes Ivan, Katrina and Rita toppled oil rigs and flooded refineries on the
U.S. Gulf Coast. The Gulf of Mexico accounts for roughly a third of domestic
U.S. oil and natural gas production.

Dean was located around 210 miles east-northeast of Barbados and 305 miles east
of Martinique. The storm was moving westward at 23 m.p.h., a brisk pace that
could bring it over the Lesser Antilles islands early Friday.

The hurricane centre said the French government issued a hurricane warning for
Martinique and Guadeloupe. Hurricane warnings were also in effect for Dominica
and St. Lucia.

A hurricane warning means hurricane conditions can be expected within 24 hours.

Tropical storm warnings were in effect for Grenada, St. Vincent and the
Grenadines, Barbados, Montserrat, Antigua and Barbuda, St. Kitts and Nevis and
St. Maarten.

A tropical storm watch, meaning tropical storm conditions could be expected
within 36 hours, was issued for the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.

Meanwhile, another weather system, Tropical Storm Erin, weakened into a
depression as it washed ashore in Texas about 25 miles northeast of Corpus
Christi, spooking oil markets and killing one person as its heavy rains flooded
Houston and caused a grocery store roof to collapse.

Forecasters have predicted the six-month hurricane season, which officially
began June 1, would be more active than average with up to 16 named storms. An
average year historically has 10 to 11 storms, of which six strengthen into
hurricanes.

None of the storms that had formed this year -- Andrea, Barry or Chantal --
posed a serious threat.

Atlantic hurricanes shot into the public consciousness after the devastation of
2004 when four storms in a row crossed Florida, and again in 2005, when Katrina
swamped New Orleans.

In 2005, Hurricane Rita also slammed into the Texas coast near New Orleans and
Wilma became for a while the most powerful hurricane ever recorded.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2007 The Leader-Post, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 401 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            August 21, 1993 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

THE HURRICANE: TV'S PERSPECTIVE

SECTION: ACCENT; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 296 words


Monday

Hurricane Andrew: One Year Later: Topics reviewed include one family's life
after the storm and rebuilding Metrozoo. 7-8 p.m., WTVJ-Channel 4.

Tuesday

Today: Segment on areas hit by Hurricane Andrew, one year later. 7-9 a.m.;
WPTV-Channel 5, WTVJ-Channel 4.

Good Morning America: Segment on areas hit by Hurricane Andrew, one year later.
7-9 a.m.; WPBF-Channel 25, WPLG-Channel 10.

Hurricane Andrew: A Look Back: 5-6 p.m., Sunshine Network.

Hurricane Andrew Town Meeting: Gov. Lawton Chiles, Insurance Commissioner Tom
Gallagher, meteorologist Dr. Bob Sheets and others review the aftermath of
Hurricane Andrew. 8-10 p.m., WCIX-Channel 6.

Andrew: The Documentary: Joel Cheatwood reviews the destructive course and
aftermath of the hurricane. 8-10 p.m., WSVN-Channel 7

Spirit of Survival: Ann Bishop explores how Hurricane Andrew affected the lives
of some Dade County residents. 8-9 p.m., WPLG-Channel 10.

Nova: Hurricane! Scientists fly into the center of hurricanes to measure
conditions that help forecast storms' intensities and probable paths. 8-9 p.m.,
WXEL-Channel 42.

After Andrew: A year after the hurricane, Florida rebuilds. 8:30-9 p.m., CNN.

Wednesday

Nova: Hurricane! Scientists fly into the center of hurricanes to measure
conditions that help forecast storms' intensities and probable paths. Noon-1
p.m., WXEL-Channel 42.

Thursday

Hurricane Andrew Town Meeting: Gov. Lawton Chiles, Insurance Commissioner Tom
Gallagher, meteorologist Dr. Bob Sheets and others review the aftermath of
Hurricane Andrew. 11:35 p.m.-1:35 a.m., WCIX-Channel 6.

Saturday

Hurricane Andrew: A Look Back: 9-10 a.m., Sunshine Network.

Hurricane '93 Update: The latest information on Florida's hurricane season.
7-7:30 p.m., WPTV-Channel 5.

Firefighters: Hurricane Andrew. 3:30-4 a.m., WSVN-Channel 7.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 1993 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 402 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            February 14, 2005 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

EXPERTS SEE FATAL FLAW IN HURRICANE SCALE

BYLINE: By PAT BEALL Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1171 words


Hide from the wind, run from the rain.

A cliche among wind engineers, storm chasers and meteorologists, it's a warning
that translates something like this for the rest of us: A hurricane's wind could
take your home. Its rain and storm surge could take your life.

But ever since Coral Gables engineer Herbert Saffir and meteorologist Robert
Simpson created the wind-driven rating scale bearing their names, hurricanes
have been categorized, and feared, in accordance with the ferocity of their
winds.

"Wind is how people remember what happens in a hurricane," said Forrest Masters
of Florida International University's International Hurricane Research Center.

Those who study severe storms say that's exactly why the famed Saffir-Simpson
wind rating scale needs to be supplemented with indexes reflecting the other two
deadly characteristics of hurricanes: rain and storm surge.

"There are very few wind-related deaths," said Susan Cutter, director of the
University of South Carolina's Hazards Research Laboratory.

According to the National Hurricane Center, 81 percent of all hurricane deaths
between 1970 and 1998 were drownings.

To be sure, a hurricane's storm surge and flood fatalities do not compare with
the grisly toll of the tsunamis in December. But unlike tsunamis, a hurricane's
lethal waters come with plenty of lead time.

Yet storm surge, the lethal rise in sea level that accompanies hurricanes, is a
less-publicized part of the Saffir-Simpson scale.

Rainfall and the flooding it causes are not part of it at all.

And after five years of tinkering, an index that could warn residents about
rain-driven flooding is still not in public use.

It is more than a scholarly debate: The Saffir-Simpson scale of wind-driven
damage is not just how people think about hurricanes. It's how they evaluate
danger.

Before Hurricane Ivan hit, "We were definitely more concerned about wind and
tornadoes," said Karen Gavaletz of the Pensacola community of Grande Lagoon,
which flooding nearly leveled. "We never dreamed the water was going to do what
it did."

Devised in 1971 as part of a United Nations paper on hurricane-resistant
housing, the Saffir-Simpson scale is near-gospel in Florida. Even schoolchildren
can recite the one-to-five shorthand for ranking the expected wind-driven
destruction. A Category 1 is worrisome. A Category 5 is a monster capable of
chewing through steel, wood and any sense of safety.

The categories seem to work best when describing a particular kind of hurricane.
"Hurricane Andrew was primarily a wind event," its damage consistent with its
Saffir-Simpson scale category of 5, explained Cutter.

On the other hand, "Frances was a rain event," Cutter said.

It's with such hurricanes that the famed scale's shortcomings are most obvious:
Frances slogged ashore as a Category 1. Damage from a Category 1 is generally
confined to shrubs, trees and unanchored mobile homes. But rains from
weak-winded Frances incurred hundreds of millions of dollars in damage to homes.

Then there's the Florida shoreline. In the Gulf, the bottom of the ocean nearing
landfall is shallow. Off Florida's Atlantic shore, the ocean floor drops
sharply.

That glitch of geography renders towns and cities on the Gulf three to four
times more vulnerable to flooding from storm surge. As a result, the same
hurricane can cause very different damage, depending on which Florida coastline
is hit.

Those technical disputes over scales and numbers hit home last year, when
Hurricanes Ivan and Frances came calling.

Having survived Hurricane Opal in 1995, many homeowners in North Florida's
Grande Lagoon figured they also could ride out Ivan safely. After all, both Opal
and Ivan were a Category 3 on the Saffir-Simpson scale.

But when it came to the lethal aspect of hurricanes Saffir-Simpson does not
index - rain - Opal was a poor predictor of what Ivan would do. Opal dropped
relatively little rain. Ivan dumped 10 to 15 inches of rain, and on a narrow
swath that placed Grande Lagoon squarely in its path.

Faced with rapidly rising waters from rain, plus a 15-foot storm surge, Rick
Gavaletz tied a 100-foot rope from him to his wife and their two young
daughters, and dragged them all to safety.

The Gavaletz family was lucky. Ivan claimed 30 lives.

Rain-heavy Frances took six lives in Palm Beach County. Of the six deaths, five
were rain-related: Three drowned. One was electrocuted. One died in an accident
on rain-slick roads. None involved wind.

"People hear '15 inches of rain' but what does that mean to them and to their
home?" said Stephen Leatherman, director of the International Hurricane Research
Center at Florida International University. "No one understands."

Storm surge is even harder to visualize. It starts as a dome of ocean water
pushed along beneath the eye of the hurricane. When the hurricane makes
landfall, so does the surge of water. The highest recorded storm surge was
roughly 22 feet: two stories of ocean water rushing inland.

As early as 1998, Jerry Jarrell, then-director of the National Hurricane Center,
urged development of new ways to describe hurricane dangers.

That year, Jarrell and others in forecasting saw firsthand what could happen
when people heeded only warnings about wind. Hurricane Mitch, a Category 5 in
1998, had dwindled to a mere tropical storm on the Saffir-Simpson scale by the
time it made landfall in Central America. People expecting a monster storm were
relieved. Then Mitch released as much as 35 inches of rain.

More than 11,000 people died in the flooding and mudslides that followed, making
it the deadliest Atlantic hurricane in 200 years.

In 1999, Irene struck South Florida as a Category 1, the tamest of the five
Saffir-Simpson categories. People went to work - only to be stranded when the
"tame" hurricane flooded Miami with 17 inches of rain. Seven people died.

"We have got to find a better way" to describe all of a hurricane's dangers,
said Bill O'Brien, Palm Beach County Emergency Services manager.

Not everyone agrees.

"We already have a system for measuring rain," said one forecaster. "It's called
inches."

Still, few dispute outright the theoretical usefulness of new warning scales In
Miami, FIU'S International Hurricane Research Center is now tackling storm surge
with animated computer models showing how an approaching surge will hit. As a
storm approaches, the continually updated model can be displayed on Internet
sites and TV. "The visual is a lot more effective than just me saying, 'There's
going to be a five foot storm surge,' " O'Brien said.

When those big waters come, people in the path of a hurricane need to think
about more than wind, Jarrell said. "The wind will usually leave you something,"
he said. Storm surge, and to a lesser degree flooding, won't.

"You need to run from it," Jarrell said. "You need to get away."

Staff writers Jane Musgrave and John Pacenti contributed to this story.

pat_beall@pbpost.com

Storm recap

Get complete day-by-day recaps and coordinates plus exclusive Post photos and
stories, interactive graphics, maps, more.

PalmBeachPost.com

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC (B&W)
 STAFF GRAPHIC Storm surge most dangerous Storm surge is the greatest potential
threat to life and property associated with hurricanes. A large dome of water,
50 to 100 miles wide, it sweeps across the coastline near where a hurricane
makes landfall and can be more than 15 feet deep at its peak. Source: NOAA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2005 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 403 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           September 23, 2005 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

FLUCTUATING INTENSITY 'BIG PUZZLE' TO PREDICT

BYLINE: By ROBERT P. KING Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1073 words


The second-biggest question haunting the Gulf Coast is the one meteorologists
are least able to answer:

How strong a punch will Hurricane Rita deliver?

Forecasters have a fairly good idea of where Rita is headed, somewhere along the
upper Texas or western Louisiana coasts. They have much less of a clue on the
future of Rita's winds, which weakened Thursday from a near-biblical 175 mph to
a still-scary 140 mph.

Will Rita zoom back up to Category 5 territory, above 155 mph, or drop to the
low 100s? It's a crucial question because a hurricane's potential damage and
all-around fear factor soar with every rise in wind speed.

"If it's a Category 3 at landfall, it's equivalent to 25 Category 1s," said
National Hurricane Center meteorologist Chris Landsea.

Meteorologists readily admit they know too little about hurricanes' internal
workings to predict when the storms will abruptly rage or calm down like moody,
hormone-addled teenagers.

"It's a big puzzle," hurricane center meteorologist Christopher Sisko said
Thursday.

Sure, the experts have some clues: Bath-warm oceans and moist air are good - at
least for the hurricanes. Dry air, Saharan dust and cyclone-shredding wind shear
are bad.

But hurricanes also have their own internal clockwork, which hurricane center
meteorologist Stacy Stewart acknowledges "we have no skill in forecasting."

A major hurricane will periodically shed and replace the ring of fierce winds
surrounding its eye, like a snake sloughing off its skin. It will weaken when
that happens - something Rita did Thursday - but then might regain its old
strength. Or not.

"We can't forecast these types of things," Sisko said of the shedding cycle. "We
can only observe them."

In predicting hurricanes' paths, meteorologists have become so skilled that
today's five-day forecasts are more accurate than three-day forecasts in the
1980s. But strength forecasts have repeatedly yielded unpleasant, sometime
disastrous surprises:

* Less than three days before 1992's Hurricane Andrew shredded Homestead as one
of the most powerful cyclones to strike the United States, it was a mere
tropical storm that inspired few worries. Bob Sheets, then the hurricane
center's director, issued perhaps the most infamous piece of public advice in
the agency's history: "Just go about your normal activities this weekend."

* Last August, after Charley boomed from 109 mph to 144 mph in five hours, the
forecasters were much more chagrined over that unexpected burst of speed than by
the storm's last-minute wobble into Punta Gorda.

* More mercifully, but just as unpredictably, Ivan last year and Dennis this
year weakened to Category 3 just before hitting the Panhandle, most likely
lessening the destruction. During its trek across the Atlantic and gulf, Ivan
had surged to Category 5 an amazing three times.

So while the hurricane center's forecasters were predicting Thursday that Rita's
winds will gradually ease, perhaps to a still-dangerous Category 3, they and
outside meteorologists said the hurricane could easily regain strength instead.

Still, Category 5 hurricanes are rare for a reason, experts say. Only three such
hurricanes have ever been known to hit the United States: Andrew, the deadly
1935 Labor Day storm that drowned the Keys, and 1969's Hurricane Camille in
Mississippi.

Scientists say atmospheric and water conditions have to be just right for a
storm to achieve that elite ranking - and once they do, they have trouble
maintaining it. Kerry Emanuel, a researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, has written that the vast majority of hurricanes never get close to
their highest potential.

Then again, the hurricane center's Stewart says, "Every once in a while you get
just the right conditions."

At least one expert says those conditions are still ripe - especially the warm
waters in the gulf and Caribbean. So don't be surprised if another storm emerges
to rival Rita and Katrina, said Michael Schlacter, chief meteorologist for the
New York forecasting company Weather 2000.

"There's going to be a storm that we haven't seen yet, that hasn't even formed,"
Schlacter said. And when it does, "It should be a fool's call to say Category 4
is a potential."

bob_king@pbpost.com

What makes Rita go?

Things that strengthen and weaken a hurricane

Hurricanes can blow sustained winds as high as 200 mph in ideal conditions, but
few storms ever reach that pitch or stay there for long.

Here are some factors that helped Hurricane Rita explode in intensity Wednesday
- then weakened it Thursday.

WATER TEMPERATURE

Heat from evaporating seawater is the primary fuel that energizes a hurricane.

Rita is traveling over the bathtub-warm Gulf of Mexico, where temperatures are
in the mid- to upper 80s.

But a hurricane can weaken itself by churning cooler water from the sea depths,
cutting off its fuel supply.

Rita stayed super-strong for a while by riding atop the gulf's Loop Current,
where the warm water runs especially deep.

Now the hurricane is over waters where the warm layers are shallower.

WIND

Hurricanes thrive when winds blow in similar direction and speed at various
levels of the atmosphere. But when the winds differ, the shear can tear a
hurricane apart.

Shear has been weak in the central gulf this week, but now Rita is moving into
stronger shear near the Gulf Coast.

OUTFLOW

High in the atmosphere, jets of cool air flow in clockwise streams out of the
hurricane's center.

These are the hurricane's exhaust pipes, keeping the storm strong by lowering
air pressure in the eye.

Cool air blows outward on upper atmosphere.

Counter-clockwise winds blow toward the eye near the surface.

But wind shear and neighboring weather patterns can disrupt the outflow,
clogging the exhaust pipes.

Pressure in the eye rises, and the hurricane weakens.

THE X FACTOR: WHEN A STORM CHANGES FROM WITHIN

Major hurricanes usually go through cycles in which the eye wall - the ring of
fierce winds surrounding the eye - shrinks and is replaced by an outer eye wall.

When this is happening, the storm weakens.

Afterward, the storm can strengthen again.

Meteorologists can't predict when this cycle will occur.

'We can't forecast these types of things. We can only observe them when they
happen.' - Christopher Sisko, meteorologist at the National Hurricane Center,
discussing the eye wall cycle.

Sources: National Hurricane Center; National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration; NASA; Kerry Emanuel, Divine Wind: The History and Science of
Hurricanes

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions. Info box at end of text.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC (C)
    Graphic by CHRISTOPHER SMITH, STEVE LOPEZ/Staff Artists Text by BOB
KING/Staff Writer What makes Rita go? Things that strengthen and weaken a
hurricane

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2005 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 404 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             August 17, 2007 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

ISLANDS ON ALERT, TOURISTS EVACUATE AS DEAN REACHES HURRICANE FORCE

BYLINE: By ROBERT P. KING Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 650 words


Dean became the year's first Atlantic hurricane early Thursday, then boomed to
Category 2 strength as it bore down on the eastern Caribbean with sustained
winds near 100 mph.

Its immediate targets were the islands of Martinique, St. Lucia, Dominica and
others nearby, which could feel the brunt of Dean's power by early today.

Hotels in Dominica and Martinique prepared to evacuate tourists from seaside
rooms, and in St. Lucia volunteers went door to door to warn islanders,
according to news reports.

From there, the National Hurricane Center expects Dean to barrel just south of
Jamaica on Sunday before striking the Yucatan peninsula as a Category 4 storm
with roughly 140 mph winds late Monday or early Tuesday.

Thursday night's forecast did not indicate any immediate danger to South
Florida. But the hurricane center said Dean's track beyond the Yucatan was
deeply uncertain, so Floridians still need to watch the storm carefully.

"You can't call them out of the woods," said Lt. j.g. Rebecca Waddington, a
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorologist stationed at the
hurricane center.

The hurricane center warned of a 3 percent chance that tropical storm-force
winds could extend as far north as Daytona Beach by Tuesday. Key West and
Marathon faced the same probability of experiencing hurricane-force winds.

Waddington called it much too soon to say where Dean ultimately will land.

"Right now, everywhere along the Gulf Coast and of course the Caribbean should
monitor the system," she said.

Some computer forecasting models estimated that Dean could reach Category 5, the
fiercest class of hurricane, after entering the Gulf of Mexico. One model
suggested that Dean could approach the northern Gulf Coast as a 172 mph
powerhouse -- a disquieting scenario for a region still bearing wounds from
Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

But other models called for final landfalls in northern Mexico. The hurricane
center's official forecast said Dean should weaken after crossing the Yucatan.

No models called for Dean to repeat the path of Hurricane Wilma, which made a
sharp right hook into Florida after striking near the Yucatan in October 2005.

Wilma's turn occurred because of a strong low-pressure trough and winds pushing
the storm to the northeast -- a typical pattern toward the end of the hurricane
season. But Dean is traveling south of a strong high-pressure ridge that is
keeping the hurricane moving to the west.

The westward movement should continue at least for the next three days,
Waddington said.

Meteorologists were hoping for more-precise forecasts after two hurricane hunter
planes visited the storm Thursday, the first day Dean was within flight range.

First, an Air Force Reserve C-130 charged into the heart of the storm and used a
newly installed device to measure winds at the ocean's surface. Then NOAA was
deploying a Gulfstream IV jet to study the atmosphere surrounding the hurricane.

As Dean approached, the French government issued a hurricane warning for
Martinique, Guadeloupe and its dependencies, the hurricane center reported.
Hurricane warnings also were in effect for the islands of Dominica and St.
Lucia.

The warnings meant hurricane conditions were expected within 24 hours.

Tropical storm warnings were in effect for islands including Grenada, Barbados,
Montserrat, Antigua and Barbuda.

Authorities declared a tropical storm watch in the U.S. Virgin Islands and
Puerto Rico, indicating that tropical storm conditions were possible in 36
hours.

On Dominica's Atlantic coast, about 18 guests at the Jungle Bay Resort & Spa
were being evacuated from their cottages to spend Thursday night in a reinforced
steel-and-concrete shelter, hotel spokeswoman Laura Ell said.

"Everyone's very calm but taking it seriously," she said. "Many of our guests
are from Florida and used to these kinds of things."

The Associated Press contributed to this story.

~ bob_king@pbpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions.

GRAPHIC: MAP (B&W)
 MARK HEMPHILL/Staff Artist TRACKING THE STORM Location of Hurricane Dean

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2007 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 405 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                        The East Bay Times (California)

                           September 7, 2017 Thursday

Tropical triple-threat: Jose, Katia to join in Irmas mayhem

BYLINE: The Washington Post

LENGTH: 510 words



HIGHLIGHT: Incredibly, all three of the active hurricanes in the Atlantic basin
could affect land at the same time on Saturday: Irma over the Bahamas (and
approaching Florida), Jose over the northeastern Leewards, and Katia in Mexico.


var _informq = _informq || []; _informq.push(["embed"]);

By Jason Samenow and Brian Mcnoldy | Washington Post

Hurricane Irma is not the only show in town. Two other menacing hurricanes, Jose
and Katia, were swirling in the Atlantic Ocean basin and forecast to strengthen
and impact land areas late Friday into the weekend.

Hurricane Jose

Jose could hit some of the same small islands in the northern Lesser Antilles
decimated by Irma. The hurricane, which formed as a tropical storm on Wednesday,
was intensifying in the eastern Atlantic, following behind Irma on a similar
path.

While it is expected to curve to the north out to sea well before reaching the
United States, it could pass very close to the northern Leeward Islands as a
major hurricane Saturday.

A hurricane watch was issued for Antigua and Barbuda, devastated by Irma on
Tuesday night and Wednesday.

Tropical storm watches were issued slightly farther west for Anguilla,
Montserrat, St. Kitts, Nevis, Saba and St. Eustatius  areas less likely to be
seriously affected.

On Thursday morning, Jose had maximum sustained winds of 90 miles per hour,
which were expected to increase to 120 miles per hour by Friday, making it a
Category 3 hurricane on the 1 to 5 Saffir-Simpson wind intensity scale.

If the storm tracks over the beleaguered islands of the northern Lesser
Antilles, they could face destructive winds for the second time in four days and
up to 10 inches of rainfall.

The exact track of Jose is still somewhat in question, and there is a chance it
could escape to the east of the already battered islands. But its too close to
call.

Hurricane Katia

Just as Jose was upgraded to a hurricane Wednesday afternoon, so was Katia. This
system formed in the western Gulf of Mexico from a lingering disturbance earlier
this week.

The storm, packing peak winds of 80 miles per hour, is forecast to track
westward toward Mexico and make landfall as a hurricane on Friday night in the
state of Veracruz.

The storm is forecast to strengthen up until landfall, with peak winds climbing
to 105 miles per hour  which would make it a strong Category 2 hurricane,
nearing major Category 3 status.

A hurricane warning is out for the state of Veracruz, which is predicted to
receive 5 to 10 inches of rain. Isolated maximum amounts of 25 inches are
possible in northern Veracruz and eastern Hidalgo, Puebla, and San Luis Potosi,
the Hurricane Center warned. This rainfall may cause life-threatening flash
floods and mudslides, especially in areas of mountainous terrain.

Three hurricanes at the same time is highly unusual

Incredibly, all three of the active hurricanes in the Atlantic basin could
affect land at the same time on Saturday: Irma over the Bahamas (and approaching
Florida), Jose over the northeastern Leewards, and Katia in Mexico.

It is quite rare to have three simultaneous hurricanes. The last time this
occurred was in 2010 with Hurricanes Igor, Julia and Karl. In an unlikely
coincidence, these storms are almost in the same order and position as Irma,
Jose and Katia, and have the same first three letters.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 406 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 irishmirror.ie

                     September 5, 2017 Tuesday 4:06 PM GMT

Richard Branson refuses to leave Necker Island despite it being in direct path
of devastating 175mph Hurricane Irma;
The billionaire tycoon is choosing to stay on the island, despite admitting that
"nothing can withstand" a hurricane as powerful as Irma

BYLINE: By Natalie Evans

SECTION: NEWS,WORLD NEWS; Version:6

LENGTH: 894 words


Richard Bransonis refusing to leave his private island in the British Virgin
Islands as 175mph Hurricane Irma heads straight for it.

The business magnet is battening down the hatches at his luxury estate on Necker
Island as Irma was upgraded to a Category 5 storm today.

The billionaire says he's survived two hurricanes on the island thanks to his
specialised 'hurricane proof' buildings - but says "nothing can withstand" a
Category 5 storm.

Branson wrote onhis blogtoday: "Generally speaking, we have one hurricane in the
British Virgin Islands around every 10 years.

"Fortunately, most of them drift north of us, but this one is coming straight
for us, with the eye of the storm heading straight for Necker, Moskito Island
and Virgin Gorda.

Hurricane Irma upgraded to 'extremely dangerous' Category 5 with winds of 175mph
set to batter US

"Obviously things can change - hopefully they do, as a category five hurricane
hasn't hit the BVI [British Virgin Islands] full on before.

"On Necker Island we have constructed really strong buildings (with hurricane
blinds) that should be able to handle extreme weather pretty well, though with a
Category 5 hurricane almost nothing can withstand it.

"We had some lovely guests staying on Necker Island who have cut their trip
short for safety reasons, and another group of guests have also postponed.

"I will be on Necker alongside our team, as I have been on the three times we
have had hurricanes over the past 30 years."

Branson, who said he was on the island in 2010 when it was hit by Hurricanes
Earl and Otto, went on to share his concerns for local residents and wildlife.

Hurricane Irma filmed from space looks terrifying

He added: "In the past, many British Virgin Islanders have shrugged off
hurricanes, stayed at home and not gone to shelters.

"This time the BVI Government and the BVI Tourist board have been very active
and providing advice to the local population."

Irma is set to hit Necker Island less than two weeks after Hurricane Harvey
killed 60 people when it battered the United States and surrounding territories.

Hurricane Irma will reach Leeward Islands, east of Puerto Rico, tonight and
could batter Florida by the weekend.

British Airways is already preparing for the worst and flying tourists off the
Caribbean island of Antigua early.

A BA spokeswoman told Mirror.co.uk: We have provided a special flight to Antigua
to get our customers home before Hurricane Irma arrives on the island.

"The Antigua Airport authorities say that operations will be significantly
impacted today, so we have offered all affected customers rebooking options.  We
are keeping our flights to other Caribbean islands under review."

Florida has declared an emergency and President Donald Trump has "offered the
full resources of the federal government as Floridians prepare for Hurricane
Irma," reports CNN.

"In Florida, we always prepare for the worst and hope for the best, and while
the exact path of Irma is not absolutely known at this time, we cannot afford to
not be prepared," said Governor Rick Scott in a statement.

Water is expected to rise 9ft (3metres) above normal levels as the storm brings
a predicted 10 inches of rain and "large and destructive waves".

'No way to prevent' chemical plant EXPLODING after it was flooded in Hurricane
Harvey

Irma is forecast to strengthen even more over the next 48 hours.

Forecasters say they cannot predict the exact path the storm will take but,
islands in Irma's path have been warned to brace themselves in preparation for
the intensifyingstormthat could pummel the area with life-threatening winds and
torrential rain.

Hurricane advisories have been issued for territories that dot the West Indies,
including the Leeward Islands, the British and US Virgin Islands and Puerto
Rico.

Not another one! Storm Irma forms in Atlantic and is expected to become
hurricane later this week

Irma was initially a Category 4 hurricane on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale,
meaning sustained winds of 130-156 miles per hour (209-251 kph) with
"catastrophic" outcomes.

This includes the uprooting of trees and downed power lines, water and
electricity outages, and significant property damage causing uninhabitable
conditions, according to the National Hurricane Center.

The NHC said: "There is an increasing chance of seeing some impacts from Irma in
the Florida Peninsula and the Florida Keys later this week and this weekend.

"In addition, rough surf and dangerous marine conditions will begin to affect
the southeastern U.S. coast by later this week."

Texas and Louisiana residents are still reeling from the catastrophic effects of
the deadly Hurricane Harvey.

Harvey struck Texas as a Category 4 hurricane on August 25 and dumped several
feet of rain, destroying thousands of homes and businesses.

In preparation for the storm, the economically struggling Puerto Rico government
on Monday declared a state of emergency and activated the National Guard.

"Despite the economic challenges Puerto Rico is facing, the approved budget has
$15 million for the emergency fund," Governor Ricardo Rosselló said in a
statement.

The island of about 3.4 million people has 456 emergency shelters prepared to
house up to 62,100 people.

To help residents prepare for the storm, the Puerto Rican government activated a
price freeze on basic necessities, including food and water, medicines, power
generators and batteries.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBMGNIRIS


                      Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 407 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                 irishmirror.ie

                     September 19, 2017 Tuesday 4:11 AM GMT

Hurricane Maria leaves Dominica 'obliterated' as Prime Minister has to be
rescued when roof blown away;
The hurricane was upgraded to a Category 5 storm with winds of 160mph just as it
hit the Caribbean island

BYLINE: By Natalie Evans

SECTION: NEWS,WORLD NEWS; Version:2

LENGTH: 813 words


The Commonwealth island of Dominica is feared to have been "obliterated" as it
took a direct hit from Hurricane Maria.

The powerful storm was upgraded to a Category 5 hurricane with winds of 160mph
just as it made landfall on the former British colony, with a population of
72,000.

The Prime Minister of Dominica, Roosevelt Skerrit, posted a series of
increasingly concerning updates on Facebook about his own survival.

In the early hours of of Tuesday he wrote: "My roof is gone. I am at the
complete mercy of the hurricane.

"House is flooding."

Fortunately, Mr Skerrit said he had been "rescued" around half an hour later.

But weather experts made grim predictions as Maria swept over the island
renowned for its natural beauty.

Follow updates on Hurricane Maria via our live blog.

Meteorologist Kurtis Gertz said it was a "dire situation that will lead to
complete destruction", while Guy Watson added: "Dominica like Barbuda has just
been obliterated".

Hurricane warnings are now in place for the Leeward Islands, the British Virgin
Islands, Puerto Rico with destructive waves, flash floods, mudslides and
life-threatening storm surge all said to pose a threat to islanders.

The NHC said: "The centre of Maria will move near Dominica and the adjacent
Leeward Islands during the next few hours, over the extreme northeastern
Caribbean Sea the remainder of tonight and Tuesday, and approach Puerto Rico and
the Virgin Islands Tuesday night and Wednesday."

In Puerto Rico, islanders have today stocked up on supplies while schools have
been shut in preparation for Hurricane Maria as governor Ricardo Rossello
declared a state of emergency.

NBC reported panicked residents queued up in a desperate scramble for water as
6,000 people on the island are still without it from Hurricane Irma.

Maria

While evacuation orders have been put in place in Guadeloupe and the US Virgin
Islands where President Donald Trump has declared an emergency.

With British residents facing a fresh hurricane battering, the Government
stressed it was taking "every measure possible" to prepare already devastated
communities.

Hurricane Maria travel advice: what to do if your holiday is affected and your
compensation rights

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office is advising against all travel to Anguilla,
the British Virgin Islands and Montserrat - with hurricane warnings in place for
the latter two.

International Development Secretary Priti Patel said British troops, police and
aid experts were "working relentlessly" to help the victims of Irma, and said
they would now be tasked with also preparing for the impact of Maria.

"We are under no illusions about the possible impact of Hurricane Maria and are
taking every measure possible to prepare communities which have already been
devastated by Hurricane Irma," she said.

Up to 12 inches of rain is predicted to fall, with "isolated maximum amounts of
20 inches" expected to hit the British Virgin Islands through Wednesday night.

On Sunday, Maria was about 405 miles south-east of the Leeward Islands with
maximum sustained winds of 65mph at 6pm UK time, theUS National Hurricane
Centersaid.

"Strengthening is forecast during the next 48 hours and Maria is expected to
become a hurricane later today or tonight," the forecaster said.

The hurricane centre warned that the US and British Virgin Islands, as well as
the US territory of Puerto Rico, should monitor the storm's progress.

The government of Puerto Rico has already begun preparations for Maria, which is
expected to make landfall there on Tuesday, officials said.

The apocalyptic aftermath: Mirror man joins rescuers on British Virgin Islands
torn to shreds by Hurricane Irma

The storm is moving west-north-west at about 15 miles per hour and is expected
to cross the Leeward Islands on Monday night, the NHC said.

Hurricane warnings were in place for the French island of Guadeloupe and for
Dominica.

Footage shows devastation left by Storm Irma in British Virgin Islands

160mph gusts as TWO hurricanes head for Japan bringing landslides and towering
waves

Hurricane conditions also are possible by Tuesday for Antigua, Barbuda, St
Kitts, Nevis, Montserrat, Saba, St Eustatius, Sint Maarten, St Martin, St
Barthelemy and Anguilla, the NHC said.

Tropical storm conditions were possible on Monday or Tuesday for St Lucia,
Martinique, Barbados, St. Vincent and the Grenadines.

'Hurricane Irma, storms and flooding are signs of imminent biblical apocalypse'

Maria is approaching the eastern Caribbean less than two weeks after Irma
hammered the region before overrunning Florida.

The powerful Category 4 storm killed at least 84 people, more than half of them
in the Caribbean.

A second storm, Hurricane Jose, was in the Atlantic Ocean about 355 miles
south-east of Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, with top sustained winds of 90mph,
the NHC said.

Jose is heading north, and its eye is expected to remain off the US east coast.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBMGNIRIS


                      Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 408 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The Ottawa Citizen

                           September 19, 1999, FINAL

Nothing stirs media like a good hurricane

BYLINE: Lisa Van Dusen

SECTION: News; A17

LENGTH: 755 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON - Maybe it's just gringa paranoia, but I'm beginning to think the
National Weather Service is run by the same shady foreign co- conspirators who
planted Monica Lewinsky, invented Dan Quayle and blamed the pilfering of U.S.
nuclear secrets at Los Alamos on that adorable little Chinese grandfather.

They know that the only superpower left can't be brought down by bombs or shame
or international law or emerging market financial contagion so they've gone to
ground, gone local and hit the braintrust in its own carefully manicured back
yard. Washington itself is terrified of anything even approaching weather.

For a long time, I thought this was only a snow issue that it was a north-south,
regional meteorological disparity that made for infuriating and laughable days
and sometimes weeks of precipitation-induced paralysis. But last week, as the
schools closed and bottled water flew from the shelves, the House of
Representatives closed down a day early so that the Congressmen could snag a
seat on the proverbial last chopper out of Saigon before Hurricane Floyd hit.

Floyd was christened by the National Hurricane Center in Miami, where people
find, name and track hurricanes and, in hurricane season here, become ubiquitous
clip-mongers so that someday they can quit working at the National Hurricane
Center and become highly paid hurricane consultants to major television
networks.

The National Hurricane Center doesn't explain how they come up with the names
for tropical storms and hurricanes. Maybe they pick them out of a hat full of
names or choose a different theme every year. This year, it was people the
hurricane forecasters have French-kissed while drunk in the Ozarks because after
Floyd there is a hurricane Gert and then a hurricane Lenny. Maybe the hurricane
forecasters are darker than we think and this year's theme is names of people
most likely to be pinned to the roof of a double-wide trailer as it is pitched
by the hurricane across the neon wasteland of downtown Hollywood Beach like a
rusty tin can.

Hurricane Floyd sent hundreds of thousands of Floridians fleeing their trailer
parks in the largest peacetime traffic jam ever in the United States, then
changed its mind. It did something that propelled it northward, depending on
which thesaurus was being madly violated on the news desks.

Hurricanes bring out the cowboy in headline writers, in the same way as they
bring out the daredevil in news anchors. Nobody has come up with anywhere near
enough cliches for hurricane movement, because there is always a torrent of bad,
bad similes during hurricane season. Fires scorch, quakes rattle, but nothing
rallies armies of bewildering military, sports and sex analogies like a
charging, slamming, grinding hurricane.

As if Washington wasn't whimpering already, waiting for this hurricane was
scarier because all day we watched Bill Hemmer, the normally composed and
unsettlingly happy CNN anchor standing on the beach being very agitated and wet,
but still happy. Hurricane stand-ups must now be to a television reporter's
audition tapes what war zone standups used to be. Because every time a hurricane
hurtles or nudges or scampers its way toward a major population centre, millions
of dollars worth of heavily insured network talent evacuates New York and
Atlanta for lower ground along the coastline. Maybe because a hurricane standup
gives you all the suspense and derring-do of a war-zone standup without the
actual danger of one.

This can provide comic relief during a hurricane countdown, as when Dan Rather
raided Corpus Christi, Texas, during a hurricane a couple of years ago and did a
bellowing, wind-ravaged, hair-ripping standup while dramatically gripping a tree
in a classic TV moment that rivalled his famous flak-jacket mujihadeen Afghan
cameo for sheer fatuousness.

The sad thing about the first leg of Hurricane Floyd was that they shut down
Disney World, robbing us of the treat of seeing either Dan Rather or Bill Hemmer
desperately clutching a lamp post on Main Street USA, runaway dwarves rolling by
in the background like doomed, heighho- ing tumbleweeds.

As it turned out, Hurricane Floyd spat perfunctorily on the nation's capitol on
its way up the coast and not much more. Meanwhile, the forces of darkness were
vindicated by the knowledge that they closed down both the capitol of the free
world and the Happiest Place on Earth, all in the same 24-hour news cycle.

Lisa Van Dusen is a Canadian writer living in Washington.


LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright 1999 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 409 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The Ottawa Citizen

                           September 19, 1999, FINAL

Nothing stirs media like a good hurricane

BYLINE: Lisa Van Dusen

SECTION: News; A17

LENGTH: 755 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON - Maybe it's just gringa paranoia, but I'm beginning to think the
National Weather Service is run by the same shady foreign co- conspirators who
planted Monica Lewinsky, invented Dan Quayle and blamed the pilfering of U.S.
nuclear secrets at Los Alamos on that adorable little Chinese grandfather.

They know that the only superpower left can't be brought down by bombs or shame
or international law or emerging market financial contagion so they've gone to
ground, gone local and hit the braintrust in its own carefully manicured back
yard. Washington itself is terrified of anything even approaching weather.

For a long time, I thought this was only a snow issue that it was a north-south,
regional meteorological disparity that made for infuriating and laughable days
and sometimes weeks of precipitation-induced paralysis. But last week, as the
schools closed and bottled water flew from the shelves, the House of
Representatives closed down a day early so that the Congressmen could snag a
seat on the proverbial last chopper out of Saigon before Hurricane Floyd hit.

Floyd was christened by the National Hurricane Center in Miami, where people
find, name and track hurricanes and, in hurricane season here, become ubiquitous
clip-mongers so that someday they can quit working at the National Hurricane
Center and become highly paid hurricane consultants to major television
networks.

The National Hurricane Center doesn't explain how they come up with the names
for tropical storms and hurricanes. Maybe they pick them out of a hat full of
names or choose a different theme every year. This year, it was people the
hurricane forecasters have French-kissed while drunk in the Ozarks because after
Floyd there is a hurricane Gert and then a hurricane Lenny. Maybe the hurricane
forecasters are darker than we think and this year's theme is names of people
most likely to be pinned to the roof of a double-wide trailer as it is pitched
by the hurricane across the neon wasteland of downtown Hollywood Beach like a
rusty tin can.

Hurricane Floyd sent hundreds of thousands of Floridians fleeing their trailer
parks in the largest peacetime traffic jam ever in the United States, then
changed its mind. It did something that propelled it northward, depending on
which thesaurus was being madly violated on the news desks.

Hurricanes bring out the cowboy in headline writers, in the same way as they
bring out the daredevil in news anchors. Nobody has come up with anywhere near
enough cliches for hurricane movement, because there is always a torrent of bad,
bad similes during hurricane season. Fires scorch, quakes rattle, but nothing
rallies armies of bewildering military, sports and sex analogies like a
charging, slamming, grinding hurricane.

As if Washington wasn't whimpering already, waiting for this hurricane was
scarier because all day we watched Bill Hemmer, the normally composed and
unsettlingly happy CNN anchor standing on the beach being very agitated and wet,
but still happy. Hurricane stand-ups must now be to a television reporter's
audition tapes what war zone standups used to be. Because every time a hurricane
hurtles or nudges or scampers its way toward a major population centre, millions
of dollars worth of heavily insured network talent evacuates New York and
Atlanta for lower ground along the coastline. Maybe because a hurricane standup
gives you all the suspense and derring-do of a war-zone standup without the
actual danger of one.

This can provide comic relief during a hurricane countdown, as when Dan Rather
raided Corpus Christi, Texas, during a hurricane a couple of years ago and did a
bellowing, wind-ravaged, hair-ripping standup while dramatically gripping a tree
in a classic TV moment that rivalled his famous flak-jacket mujihadeen Afghan
cameo for sheer fatuousness.

The sad thing about the first leg of Hurricane Floyd was that they shut down
Disney World, robbing us of the treat of seeing either Dan Rather or Bill Hemmer
desperately clutching a lamp post on Main Street USA, runaway dwarves rolling by
in the background like doomed, heighho- ing tumbleweeds.

As it turned out, Hurricane Floyd spat perfunctorily on the nation's capitol on
its way up the coast and not much more. Meanwhile, the forces of darkness were
vindicated by the knowledge that they closed down both the capitol of the free
world and the Happiest Place on Earth, all in the same 24-hour news cycle.

Lisa Van Dusen is a Canadian writer living in Washington.


LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright 1999 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 410 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                               The Ottawa Citizen

                            November 29, 1999, FINAL

Hurricane season teaches harsh lesson on inland floods

SECTION: News; C16

LENGTH: 353 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


MIAMI -- The busy 1999 Atlantic hurricane season that ends tomorrow generated an
unprecedented spate of powerful hurricanes and brought killer floods to the
United States, but fell far short of last year's deadly toll.

The six-month hurricane season saw five Category 4 hurricanes -- Bret, Cindy,
Floyd, Gert and Lenny -- for the first time on record. Category 4 storms are the
second most powerful type, with winds of 210 to 25o km/h, capable of leveling
mobile homes and badly damaging houses.

In all, 12 tropical storms formed and eight became hurricanes. Circular tropical
weather systems become tropical storms and receive names when maximum sustained
winds reach 63 km/h, and become hurricanes when those winds hit 119 km/h.

''It's definitely an above-normal season. All five of the major hurricanes
reached Category 4 status,'' said Brian Jarvinen, a hurricane specialist at the
U.S. National Hurricane Center. ''We've never had five of them be Category 4.
That in itself was a record.''

But while Hurricane Floyd claimed about 70 lives in the United States and the
Bahamas, the 1999 season did not match the crushing toll of 1998, when Hurricane
Georges killed 500 in a Caribbean rampage and Mitch took as many as 11,000 in
Central America.

From fearsome Floyd, which forced millions to flee their U.S. East Coast homes,
to tail- ender Hurricane Lenny -- a bizarre west-to-east storm in November --
the 1999 season was unusual and heads into the record books as a lesson in the
dangers of inland flooding.

U.S. hurricane forecasters have warned for years that hurricanes pose a
catastrophic threat to overbuilt coastal areas. But the 1999 season sounded
alarm bells for inland residents who can fall victim to a hurricane's torrential
rains.

Floyd's floods killed some 50 people in North Carolina, putting houses and barns
under water up to their eaves and chasing people and animals onto roofs and into
trees and attics. In South Florida, Hurricane Irene dumped up to 46 centimetres
of rain and six people were killed, five from stepping into puddles electrified
by downed wires.


LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright 1999 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 411 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                 May 30, 1999, Sunday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

Center stresses hurricane planning

BYLINE: DAVID BALLINGRUD

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 709 words



Volunteers at Suncoast Manor and elsewhere try to help vulnerable residents
prepare for the worst.

The next few days will be busy ones for Pat Lovejoy. She has about 20 people to
track down and - let's be straight about this - pester.

But Lovejoy's pestering comes with a smile. She is a member of the disaster
committee at Suncoast Manor, a continuing care retirement center in the Pinellas
Point area of St. Petersburg.

She and hundreds of volunteers like her throughout the Tampa Bay area are trying
to get vulnerable residents to make evacuation plans before the hurricane season
begins Tuesday.

National Hurricane Center forecasters and private ones such as William Gray have
lent immediacy to the task, warning that this season will be a fast and furious
one.

"People have been saying for several years we may be heading back to a period
like the 1940s and '50s, when we really had heavy hurricane seasons - a lot of
major hurricanes," said Jerry Jarrell, director of the hurricane center. "I
think it's no longer speculation. I think we are in it now."

The hurricane center made its first-ever forecast for a complete season last
week. It called for more hurricane activity than during average years, and three
or more intense storms.

William Gray of Colorado State University, the nation's most prominent private
hurricane forecaster, anticipates the same kind of busy season: He expects 14
storms, nine of those becoming hurricanes. Of the nine, four will be major,
intense storms.

An average Atlantic hurricane season includes nine to 10 tropical storms, five
or six of those becoming hurricanes, two of those major or intense.

The numbers predicted by Gray and the hurricane center would make 1999 very much
like 1998, a very bad year, indeed.

Last year the Atlantic hurricane season brought 14 tropical storms, including
three major hurricanes. The storms inflicted $ 7.3-billion in damages and 23
fatalities in the United States alone.

In Central America, however, the damage and death toll were almost beyond
comprehension.

Hurricane Mitch dumped three years' worth of rain onto Honduras in just a week
in October and then crossed over into Nicaragua. It killed about 10,000 people,
left 2-million homeless and caused (in very poor countries) damage estimated at
$ 10-billion. The bodies still are being recovered as rain washes away the mud
that fell down the sides of mountains.

Worse, officials say, Central American nations are even less prepared than they
were a year ago. Flimsy, temporary shelters remain full, and people have rebuilt
shacks along the rivers that flooded. Many roads knocked out by Mitch remain
unrepaired, adding to the isolation of areas that even under normal conditions
would be tough for rescue workers to reach.

"I'm afraid, and I'm not a coward," said America Juarez, a 38-year-old maid in
the Honduran capital, Tegucigalpa.

With these memories of last year still fresh, preparations for the current
season continue. At Suncoast Manor, Lovejoy says the residents' response has
been good.

There are several levels of care offered at the facility, and different
evacuation plans for each level. Lovejoy has worked with the nearly 200
residents who live independently, and has persuaded all but about 20 to make
some sort of plan.

Some have paid a non-refundable deposit to hold a room at a local hotel. Others
have lined up a friend in a safe zone they can visit. The point is that they
have a place to go, without trying to leave the area on roads that are certain
to be crowded.

People listen, Lovejoy said, "but I kind of have to hound some of them."

Lovejoy has been at Suncoast Manor for more than 14 years, she said, and has
worked on the disaster committee for much of that time. Her husband was her
partner in the effort until he passed away four years ago.

The next few days will find her walking the well-trimmed grounds at Suncoast
Manor, or working the phones from her home, trying to persuade the holdouts to
make some sort of plan.

"I do better face to face," she said. "I have the paperwork with me,  and I just
walk up to 'em and say, "Okay kid, here's the situation. What are you going to
do?' "

- Information from Times wires was used in this report.


LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, PAM ROYAL; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; BLACK AND
WHITE CHART; Pat Lovejoy is one of 11 members of the Suncoast Manor disaster
committee who is working to prepare vulnerable residents to cope with a
hurricane, along with resident Ann Wynkoop. (ran CITY & STATE, SS edition of
METRO & STATE); Pat Lovejoy (ran TAMPA & STATE, METRO & STATE); a hurricane
tracking chart (ran METRO & STATE)

                    Copyright 1999 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 412 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                               dailyrecord.co.uk

                    September 6, 2017 Wednesday 7:38 AM GMT

Hurricane Irma becomes most powerful storm ever recorded in Atlantic as it
prepares to hit Caribbean islands;
With sustained winds of 185mph, the Category 5 storm has almost exceeded the
maximum theoretical intensity of a hurricane.

BYLINE: By Natalie Evans

SECTION: NEWS,UK & WORLD; Version:1

LENGTH: 1056 words


Hurricane Irma has become the most powerful storm ever recorded in the Atlantic
as it barrels down on the British Virgin Islands.

Around 30,000 islands, almost all British citizens, are directly in the path of
the monster hurricane.

Emergency shelters were opened and Governor J.U Jaspert has now advised everyone
to stay indoors and away from the "extremely dangerous" hurricane.

Motorists to be hit with 4p petrol price hike in the wake of Hurricane Harvey

Irma is a Category 5 hurricane, with sustained winds of 185mph.

Some experts say it is about to exceed the maximum theoretical intensity of a
hurricane - leading to suggestions a new 'Category 6' should be added to the
traditional Saffir-Simpson scale to accommodate it.

Irma is so powerful, it has been causing seismic activity as it passes over the
Caribbean.

The strongest hurricane to ever to make landfall on the US coast was the 'Labor
Day' hurricane of 1935 which hit Florida Keys.

Around 500 people were killed and there were reports of bodies being swept from
one end of Florida to the other.

Hurricane Andrew, the most recent Category 5 storm, left the Miami-Dade area
devastated in 1992.

And since then, the city has transformed, adding huge numbers of residents and
reducing the wetlands area which would buffer the storm.

Night curfew puts Houston on lockdown to stop looting in wake of Storm Harvey

Earlier, business magnet Richard Branson revealed he has decided to remain on
his private island in the British Virgin Islands during the storm.

The billionaire says he's survived two hurricanes on the island thanks to his
specialised 'hurricane proof' buildings - but says "nothing can withstand" a
Category 5 storm.

Branson wrote on his blog: "Generally speaking, we have one hurricane in the
British Virgin Islands around every 10 years.

"Fortunately, most of them drift north of us, but this one is coming straight
for us, with the eye of the storm heading straight for Necker, Moskito Island
and Virgin Gorda.

"Obviously things can change - hopefully they do, as a category five hurricane
hasn't hit the BVI [British Virgin Islands] full on before.

"On Necker Island we have constructed really strong buildings (with hurricane
blinds) that should be able to handle extreme weather pretty well, though with a
Category 5 hurricane almost nothing can withstand it.

"We had some lovely guests staying on Necker Island who have cut their trip
short for safety reasons, and another group of guests have also postponed.

"I will be on Necker alongside our team, as I have been on the three times we
have had hurricanes over the past 30 years."

Branson, who said he was on the island in 2010 when it was hit by Hurricanes
Earl and Otto, went on to share his concerns for local residents and wildlife.

He added: "In the past, many British Virgin Islanders have shrugged off
hurricanes, stayed at home and not gone to shelters.

"This time the BVI Government and the BVI Tourist board have been very active
and providing advice to the local population."

Irma is set to hit Necker Island less than two weeks after Hurricane Harvey
killed 60 people when it battered the United States and surrounding territories.

Hurricane Irma will reach Leeward Islands, east of Puerto Rico, tonight and
could batter Florida by the weekend.

British Airways is already preparing for the worst and flying tourists off the
Caribbean island of Antigua early.

A BA spokeswoman told Mirror.co.uk : "We have provided a special flight to
Antigua to get our customers home before Hurricane Irma arrives on the island.

"The Antigua Airport authorities say that operations will be significantly
impacted today, so we have offered all affected customers rebooking options.  We
are keeping our flights to other Caribbean islands under review."

Florida has declared an emergency and President Donald Trump has "offered the
full resources of the federal government as Floridians prepare for Hurricane
Irma," reports CNN.

"In Florida, we always prepare for the worst and hope for the best, and while
the exact path of Irma is not absolutely known at this time, we cannot afford to
not be prepared," said Governor Rick Scott in a statement.

Water is expected to rise 9ft (3metres) above normal levels as the storm brings
a predicted 10 inches of rain and "large and destructive waves".

Irma is forecast to strengthen even more over the next 48 hours.

Forecasters say they cannot predict the exact path the storm will take but,
islands in Irma's path have been warned to brace themselves in preparation for
the intensifying storm that could pummel the area with life-threatening winds
and torrential rain.

Hurricane advisories have been issued for territories that dot the West Indies,
including the Leeward Islands, the British and US Virgin Islands and Puerto
Rico.

Watch alligator swim in woman's flooded backyard after Storm Harvey

Irma was initially a Category 4 hurricane on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale,
meaning sustained winds of 130-156 miles per hour (209-251 kph) with
"catastrophic" outcomes.

This includes the uprooting of trees and downed power lines, water and
electricity outages, and significant property damage causing uninhabitable
conditions, according to the National Hurricane Center.

The NHC said: "There is an increasing chance of seeing some impacts from Irma in
the Florida Peninsula and the Florida Keys later this week and this weekend.

"In addition, rough surf and dangerous marine conditions will begin to affect
the southeastern U.S. coast by later this week."

Texas and Louisiana residents are still reeling from the catastrophic effects of
the deadly Hurricane Harvey.

Harvey struck Texas as a Category 4 hurricane on August 25 and dumped several
feet of rain, destroying thousands of homes and businesses.

In preparation for the storm, the economically struggling Puerto Rico government
on Monday declared a state of emergency and activated the National Guard.

"Despite the economic challenges Puerto Rico is facing, the approved budget has
$15 million for the emergency fund," Governor Ricardo Rosselló said in a
statement.

The island of about 3.4 million people has 456 emergency shelters prepared to
house up to 62,100 people.

To help residents prepare for the storm, the Puerto Rican government activated a
price freeze on basic necessities, including food and water, medicines, power
generators and batteries.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDAR


                      Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 413 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                          THE JOURNAL (Newcastle, UK)

                      September 25, 1998, Friday Edition 1

Britons braced for wrath of Georges - But UK tourists continue to fly in despite
dangers

BYLINE:  By James Lyons in Florida

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS, Pg. 8

LENGTH: 2048 words


   Thousands of British holidaymakers in Florida were last night bracing
themselves for the wrath of Hurricane Georges, which has claimed more than 100
lives on its Caribbean rampage.

The storm, which has hammered the Caribbean with 115mph winds, will reach the
south of the state at 9am local time this morning and looks set to cause severe
damage and flooding.

At least 110 people have died and hundreds of thousands have been left homeless
since the sprawling storm began on Monday.

Yesterday, as a state of emergency was declared in central and southern Florida,
UK airlines and holiday companies continued to charter passengers to Miami,
where winds of 120mph are expected by this afternoon.

Yesterday morning, two British Airways jumbo jets left from Heathrow and Gatwick
airports bound for Miami, each carrying 400 people.

Tour operators Thomson and Airtours continued their flights to Florida but
warned tourists to stay away from the brunt of the storm in the south.

However British Airways announced the cancellation of both flights to Miami
today, meaning 800 people there would be stranded, unable to take a return
flight. The BA passengers in Miami will fly home on other airlines or be taken
to "secure" safety areas if the storm strikes, a spokesman said.

The passengers in England will be given alternative destinations or refunds.

Virgin Atlantic said flights to Miami were continuing as normal yesterday and
would continue today but said it was monitoring the situation.

However, the company said more than 17 hotels in Antigua had been damaged,
prompting the airline to postpone its new service to the island until October
21.

As Britons continued to fly in, officials in Florida said 540,000 people have
been ordered to leave Miami Beach and other low-lying areas further up the
coast.

At Cape Canaveral, Nasa decided not to take any chances and took its latest
multi-million pound space shuttle off the launch pad for fear of damage.

Phil Brown, forecaster at PA WeatherCentre, said the eye of the hurricane -
currently over Cuba - would first hit Florida Keys, the chain of sub-tropical
islands to the south of the state.

After hitting the Keys, where holidaymakers from the UK are among 100,000 people
already ordered to leave, the storm will move to Miami and the Fort Lauderdale
area. It will then track up the west of the state and may affect popular beach
resorts Tampa Bay and St Petersburg.

The forecaster said: "It is not as severe as Hurricane Andrew which saw 200mph
winds, but it is certainly very strong and after leaving Cuba and going across
the sea it will have warmed up a great deal. Florida can certainly expect a
rough time."

At 1600 BST, Georges was centred 340 miles south-east of Key West, moving
west-northwest at 12mph with gusts to 80mph.

The Foreign Office has issued an emergency telephone number for information on
the hurricane - [0171] 839-1010.

Ian Brodie, a spokesman for Florida Tourist Board, said precautions in southern
Florida were already in place in preparation for the hurricane.

He said: "People have been securing their properties and battening down since
last night. Any tourists who get caught in the storm could be taken to secure
buildings or in local schools."

If the beachside hotels in Miami are evacuated, tourists could join others
leaving from the Keys and either fly home from other airports or be transferred
to other resorts in Florida such as Orlando, he added.

"We don't really know how bad it is going to be, but Florida is well prepared
for storms."

The first flights carrying Britons stranded on the stricken islands of the
Dominican Republic and Antigua will arrive early this morning at Newcastle, with
others also arriving at Manchester and Gatwick airports.

Earlier, at Gatwick airport, many passengers were unaware of the seriousness of
the storm predicted at their holiday destination.

A couple in their 50s from Bromley, south London, were heading to Miami for a
19-day fly-drive holiday.

"We are not worried yet and will find out about it when we get there. Miami
knows how to deal with these things.

"It's not like hurricanes are something strange there," they said.

Meanwhile, in Florida, John Haynes and Claire Lycett were determined not to let
the hurricane ruin their holiday even though it threatened to severely disrupt
their plans. The couple, from Richmond, south-west London, flew to Florida from
Charlotte, North Carolina, a couple of days earlier and were due to meet up with
friends in Palm Beach.

As they watched workmen clear sun loungers from the beach at their hotel in Fort
Lauderdale, they said they feared their friends, who were due to fly in from New
York, would be unable to get into Miami airport.

But marketing executive Mr Haynes, 30, said they were not too concerned for
their own safety.

"We want to find out if they can get a flight, until then we are in limbo. We
flew in to Florida hoping for the best, but we will probably stay here. There is
nowhere that is really safer, unless you go into the middle of the state."

Many locals fear the storm could bring devastation on the scale seen across the
Dominican Republic, where Georges has killed at least 70 people and left
hundreds missing.

Governor Lawton Chiles declared a state of emergency in central and southern
Florida on Wednesday night, allowing the state to use the National Guard, lift
tolls along evacuation routes and purchase emergency supplies.

All residents of the Florida Keys were ordered to move out on Wednesday, and
cars and trucks squeezed on to the lone two-lane highway to the mainland.

The hurricane first hit the small islands of the north-east Caribbean early on
Monday, killing three people in St Kitts, and two in Antigua.

A spokeswoman for Thomson Holidays said all flights to Orlando were continuing
as normal but they were advising passengers on a two-week "flydrive" to avoid
the southern part of the state.

Meanwhile, holiday operator Airtours said they had evacuated Britons from the
Naples area in south Florida. All Airtours flights to Orlando were operating
normally but the company are also advising holidaygoers to avoid areas in the
south, she added.

North-East holidaymakers are among 100,000 people who have been forced to leave
the chain of sub-tropical islands and flee to the mainland.

The cause of the disruption is Hurricane Georges, which has already claimed the
lives of 110 people during its rampage through the Caribbean this week, damaging
Antigua, Haiti and the Dominican Republic, where nearly 300 North Easterners
have been marooned on the riot-torn island.

The tourists have decamped to hotels in Miami and Fort Lauderdale but they face
moving on again if, as predicted by the US National Hurricane Centre, the storm
follows them.

In this age of technological wizardry, it is humbling to realise how much we are
still at the mercy of extreme weather conditions.

Here we give the lowdown on the hurricane and answer the most commonly asked
questions about this natural phenomenon.

What is a hurricane?

Cyclones, hurricanes and typhoons are the same thing - a strong tropical
cyclone. The different names are used in different parts of the world - cyclone
for the Indian Ocean, typhoon for the Pacific and hurricane for the Atlantic.

A hurricane is a roaring vortex of wind up to 1,000 miles wide created by the
heat of the oceans.

To qualify as a hurricane, a wind must blow at 74mph for more than ten minutes
in the same direction. Peak hurricane season is usually between September and
January. In the Atlantic-Caribbean area, the season finishes in November, but
tends to tail off after mid-October.

The number of hurricanes can vary widely from year to year, although there have
been fewer this year than in recent years. Each is given a name, starting with A
each year. Until 1995, hurricanes had never progressed beyond N [Nana in 1990],
but reached Tanya in 1995.

How much energy is involved?

It takes 500 trillion horsepower to whirl these winds at such tremendous speeds
- that's the equivalent of exploding an atomic bomb every second, or enough
power to meet the entire United States' energy needs for 100 years.

Can you predict where a hurricane will go next?

The wind and the ocean currents are the two main factors which steer hurricanes,
but forecasting the path of a hurricane is a tough task. In the tropics the
winds usually blow from the east which is why hurricanes mainly approach land
from the east.

So how do meteorologists get a reliable forecast?

The United States use the Air Force Reserve's 53rd Weather Reconnaissance
Squadron. These official Hurricane Hunters fly through hurricanes to find the
eye, - the centre of the storm - and measure wind speed and direction.
Forecasters use this information to predict where the hurricane will go. This is
vital to give evacuation warnings. It costs about $ 1m per mile to evacuate the
coastline, so information is incredibly valuable.

What exactly do the 'Hurricane Hunters' do?

For each mission the Hurricane Hunters fly through the eye of a hurricane many
times. They pin-point the centre of the storm and find out whether it is
strengthening or weakening. Instruments continually record the wind speed and
direction which will help to track the hurricane.

What exactly is the eye of a hurricane?

The eye is the centre, and the calmest part of a hurricane. Just outside the eye
is the eye wall, which is the most violent area. Imagine a spinning
merry-go-round. When you are on the edge you are moving incredibly fast and the
closer you move to the centre, the easier it is to stand up. This is the "eye"
of the merry-go-round. Wind cannot get into the eye and it may even be sunny
there.

What is the most dangerous part of a hurricane?

A hurricane's storm surge, near the eye, is incredibly dangerous. It is made of
water that gets blown into a big pile near the eye. In open ocean the water can
flow away under the storm but as the hurricane nears land the water builds up
and can cause flooding. The wind does cause some damage but most of the damage
caused by a hurricane is done by pounding waves.

Has Britain ever had a hurricane?

No. Even the 1987 storm which battered southern England and caused damage
running into millions was not a hurricane. Britain can never have a genuine
hurricane because they are caused by moisture evaporating off the surface of the
sea at high temperatures. Britain never gets high enough temperatures over the
sea around its coast to trigger the phenomenon.

What does the description hurricane-force mean?

Hurricane-force is the top classification of wind strengths used by weathermen
on their Beaufort scale. The scale goes from one to 17. Hurricane starts at
Force 12 with speeds of between 73 and 82mph. The highest level on the scale
Force 17 - 126 to 136mph.

Which was Britain's worst hurricane force storm?

A storm in November 1703 killed more than 8,000 people. Thousands of tonnes of
shipping were lost and the original Eddystone Lighthouse at Plymouth was blown
down.

What is the most deadly hurricane disaster recorded?

On November 13, 1970, 100mph winds forced waves up to 15ft tall through the
islands of the deltas between the mouth of the Haringhata River and the lower
Meghna of Bangladesh. More than one million acres of rice paddies were flooded,
a million cattle drowned and an estimated half a million people were killed.

Which were the worst hurricanes of recent years?

Hurricane Hugo caused £4bn damage to Charleston, South Carolina, in 1989. In
1992, Hurricane Andrew devastated Florida, killing 85 people and leaving 250,000
homeless. Earlier this year in Gujarat state in western India a cyclone killed
hundreds of people.

Why do we give hurricanes names?

The American National Weather Service gives hurricanes names in order to be able
to record them properly. They used to tag hurricanes in alphabetical order with
girls' names, a practice begun in the Second World War, but this led to
complaints by the women's movement in America who objected to headlines like
"Betsy devastates Florida". This led to alternate male and female names from
1977.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 1998 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd


                          FOCUS - 414 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                  The Guardian

                      April 30, 2015 Thursday 8:46 PM GMT

US hurricane drought is 'basically dumb luck', scientists say;
No hurricanes category 3 or above have hit the United States for a decade, the
longest recorded stretch since scientists began tracking the storms

BYLINE: Peter Moskowitz in New York

SECTION: WORLD NEWS

LENGTH: 351 words


Ten years ago, an especially strong and destructive hurricane season brought
Katrina to Louisiana in August, followed two months later by Wilma slamming into
the Florida coast. And then, for the next 10 years, nothing: no major hurricanes
have hit the United States since.

As the US approaches another hurricane season beginning on 1 June, it will also
be approaching a historic milestone: there have been no category 3 or above
hurricanes in nearly a decade, a stroke of luck that scientists say is truly out
of the ordinary.

This current "hurricane drought" is the longest ever recorded since scientists
began keeping track of hurricanes in 1851. The last record of eight years
happened from 1861-68.

New research from Nasa's Goddard Institute for Space Studies, published this
week in Geophysical Research Letters, suggests the historic drought is probably
just a coincidence.

"We concluded it's basically dumb luck," said co-author of the report and senior
scientist at Nasa's Goddard Institute Dr Timothy Hall. "If [the drought] went on
and on and on we'd question our assumptions, but for now it seems to be luck."

There have been plenty of major storms and hurricanes since 2005, but all major
hurricanes have missed the US and instead concentrated on other regions around
the Atlantic Ocean. And there have been more minor storms that were nonetheless
destructive within the US: Hurricane Sandy in 2012 (category 1), Hurricane Irene
in 2011 (category 1) and Hurricane Ike in 2008 (category 2).

Most of the damage from those storms came from rain and subsequent flooding
(partially exacerbated by sea-level rise and storm surge).

Hall said the lack of major wind damage from hurricanes in the last decade could
have serious consequences if people are lulled into a sense of complacency about
extreme weather.

Hall's study, carried out with Kelly Hereid from ACE Tempest RE, a reinsurance
firm, found that insurance rates were falling in hurricane-prone areas, and
people were flocking to the coasts - meaning there could be more damage when a
major hurricane eventually makes landfall.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 415 of 881 DOCUMENTS


           Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Florida)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 23, 2010 Sunday

Active hurricane season predicted: BP oil spill could make things worse if storm
strikes

BYLINE: Jeff Barker, Northwest Florida Daily News, Fort Walton Beach

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 817 words


May 23--Although last year's hurricane season was unusually quiet, 2010 has the
potential to be "severe," meteorologists say.

Atlantic Ocean surface temperatures are far warmer than normal, even hotter then
in 2005, the most active season in recorded history, said Jeff Masters, director
of meteorology for Weather Underground Inc.

Warm water stretching from the Caribbean to the west coast of Africa, along with
a developing La Nina pattern, are setting the stage for powerful storms.

"That gives some concern that we could have a severe hurricane season this
year," Masters said. El Nino, marked by warm equatorial waters off the coast of
South America, generates strong winds that tend to "tear hurricanes apart,"
Masters said. When those same waters cool, La Nina develops and reduces wind
shears and allows strong hurricanes to build.

Right now, conditions are in "neutral," the transition phase between the two
patterns, Masters said. Equatorial waters have cooled "rapidly" over the past
month.

"El Nino is gone, and we very well could have a La Nina by hurricane season," he
said. "When that occurs, we tend to have more hurricanes, and more stronger
hurricanes, over the Atlantic."

Last month, forecasters at Colorado State University predicted an above-average
Atlantic storm season, with 15 named tropical storms, eight hurricanes and four
major hurricanes of Category 3 or higher, with top wind speeds of 111 mph. An
average year brings about 10 named storms, six hurricanes and two major
hurricanes.

While there's no way to predict now whether strong hurricanes will veer into the
Gulf of Mexico or slide up the East Coast, Masters said it is possible to
estimate how many major hurricanes will develop in a season.

For each of the last three seasons that sea surface temperatures were near what
they are now, at least five major hurricanes developed, Masters said. Major
hurricanes cause 90 percent of all damage.

This year's season rolls out June 1 in the shadow of the Deepwater Horizon oil
spill. Okaloosa County Public Safety Director Dino Villani said booms would fail
in the event of a violent storm surge, and oil could be washed far inland.

"We're going to be totally unprotected and at the mercy of whatever we get,"
Villani said.

If a powerful storm made landfall locally, parts of the oil slick washed in
could add a hazardous layer to physical wreckage. He said the worst-case
scenario would be if an oil-bearing storm surge washed across U.S. Highway 98
and into Choctawhatchee Bay.

Villani said there's no way to prepare for oil that would come ashore during a
hurricane; it would have to be cleaned up during the aftermath.

Florida Attorney General Bill McCollum wrote a letter to BP PLC on Thursday,
bringing up the possibility of hurricane-churned oil hitting the state.

McCollum asked the oil giant to commit to paying "damages that exceed the
damages normally incurred as the result of a hurricane."

Hurricanes churn up waters to depths of about 600 feet, Masters said. Oil
floating above that level could be brought to the surface, diluted and spread as
a storm moves. Oil thousands of feet deep near the source of the gusher would be
unaffected.

A hur ricane could spread oil to previously pristine shoreline spared by
currents, Masters said. The pounding surf of a storm could also wash oil off of
beaches.

"We've never seen a hurricane move through a major oil spill like this and bring
it to the land, so we don't know what's going to happen," he said.

Okaloosa County is preparing for the upcoming season the same as in years past,
Villani said.

Residents are urged to keep a stock of survival supplies and be familiar with
emergency procedures by finding out where their nearest hurricane shelter is and
what evacuation zone they live in.

An active hurricane season also might bring more opportunities for beach
erosion, even when gulf hurricanes don't directly hit the Emerald Coast. A
near-miss storm could still rile local waters and bring beach-depleting storm
surges.

Hurricanes such as Ike and Gustav have wreaked havoc in recent years on Destin's
Holiday Isle, with waters lapping up closer and closer to high-rise
condominiums. Resorts have fought for more sand to rebuild their beaches.

Contractors are installing a new sea wall at the Holiday Surf and Racquet Club,
said General Manager Jack Chumley. He's hoping more sand and a new wall will
stave off the effects of potential surges.

"We need to start praying more," he said.

To see more of the Northwest Florida Daily News or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.nwfdailynews.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Northwest
Florida Daily News, Fort Walton Beach Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune
Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call
800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The
Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100523-FO-Active-hurricane-season-predicted-0523

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FO


                  Copyright 2010 Northwest Florida Daily News


                          FOCUS - 416 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                             May 28, 2005 Saturday

Hurricane risk low on First Coast;
South Florida and North Carolina have worst odds this season, researchers say

BYLINE: RACHEL DAVIS

SECTION: Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 554 words


Residents of South Florida and parts of North Carolina are more likely to
experience hurricane-force winds this year.

Although these areas are no stranger to the oceanic monsters, this year their
vulnerability is supported by statistical data released Friday by a University
of Central Florida professor and a Georgia researcher.

Miami Beach, Naples and Cape Hatteras, N.C., are statistically more likely to
experience hurricane-force winds this season -- which begins Wednesday -- than
any other of the 35 cities studied along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts, according
to the study. The South Florida cities and the North Carolina cape have about a
10 percent chance of hosting a hurricane.

Jacksonville and St. Augustine have only a 1 to 2 percent chance. Savannah has a
3.44 percent chance.

The analysis is based on hurricane tracks during the past 154 years and ocean
climate conditions for 2005. The study's authors claim the data are more useful
for the average coastal resident than the preseason storm counts coming out of
weather-watching organizations.

Last year people "didn't really care how many storms there were," said Mark
Johnson, a UCF statistics professor. "It was 'What's the wind speed . . . at my
house?' "

The research was conducted by Johnson and Chuck Watson, founder of the Kinetic
Analysis Corp., a Savannah, Ga., engineering firm.

They began their hurricane research in 1996 but are releasing their findings to
the public this year for the first time. The pair also works as consultants to
the Florida Commission on Hurricane Loss Projection Methodology, which verifies
hurricane models for government agencies and the insurance industry.

Johnson said they will update on specific storms throughout the season on their
Web site.

This year's hurricane likelihoods, according to the study, aren't that far from
historical trends. For example, New Orleans is more likely to have a hurricane
than Jacksonville, and Miami is more likely to get hit than New Orleans.

Although South Florida is always at higher risk than North Florida, this year
the odds for South Florida are above average, with Miami, Fort Lauderdale and
Naples at about a 1-in-10 chance. The odds of hurricane-force winds hitting
cities in Georgia, North Florida and along the Gulf Coast are lower than normal.

Just because the odds are low for a certain area doesn't mean it won't be hit.
For example, Pensacola has on average only a 5 percent chance of seeing
hurricane-force winds. But the Northwest Florida city was ravaged last year by
Hurricane Ivan.

Frank Lepore, spokesman for the National Hurricane Center, said Floridians
should prepare for a hurricane whether they live in the south or the north.

"I'm sure the residents of Central Florida weren't expecting Frances and Jeanne
and what was left of Charley, but they were certainly impacted," Lepore said.

Although the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is predicting an
active hurricane season, it cannot say where the storms will make landfall. The
agency expects at least seven storms, with at least three becoming major
hurricanes. Most are expected to form between August and October over the
tropical Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean Sea.

rachel.davis@jacksonville.com, (904) 359-4614

ONLINE

@For more information about hurricanes, go to Jacksonville.com, keyword:
hurricanes.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
JASON LUEBKE/The Times-Union Hurricane risk low on First Coast

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2005 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 417 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                             May 13, 2006 Saturday

Residents to receive hurricane-readiness tips

BYLINE: CAREN BURMEISTER

SECTION: Pg. L-1

LENGTH: 1377 words


A Beaches community activists group is sponsoring a hurricane preparation
program next week as part of its mission to educate the community on growth and
public safety issues.

A panel of hurricane experts will update residents on hurricane preparation,
evacuation, re-entry and recovery.

Beaches and Jacksonville officials have been working to ease and improve
hurricane evacuation for residents in coastal and low-lying areas by, among
other things, setting up hurricane shelters that will accept pets and
encouraging people to go to a friend's home or a shelter that's tens of miles
rather than hundreds of miles inland.

The hurricane program, sponsored by the Beaches Watch Group, will run from 6:30
to 8 p.m. Thursday, May 18 at the Beaches branch library at 600 Third St. in
Neptune Beach. A presentation on will be made by a panel of emergency management
officials including Jacksonville Beach Fire Chief Gary Frazier, Atlantic Beach
Deputy Chief John Campbell, Neptune Beach Police Chief David Sembach and Marty
Senterfitt, a safety official with the Duval County Emergency Operations Center.

In addition, Tiffany Reeves with the Florida Department of Financial Services
will provide information about insurance and financial issues related to
hurricane preparations.

Beach entry passes and forms for people with special medical needs or
disabilities will be available for residents who attend the program.

"Hurricane Katrina has made many people realize that it is very important for
coastal communities to be prepared," said Beaches Watch Group President Sandy
Golding. "The 2006 hurricane season is expected to be active, so we want to make
sure Beaches residents are prepared in the event a hurricane threatens our
area."

Hurricane season starts June 1 and ends Nov. 30.

While hurricane experts don't expect this storm season will be as bad as last
year, which broke records with four major hurricanes in the United States, most
notably Hurricane Katrina, it will still be an active year. Hurricane expert
William Gray and his colleagues at Colorado State University predict about nine
hurricanes, compared to a historical average of six, and predict that five of
them will be intense hurricanes at Category 3 to Category 5.

The forecasters said it "is statistically unlikely that the coming 2006 and 2007
hurricane seasons, or the seasons which follow, will have the number of major
hurricane U.S. landfall events as we have seen in 2004-2005.

However, an oceanographer with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland
predicts the hurricane season won't be as bad as expected due to water
temperatures being cooler than last year and signs that La Niña conditions, or
unusually cool surface waters in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean, have
lifted, leaving in place the jet stream, which tends to weaken storms by
shearing off the tops of tall hurricane thunderclouds.

Forecasters have predicted a 47 percent chance of a major storm making landfall
on Florida's Gulf Coast and a 64 percent chance of landfall on the East Coast.

Hurricane experts, who met in a South Florida conference this week, are expected
to update their 2006 hurricane forecasts May 31.

Chip Patterson, chief of Duval County's Emergency Preparedness Division,
cautioned residents not to let hurricane forecasts overshadow the danger of one
powerful storm.

"The 1992 hurricane season was a very light year with only six or seven storms,
but Hurricane Andrew was one of them," Patterson said, referring to the 1992
South Florida storm that is the most destructive hurricane on record. "In 1995,
there was a large number of hurricanes but they all stayed out to sea. The
bottom line, is we still have to do the things we have to do."

Regional and city planners will soon begin a public education campaign to
encourage residents to evacuate to the home of friends or family or another safe
shelter that is tens of miles, rather than hundreds of miles away, said Ed
Preston, the emergency management planner for the Northeast Florida Regional
Planning Council.

The council will soon release a two-year study showing that the city needs more
clearance time, longer than the standard 24-hour evacuation period, due to
population growth, the highway network and evacuations in neighboring counties,
Preston said.

His agency and Jacksonville emergency preparedness officials are recommending
that emergency officials start encouraging residents in hurricane zones such as
the Beaches and Intercoastal Waterway area, as well as special needs residents
and transportation dependent residents, to leave even sooner to lessen the load
in that last 24 hours.

Duval County Emergency Preparedness officials recommend that people with special
medical needs, such as life supporting equipment, chronic or contagious
conditions or who depends on public transportation to pre-register for
assistance through the agency's Web site, www.coj.net., then click on
preparedness and then on special needs, or call 630-2472.

To remove issues that discourage residents from evacuating, Jacksonville is
setting up four evacuation shelters that let cats, dogs, hamsters, birds and
other pets stay with their owners, said Angela Vigil, spokeswoman for
Jacksonville Animal Care and Control.

She said a lot of residents have called and written the city saying they
wouldn't evacuate without that service in place.

"It has been an impediment," Vigil said.

In the next few weeks, the city will identify which four evacuation shelters
will accept pets and a Web site that will allow people to pre-register their
pets on-line, she said.

Beaches residents may use Butler Boulevard, Atlantic Boulevard, Mayport Road or
Beach Boulevard to evacuate.

Transportation officials have promised that construction that's schedule to
begin this summer on Beach Boulevard and the new bridge over the Intracoastal
Waterway will not get in the way of an evacuation.

The Jacksonville Transportation Authority plans to widen Beach Boulevard from
four to six lanes between San Pablo Road and Penman Road and build a new, fixed
bridge with a 65-foot vertical clearance to replace the McCormick Bridge. If
there is an evacuation, all work will come to a halt and all barricades and
equipment will be removed.

Also, the state will adopt a reverse lane plan on Interstate 10 that will
convert all east- and westbound lanes into westbound lanes to speed and improve
traffic leaving the coast. State officials have also agreed to set up an
emergency mobile fueling service for evacuees.

The I-10 reverse lane plan will start around Interstate 295, just west of
downtown Jacksonville, and extend across the state to I-75. Once evacuees enter
that westbound segment they must stay on I-10

all the way to 1-75, Patterson said. There will be no place to get off I-10
between I-295 and I-75.

Staff writer Caren Burmeister can be reached at (904) 249-4947, extension 21, or
via e-mail at caren.burmeister@jacksonville.com.

INFORMATION

The state's sales tax holiday for hurricane preparedness runs May

21 through June 1. Items that won't be taxed include flashlights, portable
radios and weather band radios, tarps, fuel containers, batteries, food storage
coolers, portable generators and storm shutter devices.

Some American Red Cross Hurricane shelters closest to the Beaches are:

-- Chets Creek Elementary School at 13200 Chets Creek Blvd.

-- Kernan Trail Elementary at 2281 S. Kernan Blvd.

-- Landmark Middle School at 101 Kernan Blvd.

-- Sabal Palm Elementary School at 1201 N. Kernan Road

-- Twin Lakes Elementary, Twin Lakes Academy at 8000-50 Point Meadows Drive

Disaster supply kit:

-- Water -- at least one gallon daily per person for three to seven days.

-- Food -- bring enough non-perishable, canned food and juices, paper plates and
plastic utensils and cooking tools to last three to seven days.

-- Blankets and pillows

-- Clothing -- seasonal, rain gear and sturdy shoes

-- First Aid Kit -- including medicines and prescription drugs

-- Toiletries

-- Flashlight and batteries

-- Battery-operated radio

-- Cash; ATMs may not be open or available for extended periods of time

-- Keys

-- Toys, books and games

-- Put important documents in a waterproof container, including identification,
insurance, medical records, bank account numbers, Social Security card

-- Fill cars with gas

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 The Florida Times-Union


                          FOCUS - 418 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                             coventrytelegraph.net

                     September 19, 2017 Tuesday 9:53 AM GMT

British territories told to prepare as Hurricane Maria sweeps in after Irma;
The US National Hurricane Centre said the hurricane, which has strengthened to a
'potentially catastrophic' category 5 storm, is likely to remain "extremely
dangerous"

BYLINE: By Brett Gibbons

SECTION: NEWS; Version:3

LENGTH: 405 words


Winds of 160mph have been recorded as Hurricane Maria speeds towards British
overseas territories in the Caribbean already battered by Hurricane Irma.

The US National Hurricane Centre said the hurricane, which has strengthened to a
'potentially catastrophic' category 5 storm, is likely to remain "extremely
dangerous" when it approaches the British Virgin Islands.

It made landfall when it struck the island of Dominica on Monday and the
hurricane is expected to reach the British Virgin Islands on Tuesday night.

Another British overseas territory, Montserrat, has been issued with a hurricane
warning amid fears Maria could cause a devastating storm surge with waves
between six to nine feet, while torrential rain could trigger deadly flash
floods. Anguila, another island badly hit by Irma, is also in the firing line.

The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office is advising against all travel to the
British Virgin islands.

Hurricane Maria: UK's Caribbean territories braced for 'catastrophic' storm

Hurricane Maria threat for Caribbean after Irma passes

Forecaster Kevin Roth, of The Weather Channel, said: "Conditions are set to
deteriorate rapidly in the US and British Virgin Islands on Tuesday evening with
Maria expected to move over the islands.

"Maria should go on towards Puerto Rico on Wednesday and is still expected to be
a category 5 hurricane at that time.

"It should move away from Puerto Rico during Wednesday night and Thursday
morning and is likely to head just north of the Dominican Republic.

"Hurricane conditions are possible along the northern coast of the Dominican
Republic on Thursday. From there Maria's likeliest path is close to the Turks
and Caicos and south-eastern Bahamas on Friday and east of the Bahamas on
Saturday."

Paul Gibbons in Hurricane Irma

He said it was still too early to pinpoint Maria's path or potential impacts to
the USA beyond Saturday.

"However, latest guidance is suggesting a path well east of the south-east coast
of the US," the forecaster added.

Download our all-new mobile app to get the latest news, sport and what's on.

One quick sync and you can read our content on the move without being online.

Get regular news alerts straight to your mobile and keep up with the latest
traffic and travel or breaking events as they happen via our daily live blogs.

It's completely customisable to your own specific interests.

Download it today by clickinghere for iPhoneandhere for Android

archives

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBET


                         Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 419 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                              birminghammail.co.uk

                     September 19, 2017 Tuesday 8:35 AM GMT

Battered Caribbean braces for 'potentially catastrophic' Hurricane Maria;
The US National Hurricane Centre (NHC) said the hurricane, which has recorded
winds of more than 160mph, is likely to remain "extremely dangerous"

BYLINE: By James Rodger

SECTION: NEWS; Version:3

LENGTH: 466 words


Hurricane Maria has intensified into a "potentially catastrophic" category five
storm as it continues on a collision course with British overseas territories
already battered by Irma.

The US National Hurricane Centre (NHC) said the hurricane, which has recorded
winds of more than 160mph, is likely to remain "extremely dangerous" when it
approaches the British Virgin Islands (BVI).

Emergency steps are being undertaken on the BVI to prepare for the looming
onslaught, although an official coordinating the operation has warned the
islands had been "weakened" by Irma and the situation "doesn't look good".

Relief workers are racing to secure debris left strewn across the islands that
have the potential to make the coming hurricane "more hazardous" if they are
picked up by high winds.

Another British overseas territory, Montserrat, has been issued with a hurricane
warning amid fears Maria could bring a devastating storm surge, while torrential
rain could trigger deadly flash floods.

UK International Development Secretary, Priti Patel, said the Government is
under no illusion about the possible impact of the strengthening hurricane and
said they are taking steps to prepare communities.

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office is advising against all travel to the BVI,
warning residents to identify shelter "immediately" and be ready to take cover
when the hurricane approaches.

The path Hurricane Maria is set to take

Following a similar path to Irma, Maria's "intense" centre made landfall with
Dominica on Monday and the hurricane is expected to reach the British Virgin
Islands on Tuesday night and into Wednesday.

Hurricane Irma donations for victims reach £1.3MILLION

Brigadier John Ridge, the second in command of the UK's Joint Task Force, said
whichever direction the hurricane goes, "it is bad".

"They are either going to get the wind, which will pick up all the debris that
is lying around," he said.

"And also, irritatingly, where they have made progress in getting covers over
the houses and power lines up, it will potentially damage that again.

Tornado weather

"Or they get a huge amount of rain, which is also bad because of the blockages
in the drainage channels - so the potential for some quite serious flooding as
well.

"Whatever happens, it doesn't look good sadly."

NASA satellite view of hurricane Irma

Foreign Office officials have also warned against all but essential travel to
Montserrat, where residents voiced concerns that the hurricane will strike the
island from the south, creating a "very serious" situation.

Donald Trump labelled 'lying and hypocritical bigot' at Emmys

Meanwhile the NHC has issued a hurricane watch, meaning hurricane conditions are
expected somewhere within the area, for the island of Anguila, a British
overseas territory badly affected by hurricane Irma.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBEM


                         Copyright 2017 Trinity Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 420 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                              May 30, 2004 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Storms strength roll of the dice

BYLINE: DINAH VOYLES PULVER -- ENVIRONMENT WRITER

SECTION: SECTION C; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1188  words


Imagine a ho-hum hurricane blowing toward the Volusia-Flagler coast. You go to
bed thinking its no big deal, but wake up to find it whipped into a killer storm
overnight with 150 mph winds that will cause massive damage. Think it cant
happen? Think again. It has happened. And, experts say they have no way of
predicting when it might happen again. They dont know why major hurricanes often
intensify quickly or fall apart just before they hit the coast. In its official
forecast for the Atlantic hurricane season that starts Tuesday, the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration admits it has made comparatively little
headway in predicting how strong a hurricane will become and how much rain it
will produce. While the ability to predict a storms path has improved
dramatically in the last 10 years, answers to other big questions and the money
to study them remain hard to come by. Research meteorologists say its their
nightmare, but admit it may take another Andrew hitting a densely populated
coastal area to get Congress to approve money needed to move hurricane science
forward more quickly. For each year that breezes by without a major storm,
experts say, complacency grows not only among the millions who live and play on
the coast but also among members of Congress. Federal hurricane research funding
has been virtually flat for two decades, say scientists in all aspects of the
research, from Washington, D.C., to Miami.

People are underinvesting in hurricane research of all kinds, said William
Hooke, director of policy programs for the American Meteorological Society. Not
just the physical nature of hurricanes and prediction, Hooke said, but also
social behaviors in the face of hurricane risk.

The hurricane threat to this country is growing, largely because more and more
people are living on the coast, Hooke said. The number of people and the dollar
amount of property and business exposed is growing.

At the same time, we havent had too many big hurricane encounters with the major
populations center, said Hooke, who has studied weather for more than 30 years.
Spending a few extra million now to answer the critical questions could save
millions in evacuation costs and possibly hundreds of lives, experts say. They
hope within five to 10 years to be able to forecast the strength of a storm 24
to 48 hours before it hits. Emergency managers say such advances could mean
enormous cost savings in terms of evacuations. Volusia County Emergency
Management Director Jim Ryan said the ballpark estimate for evacuation costs is
$1 million for every mile evacuated. If the research could pinpoint the forecast
and reduce the evacuation by even three miles, thats $3 million saved on just
one storm, said Michael Black, a meteorologist with the hurricane research
division of the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration. The potential
consequences of inadequate research can be very scary, said Hugh Willoughby, a
former director of the hurricane research division. If a storm doubles in
strength at the last minute and slams into an area that wasnt evacuated, the
costs in dollars and lives would be astronomical, said Willoughby, a research
professor at the International Hurricane Research Center at Florida
International University.

Theres no question our work has really improved dramatically, Black said, but we
have little skill with the intensity problem. They have guesses, such as the
temperature of the water or certain cloud formations, but it takes time, people
and data collection to know for sure.

We simply do not know how strong the storm is going to be when it hits you,
Black said. Its little more than a guess. Yet, the research divisions budget has
been almost stagnant at about $2.5 million for 20 years, said Willoughby, who
retired from NOAA in 2000 after growing frustrated with ongoing budget battles
that led to only small cost-of-living increases annually. The hurricane research
division is making scientific progress even with a status quo budget, Willoughby
said. And the news isnt all bad on the funding front, he noted. Universities
have been able to win money for research. For example, eight Florida
universities are expected to split $3.4 million in federal hurricane research
money in the coming year. Meteorologists with the federal government havent been
as successful, primarily, he said, because they dont have paid lobbyists like
the universities. Some hurricane experts lament what, they say, is a diversion
of research money to global warming. They support studying global climate
problems because it could yield clues to help forecast hurricanes. But, they
say, shortchanging hurricane research in favor of global warming is like
watching an asteroid billions of miles away and saying theres a chance that it
could hit you while a big Mack truck in the form of a hurricane is bearing down.

The hurricane issue is a no-brainer, Black said. You could get universal support
from the public. Congress could spend very little money and get a huge return on
the investment. The National Hurricane Center is the best tropical cyclone
forecasting organization in the world, Willoughby said, but its track forecasts
are driven by numerical models that use observations collected from hurricanes
throughout the last 50 years or so.

As long as we have business-as-usual hurricanes, well be happy with the
forecast, he said. Experts worry about the big storm or the unusual storm, like
Andrew, which grew from a tropical storm to 150 mph in 36 hours.

If the 1935 Labor Day storm in the Keys were to happen today, the models we have
wouldnt forecast it successfully, Willoughby said. You might get lucky, and a
forecasters intuition might lead him to the right conclusion. Florida has only
been hit with four major hurricanes since 1965, Willoughby said.

If we get back to a period of storms like we had in the teens or the 1930s,
theres going to be a crisis in windstorm insurance, Willoughby said. The
insurers know it, he said. Theyre looking at the climatology that shows the
country is in a period of above- normal activity, and they know its a recipe for
insolvency. Forecasters know it too. They say they hope to continue winning the
numbers game, inching toward solving the mysteries of hurricane science before
the next big one levels a sprawling coastal city. Hurricane Season The Atlantic
hurricane season starts Tuesday and runs through Nov. 30.OFFICIAL OUTLOOK: The
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicts 12 to 15 tropical
storms, six to eight becoming hurricanes, and two to four of those
major.UNOFFICIAL OUTLOOK: Colorado State University-based expert Bill Gray
forecasts 14 named tropical storms, eight becoming hurricanes and three becoming
intense hurricanes.2004 STORM NAMES: Alex, Bonnie, Charley, Danielle, Earl,
Frances, Gaston, Hermine, Ivan, Jeanne, Karl, Lisa, Matthew, Nicole, Otto,
Paula, Richard, Shary, Tomas, Virginie and Walter.MORE ONLINE: For more
information about hurricanes see the links at www.news-journalonline.com. TALK
ABOUT IT How are you preparing for hurricane season?Share your thoughts
www.newsjournalonline.com

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Caption: Photo 1: Robbie Koch, 14, right, and his sister, Kayla Koch,
16, make their way in high winds as Hurricane Claudette blows through Port
Lavaca, Texas, in July 2003.Photo 2: Hurricane specialist James Franklin talks
Wednesday at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration center in Miami
about the new research being done on hurricanes. Not every idea helps, but you
dont know that unless you put it to the test, said Franklin.Associated Press
photos

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2004 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2004 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 421 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 23, 2014 Friday

Forecasters predict slow Atlantic hurricane season

LENGTH: 580  words

DATELINE: Fort Collins


Colorado State University has issued the following news release:

A slower-than-usual hurricane season is expected this year because of an
expected El Nino, federal forecasters said Thursday, but they warned that it
takes only one storm to wreak havoc and urged Americans to be prepared.

The El Nino, which warms part of the Pacific every few years and changes rain
and temperature patterns around the world, will likely reduce the number and
intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration said in New York City.

Cooler temperatures on the surface of the Atlantic Ocean compared with recent
years will also lower the probability of hurricane formation.

"El Nino helps to reduce the ability of storm systems coming off Africa to
strengthen into tropical storms and hurricanes," said Dr. Gerry Bell, NOAA's top
hurricane season forecaster.

Bell cautioned that El Nino has not yet developed and officials have not yet
issued any forecasts for it.

Officials expect about eight to 13 named tropical storms and three to six
hurricanes. One or two major hurricanes with winds over 110 miles per hour are
forecast.

The six-month storm season begins June 1.

Forecasters got it wrong last year when they predicted an unusually busy
hurricane season. There were 13 named storms and two hurricanes, Umberto and
Ingrid, both of which were Category 1, the lowest on the scale that measures
hurricanes by wind speed. There were no major hurricanes.

In 2012, storm surge was devastating to the New York area when Superstorm Sandy
slammed the East coast, killing 147 people and causing $50 billion in damage.
Sandy lost hurricane status when it made landfall in New Jersey.

A new mapping tool this year will keep coastal residents updated on the storm
surge threat, using tides and currents to predict how high the surge might be
and where exactly it will hit, said Dr. Holly Bamford, director of NOAA's
National Ocean Service.

"Storm surge can be deadly," Bamford said. "It only takes six inches of
fast-moving water to knock an adult over."

The map will be activated when a hurricane or tropical storm watch is announced,
or about 48 hours before the onset of tropical storm force winds, and updated
along with National Weather Service advisories every six hours.

New York City officials also launched "Know Your Zone," a hurricane awareness
campaign that is being billed as a "one-stop-shop" for hurricane preparedness.
New Yorkers can go onto the city's website (http://nyc.gov/knowyourzone ) to
find out which evacuation zone they reside in and other critical storm-related
information.

"The effects of Sandy make it clear why you must be prepared," said Joseph
Bruno, the city's commissioner of the office of emergency management.

The Atlantic hurricane season goes through cycles of high and low activity about
every 25 to 40 years based on large scale climatic patterns. Since 1995, an
average season has 15 named tropical storms, eight hurricanes and about four
major storms. The last time a major hurricane made landfall in the U.S. was when
Wilma came ashore in 2005, an eight-year stretch that is the longest on record.

During the six-month season, forecasters name tropical storms when top winds
reach 39 mph; hurricanes have maximum winds of at least 74 mph.

Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not
be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

For more information please visit: http://www.colostate.edu

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 422 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 23, 2014 Friday

Washington: NOAA Expects Slow Hurricane Season

LENGTH: 586  words

DATELINE: Washington


Emergency Medical Services has issued the following news release:

A slower-than-usual hurricane season is expected this year because of an
expected El Nino, federal forecasters said Thursday, but they warned that it
takes only one storm to wreak havoc and urged Americans to be prepared.

The El Nino, which warms part of the Pacific every few years and changes rain
and temperature patterns around the world, will likely reduce the number and
intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration said in New York City.

Cooler temperatures on the surface of the Atlantic Ocean compared with recent
years will also lower the probability of hurricane formation.

"El Nino helps to reduce the ability of storm systems coming off Africa to
strengthen into tropical storms and hurricanes," said Dr. Gerry Bell, NOAA's top
hurricane season forecaster.

Bell cautioned that El Nino has not yet developed and officials have not yet
issued any forecasts for it.

Officials expect about eight to 13 named tropical storms and three to six
hurricanes. One or two major hurricanes with winds over 110 miles per hour are
forecast.

The six-month storm season begins June 1.

Forecasters got it wrong last year when they predicted an unusually busy
hurricane season. There were 13 named storms and two hurricanes, Umberto and
Ingrid, both of which were Category 1, the lowest on the scale that measures
hurricanes by wind speed. There were no major hurricanes.

In 2012, storm surge was devastating to the New York area when Superstorm Sandy
slammed the East coast, killing 147 people and causing $50 billion in damage.
Sandy lost hurricane status when it made landfall in New Jersey.

A new mapping tool this year will keep coastal residents updated on the storm
surge threat, using tides and currents to predict how high the surge might be
and where exactly it will hit, said Dr. Holly Bamford, director of NOAA's
National Ocean Service.

"Storm surge can be deadly," Bamford said. "It only takes six inches of
fast-moving water to knock an adult over."

The map will be activated when a hurricane or tropical storm watch is announced,
or about 48 hours before the onset of tropical storm force winds, and updated
along with National Weather Service advisories every six hours.

New York City officials also launched "Know Your Zone," a hurricane awareness
campaign that is being billed as a "one-stop-shop" for hurricane preparedness.
New Yorkers can go onto the city's website (http://nyc.gov/knowyourzone ) to
find out which evacuation zone they reside in and other critical storm-related
information.

"The effects of Sandy make it clear why you must be prepared," said Joseph
Bruno, the city's commissioner of the office of emergency management.

The Atlantic hurricane season goes through cycles of high and low activity about
every 25 to 40 years based on large scale climatic patterns. Since 1995, an
average season has 15 named tropical storms, eight hurricanes and about four
major storms. The last time a major hurricane made landfall in the U.S. was when
Wilma came ashore in 2005, an eight-year stretch that is the longest on record.
CLICK HERE FOR MORE INFORMATION

During the six-month season, forecasters name tropical storms when top winds
reach 39 mph; hurricanes have maximum winds of at least 74 mph.

Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not
be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

For further information please visit: http://www.emsworld.com/

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 423 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         Portland Press Herald (Maine)

                      August 6, 2001 Monday, Final Edition

LONG-TERM OUTLOOK GRIM, BUT MAINE HAS LESS TO WORRY OVER;
Experts say Maine is more apt to have tropical storms than hurricanes.

BYLINE: OSAMU TSUKIMORI Staff Writer

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 693 words


The nation's top hurricane forecasters are predicting a period of more-frequent
and more-destructive storms in the next few decades for states on the Atlantic
and Gulf coasts.

Warmer ocean temperatures and a change in wind patterns will make conditions
more conducive to hurricanes for the next 25 to 40 years, said Stanley
Goldenberg, research meteorologist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.

However, scientists agree that this year is expected to have normal hurricane
activity, typically described as eight to 11 tropical storms and five to seven
hurricanes, two or three of major intensity.

Not that residents of Maine and New England have to worry a lot about hurricane
landfalls. The southern states on the East Coast get far more direct hits than
New England.

Al Wheeler, meteorologist in charge of the National Weather Service office in
Gray, said Maine traditionally has greater chances of seeing a tropical storm
than a hurricane.

He said that on average, a tropical storm strikes Maine once every six years,
and a hurricane strikes once every 10 or 11 years.

Still, Maine has its share of hurricane history.

The hurricane of 1938 left half of Maine without phones and lights for three
days. Overall, it killed more than 600 people, primarily from a 17-foot storm
surge along the Connecticut and Rhode Island coasts.

Other memorable New England storms include hurricanes Carol and Edna in 1954;
Hurricane Gloria in 1985; and most recently, Hurricane Bob in 1991, which killed
11 New Englanders and caused power outages for days in some parts of Maine.

Asked whether a hurricane like the one in 1938 would strike Maine again in the
next 20 or 30 years, Wheeler said, "That's hard to predict. But it's certainly
possible."

Art Cleaves, director of the Maine Emergency Management Agency, said that when
hurricanes strike, areas from York County north to Greater Portland have the
most flooding.

But he advised all Mainers to plan an evacuation route and have a three-day
supply of emergency items well before a storm strikes.

"Oftentimes, people don't do the pre-planning," he said.

Is there a hurricane season in New England? Not exactly, but August and
September are the peak months, said Edward S. Fratto, executive director of the
Northeast States Emergency Consortium.

At the NOAA, meteorologist Goldenberg researched why the highest level of
hurricane activity occurred between 1995 and 2000.

The Atlantic Ocean had double the normal number of storms, and major hurricanes
in the Caribbean more than doubled compared with the relatively inactive period
from 1971 to 1994. Goldenberg's findings appeared in the journal Science last
month.

His data suggest that North Atlantic and Caribbean water temperatures are
entering a cyclical warm phase that lasts 25 to 40 years, and that intense
hurricane activity can be expected because of it - similar to what occurred from
the late 1920s to the late 1960s.

Goldenberg also found that warmer surface temperatures in the North Atlantic,
coupled with a decrease in vertical wind shear, will contribute to the
conditions creating more hurricanes.

"When we see this combination, we better be prepared for a very busy period for
hurricane activity," Goldenberg said.

Hurricane watchers also closely follow the predictions of William M. Gray, a
professor of atmospheric science at Colorado State University.

In 2000 Gray predicted 11 storms significant enough to be given names and seven
hurricanes, three of them in the "major" category with sustained winds greater
than 110 mph. The 2000 season ended Nov. 30 with 15 named storms and eight
hurricanes, three of them major, according to Colorado State.

Gray's prediction for 2001 is 12 named storms and seven hurricanes, three of
them major. That estimate will be updated Tuesday at:
typhoon.atmos.colostate.edu/forecasts/.

Gray estimates the probability of one or more major hurricanes making landfall
in 2001 along the East Coast at 50 percent, compared with a 31 percent average
in the last century.

Staff Writer Osamu Tsukimori can be contacted at 791-6383 or at:

otsukimori@pressherald.com

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                 Copyright 2001 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 424 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         Portland Press Herald (Maine)

                    September 11, 2005 Sunday, Final Edition

Maine 'long overdue' for a hurricane;
The state is usually spared the worst storms, and that may lead to complacency.

BYLINE: JOHN RICHARDSON Staff Writer

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1294 words


Many Mainers see the pictures and read the stories from the hurricane-ravaged
Gulf Coast with both a sense of horror and a sense of security.

But Mainers shouldn't feel too safe, according to those who track storms and
prepare for natural disasters.

Yes, the risks are much smaller here in the Northeast and the storms much less
frequent than those down South. But powerful hurricanes can strike Maine. It's
happened before and, experts say, it will happen again.

"We're long overdue for a storm," said Gene Maxim, Maine's hurricane planner.

And like those devastated by Katrina, Mainers also will pay for being complacent
and putting themselves and their property at risk, planners say.

Homes would be damaged by flooding water and crashing trees and limbs.
Electricity would be cut off. Roads and bridges would be impassable and perhaps
washed away. Boats and marinas could be damaged or destroyed.

The winds would stop and the flooding would subside - in a matter of hours or
days rather than the weeks it will take to pump out New Orleans. But there would
be lasting damage to the tourism industry and the fishing and maritime
industries. Everyone would share the costs of the recovery and the lost tax
revenue from a damaged economy.

"People are building in harm's way," said Maxim, a planner at the Maine
Emergency Management Agency. "If a weak Category 2 (hurricane) hit the Maine
coast right now, it would probably be a $1 billion storm."

The worst-case scenario in Maine, of course, pales in comparison to the
unprecedented destruction caused by Katrina. That storm, a Category 4 hurricane
when it reached land east of New Orleans, caused as much as $100 billion or more
in damage. It has killed hundreds, possibly thousands, and forced hundreds of
thousands to leave destroyed communities with only the belongings they could
carry.

No Maine community is as vulnerable as New Orleans. That city sits partly below
sea level and was home to 100,000 people who would not or could not evacuate.

And no one expects Maine to experience a Category 4 or 5 hurricane - one with
winds of at least 131 mph. Several factors protect the Maine coast from such a
monster storm.

Hurricanes need warm ocean temperatures from which to draw energy. The colder
northern water drains the destructive force out of hurricanes as they move up
the coast. Only those moving north at high speeds - they can travel at 60 mph -
will still have hurricane-force winds when they get here.

High-altitude wind patterns also change as hurricanes move north from the
tropics, a phenomenon that can weaken the storms.

And, as a last defense, Maine also has Massachusetts. Most storms heading toward
Maine will cross land, such as Cape Cod, and lose energy.

But those factors can't protect Maine from all destructive hurricanes.

Maine has been hit periodically by Category 1 hurricanes - storms with winds of
74 to 95 mph sustained winds.

In late summer 1954, for example, Hurricanes Carol and Edna struck Maine within
12 days of each other, killing 11 people and causing more than $10 million in
damage in southern and coastal Maine.

A Category 2 hurricane - one with winds between 96 and 110 mph - might be
unusual but is far from impossible, experts say. One such storm, Hurricane Juan,
blew past Maine before causing destruction in Halifax, Nova Scotia, on Sept. 29,
2003.

A Category 3 hurricane along the Maine coast also can't be ruled out, although
it is considered an absolute worst-case scenario.

One hurricane like that did hit southern New England on Sept. 21, 1938,
battering the Boston area with wind gusts of up to 183 mph. The unnamed storm
killed more than 600 people and caused $306 million in damage - the equivalent
of about $3.5 billion in current dollars.

"We haven't had anything more than a Category 1, but based on the '38 hurricane
there isn't any reason to believe we couldn't get more," said John Jensenius,
warning coordination meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Gray. "I
would say our worst-case storm would be something similar to the 1938 hurricane,
moving south to north at a high speed, hitting just west of Penobscot Bay."

The most vulnerable place on the coast is Penobscot Bay because of the bay's
funnel shape. A storm there could push seawater into the bay, building a large
surge up the Penobscot River and flooding parts of Bangor.

Maine's Emergency Management Agency keeps a series of coastal maps created with
a computer model called SLOSH, which stands for Sea, Lake and Overland Surge
from Hurricanes. Shades of green and yellow show what coastal areas could be
flooded if they are hit by hurricanes of varying strength at high tide.

East Grand Avenue in Old Orchard Beach, for example, is in an area shaded light
and dark green, which means a Category 1 or 2 hurricane could push seawater over
the busy strip and flood the shops, amusement-park rides and bars.

Biddeford Pool, South Portland's Ferry Village neighborhood and Knightville-Mill
Creek commercial district, Portland's bustling Commercial Street and Falmouth's
Mackworth Point neighborhood are a few other areas that could be flooded by a
Category 2 hitting at the right time and in the right place, the model says.

The fact that it's been decades since the storms of 1938 and 1954 is a mixed
blessing, according to Maxim.

"It's good news and it's bad news," he said. "We don't have a lot of storm
history and that tends to make people complacent." Annie Spaulding of Pownal
won't forget about the damage a hurricane can bring to Maine.

Her parents were killed during Hurricane Edna on Sept. 11, 1954. They had gone
out to the store when their car went off a washed-away bridge and into a swollen
stream in Pownal. She was 15 years old, and one of 11 children between the ages
of 8 and 23.

The images of Katrina's victims reminds her how Hurricane Edna changed her life
forever. "Especially when I see the kids and think about how it was for us," she
said. "They've lost everything that's familiar to them."

She's talked to people since Katrina who comment on how fortunate Maine is to be
safe from such a disaster.

"And I've said, 'Well, we have hurricanes. Not quite that severe, but I lost my
parents in '54 from a hurricane,' " she said. "I think it's more the younger
people who don't think anything like that could happen here."

Planners and storm experts are taking lessons from Katrina to examine hurricane
and disaster plans in Maine. Forecasting, emergency plans and communications
have all improved since Hurricane Edna hit 51 years ago. But as Katrina and
other recent hurricanes have shown, that hasn't prevented unnecessary damage and
death, Maxim said.

He hopes Mainers take some personal lessons from Katrina and prepare for the
worst the next time a hurricane comes this way.

"People have to have some responsibility for themselves to prepare," Maxim said.
"If you stop and think about how many firefighters and police and emergency
managers there are, there are probably less than 1 percent of the population.
And the other 99 percent are expecting that 1 percent to save them."

Local and state officials can advise people to leave, but some will stay to
protect their pets or their houses, just like many did in New Orleans, where the
risks are much better understood, according to Maxim and Jensenius.

"It's very difficult to get people prepared for an unusual event," Jensenius
said. "We do have the problem that people are going to stay when they are told
to evacuate, although we would hope that with recent situations that people will
have second thoughts about staying where they are."

Staff Writer John Richardson can be contacted at 791-6324 or at:
jrichardson@pressherald.com

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Staff file photo
Commercial Street in Portland was covered by water during Hurricane Edna on
Sept. 11, 1954. The storm killed eight in Maine.
Staff photo by John Ewing
Gene Maxim, the hurricane planner for the Maine Emergency Management Agency,
shows a SLOSH map of Casco Bay that marks the areas most in danger of flooding.

                 Copyright 2005 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 425 of 881 DOCUMENTS


           Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Florida)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            November 30, 2015 Monday

EDITORIAL: Hurricane season comes to quiet close

BYLINE: Northwest Florida Daily News, Fort Walton Beach

SECTION: COMMENTARY

LENGTH: 424 words


Nov. 30--Today is notable for reasons you may have forgotten. Nov. 30 marks the
"official" end of the 2015 hurricane season.

Dare we breathe a sigh of relief? Or would that jinx us, bringing a freak,
late-season hurricane to pummel our Christmas decorations and holiday travel
plans?

We'll take a chance and rejoice that once again, the Emerald Coast has dodged a
bullet. The last major hurricane to strike our area was Dennis in 2005. We have
had some close calls, including Ida, a November storm in 2009 that could have
brought hurricane-force winds to Northwest Florida a couple of weeks before
Thanksgiving.

Luckily, that didn't happen. In fact, the Florida Panhandle, once branded
"Hurricane Alley" after an onslaught of storms in the 1980s and '90s, has been
very, very lucky in having escaped nature's wrath the past decade.

A few thoughts about the situation on this, the last day of hurricane season
2015:

Each year before the season begins, various meteorological agencies hazard a
guess as to how many storms will form in the Atlantic. This year's predictions
called for a quiet season, with six to 10 named storms, one to four hurricanes,
and one major hurricane -- that from the Climate Prediction Center.

Philip J. Klotzbach and William M. Gray with the Department of Atmospheric
Science at Colorado State University issued a similar forecast, with only eight
named storms, three hurricanes and one major hurricane.

Mother Nature had the last word. So far this year, 12 storms were named, four
became hurricanes, and there were two major hurricanes, including the monster
Joaquin that threatened the East Coast with 155 mph winds. As Weather
Underground co-founder Dr. Jeff Masters has pointed out, pre-season forecasts
have "zero skill," meaning they aren't very accurate.

Believe it or not, there's a downside to going so long without a hurricane.
People forget how deadly these storms can be. They don't adequately prepare.
With folks relocating to Florida all the time, a significant portion of the
Sunshine State's population has never experienced a storm.

The National Hurricane Center's website offers a free information resource for
people wanting to prepare ahead of time. Visit
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/prepare/ready.php for the details.

Trust us, you'll need to prepare. Don't put this off until the day before a
hurricane strikes.

___ (c)2015 the Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Fla.) Visit the
Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Fla.) at www.nwfdailynews.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20151130-FO-EDITORIAL-Hurricane-season-comes-to-quiet-close-1130-20151130

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FO


                  Copyright 2015 Northwest Florida Daily News


                          FOCUS - 426 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                                The New York Post

                          September 15, 2004 Wednesday

CLASSROOM EXTRA: HURRICANES WREAK HAVOC!

BYLINE: JASMIN K. WILLIAM

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 695 words


Hurricanes have been making headlines lately, with Florida getting hit with
three storms in a month. Learn more about these deadly storms.

Charley, Frances and Ivan. No, these aren't rappers - they're the names given to
three powerful hurricanes that have wreaked havoc across the Caribbean and
Florida in the past three weeks.

Hurricane season began on June 1 and continues though Nov. 30. These devastating
storms pack a real punch, causing the ocean to surge, creating flooding rains
and winds that can reach more than 150 miles per hour.

A hurricane has three parts:

Eye - the low-pressure calm center of the storm

Eye Wall - the area around the eye with the most violent winds

Rain Bands - thunderstorms circulating from the eye that feed the condensation
and evaporation cycle that powers the storm.

Hurricanes start out as tropical depressions far away from land. They form over
the warm ocean waters near the equator. Warm, moist air from the ocean's surface
begins to rise. As it does, it cools and forms rain droplets and storm clouds.
The rising air below is replaced by more humid air from the ocean's surface. As
this cycle of evaporation and condensation continues, winds swirl in different
directions, combining with the rising ocean air. The storm grows into the
familiar white swirl pattern you've seen on TV. This can take a few hours or
several days.

As many of 100 of these systems can form during hurricane season, but only about
10 will develop into tropical storms. These are not dangerous - until they hit
land.

A tropical depression becomes a tropical storm when its winds reach a dangerous
39 miles per hour or more. Though not as destructive as hurricanes, tropical
storms can still flip over trucks, destroy buildings and topple trees.

Once a tropical storm's winds hit 74 mile per hour or better, the storm takes a
cyclone shape and officially becomes a hurricane.

Hurricanes are classified in categories from one to five, depending on the
storm's strength. A category five is the strongest and has the most potential to
do the greatest amount of damage to land, property and human life.

The areas hardest hit by hurricanes are the Caribbean islands and the southeast
coast of the U.S. bordering the Gulf of Mexico. Southern Florida gets a lion's
share of hurricanes.

Though New York is pretty safe from taking a direct hit from a hurricane, we
sometimes get tail effects - like last week's heavy rains that stopped the
subways. The storms do most of their damage further south and lose strength by
the time they head north and out to sea. However, in 1938, a Category 3 storm
hit Long Island. High winds hit New England and the heavy rains caused river
flooding in New York, Massachusetts and Connecticut. Six hundred people were
killed.

What's in a name?

Our word "hurricane" is similar to words used by other cultures to describe
these violent and deadly storms. Hurakan is the name of a Mayan god that blew
his breath over the water. Hurrican is the name of an ancient evil Caribbean
god.

With as many as 100 tropical storm forming during hurricane season, naming them
is necessary to keep track of them. Both male and female names are used. If a
storm has killed many people, or cost a lot of money in damages, its name is
retired and not used again. Deadly storm names Agnes, Hazel, Andrew, Camille and
Gloria are retired.

Here's this season's list of hurricane names:

Alex Hermine Otto

Bonnie Ivan Paula

Charley Jeanne Richard

Danielle Karl Shary

Earl Lisa Tomas

Frances Matthew Virginie

Gaston Nicole Walter

The deadliest hurricane in U.S. history was an unnamed Category 4 storm that hit
Galveston, Texas in 1900. It killed 8,000 people.

Hurricane Ivan has officially reached Category 5 status. The storm has hit
Grenada, Cuba and now threatens Florida.

Today's lesson fulfills the following New York standards: E1c, E3c, E3d, Science
S3c, S4a, S6a.

Check the weather page of today's Post for information on Hurricane Ivan.

Create a hurricane safety check list. How would you prepare yourself if you were
caught in a hurricane?

Use the Internet or an encyclopedia to learn more about tropical storms and
hurricanes.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Hurricane Ivan has terrorized the Caribbean islands and Cuba and now
heads for Florida.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2004 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 427 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                           The Ledger (Lakeland, FL)

                              June 1, 2003, Sunday

FLORIDA HAS SEEN PLENTY OF HURRICANES; THE STATE WAS SPARED IN 2002, BUT HAS
LOGGED A HISTORY OF DEATHS AND DAMAGE.

BYLINE: DANEESHA DAVIS The Ledger

SECTION: Hurricane 2003; Pg. S7

LENGTH: 912 words


LAKELAND -- The 2002 Atlantic Hurricane season brought four hurricanes, eight
tropical storms and two tropical depressions.

Hurricane Gustav was the first hurricane of the season. A category 2 storm,
Gustav hit the outer banks of North Carolina, Nova Scotia and Newfoundland. One
death was reported, according to the National Hurricane Center.

In North Carolina, damage was estimated at $ 100,000, while in Canada, Prince
Edward Island suffered tree damage.

Hurricane Isidore hit Cuba, the northern Yucatan Peninsula and parts of
Louisiana, where almost $ 330 million in damage was done. Four deaths were
reported in the United States and two in Mexico.

Hurricane Kyle became the third longest-lived tropical cyclone, lasting for 22
days. Kyle washed ashore on much of the Southeastern United States.

Beach erosion was reported on the South Carolina coastlines and damage were
estimated at $ 5 million, the Hurricane Center reported.

Hurricane Lili caused major flooding in Jamaica, the Cayman Islands and western
Cuba. It landed in Louisiana as a category one storm. Lili destroyed
approximately 400 homes in Barbados and half of the banana crop in St. Lucia.
Damages were estimated at $ 860 million.

Although none of these hurricanes hit Florida last season, the state has
attracted a long list of hurricanes from 1900 to 1996.

TARGET FLORIDA

The National Hurricane Center says that 36 percent of all hurricanes that have
hit the United States hit Florida.

The Southeast part of the state has been hit the hardest, with 28 hurricanes.
Seven of those were category 3 storms with minimum winds of 111 mph or higher,
three were category 4 storms with minimum winds of 131 mph and one, Andrew, was
a category 5 storm with minimum winds of 156 mph.

The Northwest has also been battered with 25 hurricanes, with seven category 3
storms.

The 1928 San Felipe-Lake Okeechobee hurricane was the deadliest hurricane in
Florida's history and second deadliest in U.S. history, killing more than 1,800
people, possibly as many as 2,500 or more, and doing a reported $ 25 million in
damage.

The deadliest was the hurricane that hit Galvaston, Texas, in 1900 killing at
least 8,000, and possibly as many as 12,000. Both those storms were category 4.

In 1992, Hurricane Andrew devastated much of southern Miami-Dade County and is
the most expensive hurricane in U.S. history to date, with damage estimates at $
26.5 billion.

It was only the third category 5 hurricane known to have hit the United States.

The second was Hurricane Camille, which hit Mississippi and Louisiana in 1969.

The most intense storm recorded was the 1935 Labor Day category 5 hurricane that
hit the Florida Keys, killing 405 people. Its pressure was recorded at 892
millibars, a unit used to measure atmospheric pressure.

Hurricane Donna ranks sixth on the list of most intense storms. It became the
first hurricane recorded to travel the entire East Coast of the United States.

In 1964, Donna hit the eastern coast of Florida with 180 mph winds and a 13-foot
storm surge. It then moved along the coast to South Carolina and its destructive
path ended in the New England states where it produced more than 5 inches of
rain over Maine.

The Hurricane of 1938 was largely ignored because headlines of Adolf Hitler
dominated the news.

At the time, radar was not in use so residents in the New England states were
not prepared for the hurricane.

It struck in September with wind gusts of up to 186 mph. More 600 people were
killed and property damage was estimated to be $ 300 million. In 2001 dollars,
that translates into damage of $ 4.7 billion.

In the aftermath of the storm, drinking water was contaminated and phone service
for as many as 301,000 phones, was out. There was also fear of typhoid.

FATAL STORMS

These are the 20 Atlantic hurricanes that killed the most people from 1900 to
2002. Storms before 1953 were not named. They are designated by the area they
struck.

Category indicates the strength of the storm:
 HURRICANE          YEAR                CATEGORY
 Galveston, Texas   1900                4                   8,000*
 Southeast Florida, 1928                4                   1,836**
Lake Okeechobee
 Florida Keys,      1919                4                   600***
South Texas
 New England        1938                3#                  600
 Florida Keys       1935                5                   408
 Audrey (S.W.       1957                4                   390
Louisiana, North
Texas)
 Northeast United   1944                3#                  390##
States
 Grande Isle, La.   1909                4                   350
 New Orleans        1915                4                   275
 Galveston, Texas   1915                4                   275
 Camille (Miss.,    1969                5                   256
Louisiana,
Virginia)
 Miami, Pensacola,  1926                4                   243
Mississippi, Ala.
 Diane (Northeast   1955                1                   184
United States)
 Southeast Florida  1906                2                   164
 Pensacola,         1906                3                   134
Mississippi,
Alabama
 Agnes (Florida,    1972                1                   122
N.E. United States)
 Hazel (South       1954                4#                  95
Carolina, North
Carolina)
 Betsy (Southeast   1965                3                   75
Florida, Louisiana)
 Carol (Northeast   1954                3#                  60
United States)
 Floyd              1999                2                   56
(Mid-Atlantic, N.E.
United States)

* The death toll could be as high as 10,000 to 12,000.

** Death toll expected to be revised later this year to 2,500 or more.

*** More than 500 lives were lost on ships at sea. Total death toll could be
from 600 to 900.

# Storm was moving at more than 30 miles per hour.

## 344 of the total number killed were lost on ships at sea.

SOURCE: National Hurricane Center


LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Ledger: Chart

             Copyright 2003 Lakeland Ledger Publishing Corporation


                          FOCUS - 428 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                   June 7, 1994, Tuesday, Early Tampa Edition

A busier hurricane season than previous 3, forecast says

SECTION: TAMPA TODAY; TAMPA BAY & STATE; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 185 words

DATELINE: FORT COLLINS, Colo.



Noted hurricane forecaster William Gray says this season will be busier than
the past three.

Gray and his team are forecasting a below-average five hurricanes and nine
named storms this hurricane season; one of those hurricanes will be severe,  the
Colorado State University hurricane expert said Monday.

He also said there will be 15 hurricane days - four six-hour periods with
hurricane-force winds of 74 mph or more - and one intense hurricane day, when
winds surpass 110 mph.

During an average hurricane season, there are 5.7 hurricanes and between  four
and five intense hurricane days.

In 1993, there were four hurricanes, one of them intense; eight named  storms;
10 hurricane days and one intense hurricane day.

Gray predicted a Hurricane Destruction Potential of 40 during this  hurricane
season. The HDP, a rating of wind- and ocean-surge destruction  potential, is 68
during an average year, he said.

"It is inevitable we will see a return of more intense hurricanes in  upcoming
years," said Gray. "Even though this year will not be the start of  this
upswing."

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA TODAY

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 429 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     August 28, 1994, Sunday, City Edition

HURRICANE HORRORS

BYLINE: MARGO HAMMOND

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; books; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 941 words



Admit it. When you heard that Tropical Storm Chris might turn into Hurricane
Chris, you felt a certain excitement. After all, who among us doesn't like the
idea of flirting with danger from time to time? A hurricane, that could be
exciting; we could have a hurricane party, live by candlelight, you told
yourself dreamily.

Well, snap out of it. Hurricanes are not to be taken lightly. Just read  David
E. Fisher's The Scariest Place on Earth: Eye to Eye with Hurricanes  (Random
House, $ 23) and I guarantee you will never contemplate another  hurricane party
again. Scarier than any manufactured thriller, this book will  keep even the
boldest up at night, straining to hear the first sounds of The  Big One.

A cosmochemist and chairman of the Department of Marine Geology and  Geophysics
at the University of Miami, Fisher has not only studied hurricanes,  he's lived
through them. It was more the latter than the former that convinced  him that
hurricanes were no picnic. For Fisher, the "scariest place on  earth" was Miami
on Aug. 24, 1992, the day Hurricane Andrew hit shore, just  miles from his home.

Studying hurricanes, however, can be sobering, too. Just a cursory look at  the
history of hurricanes and the havoc they can wreak should convince anyone  that
these monster storms are anything but fun.

"In recent years we haven't heard much about the terror of hurricanes,  probably
because atmospheric conditions in the past couple of decades have  diminished
their frequency," Fisher writes. "But, as we shall see, the  immediate future
looks more like a return to the old days, and with global  warming, a return
with a vengeance."

Throughout The Scariest Place on Earth, Fisher intertwines scientific
explanations of how hurricanes form and grow with stories of killer hurricanes
throughout history, and, in particular, with his own personally terrifying
experience of Hurricane Andrew. He also discusses attempts that have been made
to alter the course of hurricanes, a tricky proposition.

"To steer all hurricanes away from landfall, or to weaken them below their
potential for destruction, would deprive our continent and islands of
rainfall," says Fisher. "But every few years a hurricane strikes with such
devastating force that the obligation to try to protect people living under  the
shadow of potential disaster is pressing."

By definition hurricanes only occur in the Atlantic. The Pacific has its  own
name for the same natural phenomenon: typhoons. It was a typhoon in Japan,  in
fact, that prompted the first recorded account of such storms. In 1274  Genghis
Khan twice tried to invade Japan and both times ended up fighting  winds roaring
out of the east (so much for the theory that bad luck can't  strike two times in
a row).

Winds though are not the worst part of a hurricane. "It's true that most
economic damage is done by the hundred-mile-an-hour-and-up winds," says  Fisher,
"but it's the storm surge that kills people. By the thousands. By the  hundreds
of thousands."

Hurricane Andrew caused more damage in terms of material goods than any  natural
disaster in world history, but the hurricane that slammed into  Bangladesh in
1970 killed so many people that only rough estimates are  possible. Some say up
to 1-million people died.

"Hurricanes are basically a gigantic heat pump, gathering in the sun's  energy
over a region of hundreds of square miles and pumping it into the small  center
of the storm," says Fisher, who goes on to explain just how that heat  pump ends
up churning up monster winds and killer surges.

Not all hurricanes, though, are created equal. "As the storm moves across  the
waters it can grow or weaken, depending largely on the coordination  between
inrushing surface winds and outpouring high-altitude winds," he  writes. "The
hurricane can straggle along and never become much worse than a  bad
thunderstorm, or it can grow until it roars into a city with absolutely
devastating force, killing more people and causing more damage than anything
else in all of nature's arsenal." Andrew, which was first acknowledged in The
Miami Herald on Aug. 11, 1992 as a tropical storm whose direction was "away
from any place it could cause trouble," had by August 24 roared into a
full-scale hurricane with winds between 135 and 150 miles per hour and 18-foot
waves.

Still considering a hurricane party? Consider this story in Pass Christian,  a
small resort town on the gulf in Mississippi. In 1969, as Camille headed  toward
the coast, a group of 20 or 30 young adults at the posh Richelieu  apartments on
the beachfront decided to stay on, despite the warnings of the  local police
chief to evacuate.

"Most had been through hurricanes before, and it was kind of fun, they  said.
The electricity would go out and the ocean would turn into a gorgeous  wild surf
and the wind would blow, and everyone would be stuck there for a  couple of
days," writes Fisher. "They were prepared: They had plenty of beer  . . .

"The storm hit at 10 that night. The electricity went out almost  immediately,
which wouldn't have disturbed the party at the Richelieu; indeed,  that would
have been part of the festivities. But then a wave "as high as a  three-story
house' rose up out of the sea and crashed over them. That was the  end of the
party."

The solid-stone building was shattered by the storm surge. All the adults
inside were killed. The next day a 5-year-old boy was found floating on a
mattress. He was the only one to survive.

Margo Hammond is book editor for the Times.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; the ocean during hurricane force winds

TYPE: COLUMN

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 430 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                   November 30, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition

No mean season for hurricanes

BYLINE: FELECIA ROSSER

SECTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 388 words



The Atlantic hurricane season ends today with only three hurricanes and seven
named storms, many of which blew over Florida.

Noted hurricane forecaster William Gray, an atmospheric scientist at  Colorado
State University, predicted that five hurricanes would form from nine  named
storms in a milder-than-usual season that began June 1.

Gray will release his report and an early forecast for next year on  Thursday.
There are typically six hurricanes a season.

"It would appear that conditions were not favorable for hurricanes,  although
the season ended in a surge with two hurricanes," said Richard  Pasch, a
forecaster with the National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables.

"The intensity of the hurricanes was lower than normal," he said. "The  pressure
was high, which usually goes along with smaller storms."

Gordon, the last hurricane of the season, fizzled to a tropical depression  when
it hit Florida this month. It still led to eight deaths in Florida and  $
336-million in crop damage.

Hurricane Florence formed in the deep tropics and spun out harmlessly this
month. Hurricane Chris also formed in the deep tropics in August and died over
open water.

A tropical storm has winds of at least 39 mph. It becomes a hurricane at 74
mph. Chris and Gordon were just barely hurricanes, while Florence reached 100
mph.

Mother Nature continues to baffle experts on what conditions lead to  hurricanes
and tropical storms.

"We don't have all the answers on that," Pasch said. "What we do know is  that
we need warm water, and we need to have an area of low pressure existing.

"It also requires that winds through the atmosphere should not change much  so
there isn't a strong wind shear. But we're still doing research."

Tropical Storms Alberto and Beryl both brought a lot of rain to the Florida
Panhandle but did their heaviest damage in Georgia. Alberto, the first named
tropical storm of the year, moved inland and stalled over Georgia in July,
causing flooding that killed 31 people, forced about 40,000 people to evacuate
and damaged thousands of homes. Beryl spawned tornadoes in Georgia and South
Carolina in August, injuring 36 people.

Debby, a tropical storm that formed in mid-September, caused nine deaths,
mostly on the islands of Martinique and St. Lucia.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE; TAMPA TODAY

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Times files; Gordon, at the time a tropical
storm, left South Daytona flooded., (ran TAMPA TODAY)

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 431 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                August 5, 1995, Saturday, North Suncoast Edition

Forecaster rides winds of change

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 776 words

DATELINE: MIAMI



When William Gray predicts storms, the experts pay attention.

They were listening Friday.

Gray, considered the guru of hurricane forecasters, revised his predictions  for
this Atlantic season.

He now forecasts the number of named storms at 16 and hurricanes at nine.  He
had predicted 12 storms, with eight developing into hurricanes.

"Everything is just pointing to a blockbuster year in terms of storms,"  said
Gray, who issues forecasts three times during the season. "It's just one  of
those years."

That worries Florida emergency officials.

"Oh, my gosh. Oh, my gosh. Wow," said State Meteorologist Mike Rucker  when he
heard of Gray's revision.

Rucker may have been reacting to Gray's track record.

In eight of the 11 previous years, Gray has accurately predicted the number  of
hurricanes and tropical storms within two. Five of those years he was  correct
on either the number of hurricanes or tropical storms.

"I have quite a bit of faith in him," said Rucker.

Gray studies climate patterns and teaches a course in tropical storms at
Colorado State University. By his own account, his 11-year record consists of
two "busts," two "marginal" predictions and seven "darned good" years.

Steve Benn, evacuation coordinator for Brevard Emergency Management, also  was
taking note of Gray's forecast.

"It's a reason for people to be prepared," said Benn.

Gray's increase Friday doesn't mean the rest of the season will be more  active
than he thought before, he assured. In each case, he classified three
hurricanes as severe.

"What has added to it is the early-season activity," he said.

Since the season began in June, five storms have formed, and Florida was  hit by
both that grew into hurricanes. But the most active part of the season  is
mid-August through mid-October.

The season lasts through the end of November.

"The factors we use to forecast hurricanes unfortunately call for that
early-activity level to increase more as the season progresses," said Gray.

Even if Gray's predictions come true, they won't set any records.

There would have to be 21 tropical storms to tie the record set in 1993 and  12
hurricanes to tie the 1969 record, said Ed Rappaport, hurricane specialist  at
the National Hurricane Center.

"We're always interested in what Dr. Gray forecasts," he said.  "Essentially we
had a quick start with five systems."

Storms are given names when sustained winds hit tropical-storm force of 39  mph
and reach hurricane status when winds top 74 mph.

On average, there are 9 to 10 named storms a year, 5 to 6 of them  hurricanes.

Hurricane Allison became the earliest June hurricane to hit Florida when it
slammed into the Gulf Coast on June 5. Hurricane Erin hit both Florida coasts
this week, killing three people, leaving five missing and knocking out power  to
more than 1-million.

Rainfall and warm temperatures in West Africa, equatorial winds, low air
pressures and temperatures over the Atlantic and Caribbean have contributed to
the increased activity this year, Gray said.

He also mentioned the relative weakness this year of El Nino and the warm  water
temperatures off South America's West Coast.

In years past, El Nino, a Pacific Ocean phenomenon, has inhibited hurricane
activity.

"This year it's just gone," he said.

That doesn't brings smiles to the faces of residents in hurricane-prone  areas
like Miami, where the scars of 1992's Hurricane Andrew are still  visible.

Norky Mendez spent $ 350 on plywood for makeshift storm shutters in
anticipation of Hurricane Erin.

"Let's just put it this way," said Mendez. "We're not taking them off  till
November. That's when the hurricane season ends."

- Information from the Associated Press, Orlando Sentinel, Reuters and Times
files was used in this report.

Gray's anatomy: Stormier

Dr. William Gray, the Colorado State professor who is noted for his yearly
hurricane predictions, has issued a mid-season revision. Gray now sees far  more
named storms than in his earlier predcitions. His 1995 predictions and
revisions:

Date of prediction   Named Storms   Hurricanes   Severe storms

April 14                 10             6             2

June 7                   12             8             2

August 4                 16             9             3

1995 hurricane names: Allison, Barry, Chantal, Dean, Erin, Felix, Gabrielle,
Humberto, Iris, Jerry, Karen, Luis, Marilyn, Noel, Opal, Pablo, Roxanne,
Sebastien, Tanya, Van, Wendy

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO; COLOR CHART; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; Dr. William Gray;
chart of Dr. William Gray's storm and hurricane predictions; chart of 1995
hurricane names

                    Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 432 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     August 5, 1995, Saturday, City Edition

Expert predicts 7 more hurricanes

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: MIAMI



When William Gray predicts storms, the experts pay attention.

They were listening Friday.

Gray, considered the guru of hurricane forecasters, revised his predictions  for
this Atlantic season.

Gray said 11 more named storms - seven strong enough to become hurricanes -
should develop between now and the end of November.

That brings his forecast for the total number of named storms this season  to
16, with nine of those hurricanes. Gray had predicted 12 storms, with eight
developing into hurricanes.

"Everything is just pointing to a blockbuster year in terms of storms,"  said
Gray, who issues forecasts three times during the season. "It's just one  of
those years."

That worries Florida emergency officials.

"Oh, my gosh. Oh, my gosh. Wow," said State Meteorologist Mike Rucker  when he
heard of Gray's revision.

Rucker may have been reacting to Gray's track record.

In eight of the 11 previous years, Gray has accurately predicted the number  of
hurricanes and tropical storms within two. Five of those years he was  correct
on either the number of hurricanes or tropical storms.

"I have quite a bit of faith in him," said Rucker.

Gray studies climate patterns and teaches a course in tropical storms at
Colorado State University. He says his 11-year record consists of two  "busts,"
two "marginal" predictions and seven "darned good" years.

Steve Benn, evacuation coordinator for Brevard Emergency Management, also  was
taking note of Gray's forecast.

"It's a reason for people to be prepared," said Benn.

Gray's increase doesn't mean the rest of the season will be more active  than he
thought before, he assured. In each case, he classified three  hurricanes as
severe.

"What has added to it is the early-season activity," he said.

Since the season began in June, five storms have formed, and Florida was  hit by
both that grew into hurricanes. But the most active part of the season  is
mid-August through mid-October.

The season lasts through the end of November.

"The factors we use to forecast hurricanes unfortunately call for that
early-activity level to increase more as the season progresses," said Gray.

Even if Gray's predictions come true, they won't set records.

There would have to be 21 tropical storms to tie the record set in 1993 and  12
hurricanes to tie the 1969 record, said Ed Rappaport, hurricane specialist  at
the National Hurricane Center.

"We're always interested in what Dr. Gray forecasts," he said.  "Essentially we
had a quick start with five systems."

Storms are given names when sustained winds hit tropical-storm force of 39  mph
and reach hurricane status when winds top 74 mph.

On average, there are 9 to 10 named storms a year, 5 to 6 of them  hurricanes.

Hurricane Allison became the earliest June hurricane to hit Florida when it
slammed into the Gulf Coast on June 5. Hurricane Erin hit both Florida coasts
this week, killing four people, leaving seven missing and knocking out power  to
more than 1-million.

Rainfall and warm temperatures in West Africa, equatorial winds, low air
pressures and temperatures over the Atlantic and Caribbean add to the  increased
activity this year, Gray said.

He also mentioned the relative weakness this year of El Nino and the warm  water
temperatures off South America's West Coast. In years past, El Nino, a  Pacific
Ocean phenomenon, has inhibited hurricane activity.

"This year it's just gone," Gray said.

That doesn't brings smiles to the faces of residents in South Florida,  where
the scars of 1992's Hurricane Andrew are still visible.

Norky Mendez, a secretary in Homestead, spent $ 350 on plywood for makeshift
storm shutters in anticipation of Hurricane Erin.

"Let's just put it this way," said Mendez. "We're not taking them off  till
November. That's when the hurricane season ends."

- Information from the Associated Press, Orlando Sentinel, Reuters and Times
files was used in this report.

Gray's anatomy: Stormier

Dr. William Gray, the Colorado State professor who is noted for his yearly
hurricane predictions, has issued a mid-season revision. Gray now sees far  more
named storms than in his earlier predictions. His 1995 predictions and
revisions:

Date of prediction   Named Storms   Hurricanes   Severe storms

April 14                 10             6             2

June 7                   12             8             2

August 4                 16             9             3

1995 hurricane names: Allison, Barry, Chantal, Dean, Erin, Felix, Gabrielle,
Humberto, Iris, Jerry, Karen, Luis, Marilyn, Noel, Opal, Pablo, Roxanne,
Sebastien, Tanya, Van, Wendy

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: NATIONAL; Tampa Today

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO; COLOR CHART; BLACK AND WHITE CHART; Dr. William Gray;
chart of Dr. William Gray's storm and hurricane predictions; chart of 1995
hurricane names

                    Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 433 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            August 26, 2017 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

With time running out, thousands flee Hurricane Harvey

BYLINE:  By MICHAEL GRACZYK and FRANK BAJAK Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1013 words


CORPUS CHRISTI, TEXAS - Hurricane Harvey began moving into Texas late Friday,
bringing the fierce wind and torrential rain whose forecast earlier sent tens of
thousands of residents fleeing a wide swath of the state's Gulf Coast in hopes
of escaping its wrath.

The National Hurricane Center said the eye of the dangerous Category 4 storm
came ashore late Friday night.

With time running out, residents fled Friday from the path of the increasingly
menacing-looking hurricane as it took aim at an area of Texas that includes oil
refineries, chemical plants and dangerously flood-prone Houston, the nation's
fourth-largest city.

Texas Gov. Greg Abbott warned that the monster system would be "a very major
disaster," and the forecasts drew fearful comparisons to Hurricane Katrina, one
of the deadliest ever to strike the U.S.

"We know that we've got millions of people who are going to feel the impact of
this storm," said Dennis Feltgen, a spokesman and meteorologist for the National
Hurricane Center. "We really pray that people are listening to their emergency
managers and get out of harm's way."

As night fell, punishing wind had already begun to cause damage in downtown
Corpus Christi, the city closest to the center of the storm. A trash can lid
skipped across a parking lot behind hotels on the seawall. In the city of
325,000 residents, a traffic light post was toppled but still lit, its wires
unearthed.

Fueled by warm Gulf of Mexico waters, Harvey grew rapidly, accelerating from a
Category 1 early in the morning to a Category 4 by evening. Its transformation
from an unnamed storm to a life-threatening behemoth took only 56 hours, an
incredibly fast intensification.

If it does not lose significant strength, the system will come ashore as the
fiercest hurricane to hit the U.S. in 13 years and the strongest to strike Texas
since 1961's Hurricane Carla, the most powerful Texas hurricane on record.

Aside from the wind of 130 mph and storm surges up to 12 feet, Harvey was
expected to drop prodigious amounts of rain - up to 3 feet. The resulting
flooding, one expert said, could be "the depths of which we've never seen."

Galveston-based storm surge expert Hal Needham said forecasts indicated that it
was "becoming more and more likely that something really bad is going to
happen."

At least one researcher predicted heavy damage that would linger for months or
longer.

"In terms of economic impact, Harvey will probably be on par with Hurricane
Katrina," said University of Miami senior hurricane researcher Brian McNoldy.
"The Houston area and Corpus Christi are going to be a mess for a long time."

Before the storm arrived, home and business owners raced to nail plywood over
windows and fill sandbags. Steady traffic filled the highways leaving Corpus
Christi, but there were no apparent jams. In Houston, where mass evacuations can
include changing major highways to a one-way vehicle flow, authorities left
traffic patterns unchanged.

Federal health officials called in more than 400 doctors, nurses and other
medical professionals from around the nation and planned to move two 250-bed
medical units to Baton Rouge, La. Other federal medical units are available in
Dallas.

Just hours before the projected landfall, the governor and Houston leaders
issued conflicting statements on evacuation.

After Abbott urged more people to flee, Houston authorities told people to
remain in their homes and recommended no widespread evacuations.

In a Friday press conference that addressed Houston officials' decision to not
have a voluntary or mandatory evacuation, Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner said
there might be a "greater danger" in having people who don't need to be
evacuated on roads that could flood.

At a convenience store in Houston's Meyerland neighborhood, at least 12 cars
lined up for fuel. Brent Borgstedte said this was the fourth gas station he had
visited to try to fill up a car. The 55-year-old insurance agent shrugged off
Harvey's risks.

"I don't think anybody is really that worried about it. I've lived here my whole
life," he said. "I've been through several hurricanes."

Scientists warned that Harvey could swamp counties more than 100 miles inland
and stir up dangerous surf as far away as Alabama and the Florida Panhandle, 700
miles from the projected landfall.

It may also spawn tornadoes. Even after weakening, the system might spin out
into the Gulf and regain strength before hitting Houston a second time Wednesday
as a tropical storm, forecasters said.

By late afternoon, the storm was centered about 60 miles southeast of Corpus
Christi, moving 10 mph to the northwest.

All seven Texas counties on the coast from Corpus Christi to the western end of
Galveston Island ordered mandatory evacuations from low-lying areas. Four
counties ordered full evacuations and warned there was no guarantee of rescue
for people staying behind.

Voluntary evacuations have been urged for Corpus Christi and for the Bolivar
Peninsula, a sand spit near Galveston where many homes were washed away by the
storm surge of Hurricane Ike in 2008.

People in the town of Port Lavaca, population 12,200, appeared to heed the
danger. The community northeast of Corpus Christi was a ghost town Friday, with
every business boarded up. But at a bayside RV park that looked vulnerable, John
Bellah drove up in his pickup to have a look at an RV he had been told was for
sale. He and his wife planned to ride out Harvey.

"This is just going to blow through," said Bellah, 72, who said he had been
through Hurricane Rita in 2005 and Carla in 1961. He described those storms as
"much worse."

The storm posed the first major emergency management test of President Donald
Trump's administration.

The White House said Trump was closely monitoring the hurricane and planned to
travel to Texas early next week to view recovery efforts.

Trump's homeland security and counterterrorism adviser, Tom Bossert, said the
administration was "bringing together the firepower of the federal government to
assist the state and local governments, but the state and local governments are
in the lead here."

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  A power generator tips in front of Texas' CHRISTUS Spohn Hospital in
Corpus Christi, Texas, as Hurricane Harvey hits Friday, Aug. 25, 2017. (Courtney
Sacco /Corpus Christi Caller-Times via AP)  A woman is helped to a bus as she
and other are evacuated as the outer bands of Hurricane Harvey begin to make
landfall, Friday, Aug. 25, 2017, in Corpus Christi, Texas. Harvey intensified
into a hurricane Thursday and steered for the Texas coast with the potential for
up to 3 feet of rain, 125 mph winds and 12-foot storm surges in what could be
the fiercest hurricane to hit the United States in almost a dozen years. (AP
Photo/Eric Gay)  Michael Reyes, left, who is a general surgeon, hugs his wife
Sara Reyes as she prepares to flight out of Corpus Christi with her daughter Eva
Reyes and he prepares to stay as Hurricane Harvey approaches the Gulf Coast area
on Friday, Aug. 25, 2017, at the Corpus Christi International Airport in Corpus
Christi, Texas. The slow-moving hurricane could be the fiercest such storm to
hit the United States in almost a dozen years. Forecasters labeled Harvey a
"life-threatening storm" that posed a "grave risk" as millions of people braced
for a prolonged battering. (Gabe Hernandez/Corpus Christi Caller-Times via AP)
Water rises at Bob Hall Pier in Corpus Christi, Texas as Hurricane Harvey
approaches on Friday, Aug. 25, 2017. The slow-moving hurricane could be the
fiercest such storm to hit the United States in almost a dozen years.
Forecasters labeled Harvey a "life-threatening storm" that posed a "grave risk"
as millions of people braced for a prolonged battering. (Courtney Sacco/Corpus
Christi Caller-Times via AP)  Tom Corbin, right, and Terry Corbin prepare
sandbags as Hurricane Harvey approaches the Coastal Bend area on Friday, Aug.
25, 2017, in Corpus Christi, Texas. The National Hurricane Center warns that
conditions are deteriorating as Hurricane Harvey strengthens and slowly moves
toward the Texas coast. (Gabe Hernandez/Corpus Christi Caller-Times via AP)
Oscar Aldana, left, and Abraham Blanco prepare sandbags to take home as
Hurricane Harvey approaches the Coastal Bend area on Friday, Aug. 25, 2017, in
Corpus Christi, Texas. The National Hurricane Center warns that conditions are
deteriorating as Hurricane Harvey strengthens and slowly moves toward the Texas
coast. (Gabe Hernandez/Corpus Christi Caller-Times via AP)  Michael Brennan,
branch chief at the National Hurricane Center, gives an update on Hurricane
Harvey as it moves toward the Texas coast, Friday, Aug. 25, 2017, in Miami. The
National Hurricane Center warns that conditions are deteriorating as Hurricane
Harvey strengthens and slowly moves toward the Texas coast. (AP Photo/Lynne
Sladky)  Officials deliver water to an holding area for residents waiting to be
evacuated, Friday, Aug. 25, 2017, in Corpus Christi, Texas. Harvey intensified
into a hurricane Thursday and steered for the Texas coast with the potential for
up to 3 feet of rain, 125 mph winds and 12-foot storm surges in what could be
the fiercest hurricane to hit the United States in almost a dozen years.(AP
Photo/Eric Gay)  Texas A&M University at Galveston students wait to board a bus
Friday, Aug. 25, 2017, as they evacuate the Mitchell Campus on Pelican Island in
Galveston, Texas ahead of Hurricane Harvey. Harvey intensified into a hurricane
Thursday and steered for the Texas coast with the potential for up to 3 feet of
rain, 125 mph winds and 12-foot storm surges in what could be the fiercest
hurricane to hit the United States in almost a dozen years. (Jennifer
Reynolds/The Galveston County Daily News via AP)  Vimal Patel boards up windows
with the help of Carl Bledsoe (left) at the Catalina Motel as Hurricane Harvey
approaches the Coastal Bend area on Friday, Aug. 25, 2017, in Corpus Christi,
Texas. The National Hurricane Center warns that conditions are deteriorating as
Hurricane Harvey strengthens and slowly moves toward the Texas coast. (Gabe
Hernandez/Corpus Christi Caller-Times via AP)  City workers pull down a canvas
covering as the outer bands of Hurricane Harvey move closer, Friday, Aug. 25,
2017, in Corpus Christi, Texas. The National Hurricane Center warns that
conditions are deteriorating as Hurricane Harvey strengthens and slowly moves
toward the Texas coast.(AP Photo/Eric Gay)  A man carries a sandbag he filled
along the sea wall in preparation of Hurricane Harvey, Friday, Aug. 25, 2017, in
Corpus Christi, Texas. The National Hurricane Center warns that conditions are
deteriorating as Hurricane Harvey strengthens and slowly moves toward the Texas
coast. (AP Photo/Eric Gay)  A man checks on a boat in the marina in preparation
of Hurricane Harvey, Friday, Aug. 25, 2017, in Corpus Christi, Texas. The
National Hurricane Center warns that conditions are deteriorating as Hurricane
Harvey strengthens and slowly moves toward the Texas coast.(AP Photo/Eric Gay)
Leo Martinez carries a sandbag he filled along the sea wall, in preparation for
Hurricane Harvey, Friday, Aug. 25, 2017, in Corpus Christi, Texas. The National
Hurricane Center warns that conditions are deteriorating as Hurricane Harvey
strengthens and slowly moves toward the Texas coast..(AP Photo/Eric Gay)
Carolyn Price empties a fridge on the lower level of her property in Matagorda,
Texas before Hurricane Harvey makes landfall Friday, Aug. 25, 2017. Conditions
were deteriorating along Texas's Gulf Coast on Friday as Hurricane Harvey
strengthened and slowly moved toward the state, with forecasters warning that
evacuations and preparations "should be rushed to completion." Price and her
husband David drove down from Lake Conroe to retrieve their power fishing boat
and other belongings after hearing the surge would reach 10-12 feet. (Godofredo
A. Vasquez/Houston Chronicle via AP)  Lynn Dixon places sandbags outside their
home decor store in Galveston, Texas as Hurricane Harvey intensifies in the Gulf
of Mexico Friday, Aug. 25, 2017. Conditions were deteriorating along Texas's
Gulf Coast on Friday as Hurricane Harvey strengthened and slowly moved toward
the state, with forecasters warning that evacuations and preparations "should be
rushed to completion." (AP Photo/David J. Phillip)  Stephanie Garcia, left,
waits with her family at a high school gym to be evacuated as the outer bands of
Hurricane Harvey begin to make landfall, Friday, Aug. 25, 2017, in Corpus
Christi, Texas. Harvey intensified into a hurricane Thursday and steered for the
Texas coast with the potential for up to 3 feet of rain, 125 mph winds and
12-foot storm surges in what could be the fiercest hurricane to hit the United
States in almost a dozen years.(AP Photo/Eric Gay)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 434 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           September 10, 2017 Sunday
                                 SECOND EDITION

'This is your last chance': Irma puts a bull's-eye on Tampa

BYLINE:  By JAY REEVES and TAMARA LUSH Associated Press  The Washington Post
contributed to this report.

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 902 words


NAPLES, Fla. - Hurricane Irma's leading edge bent palm trees and spit rain as
the storm swirled toward Florida with 120 mph wind Saturday on a projected new
track that could expose Tampa - not Miami - to a direct hit.

Tampa has not taken a head-on blow from a major hurricane in nearly a century.

An estimated 70,000 Floridians huddled in shelters late Saturday as Irma closed
in on the Florida Keys, where it was expected to roll ashore Sunday morning and
begin making its way up the state's west coast.

"This is your last chance to make a good decision," Gov. Rick Scott warned
residents in Florida's evacuation zones, which encompassed a staggering 6.4
million people, or more than 1 in 4 people in the state.

Earlier in the day, Irma executed a westward swing toward Florida's Gulf Coast
that appeared to spare the Miami metropolitan area of the catastrophic direct
hit that forecasters had been warning of for days.

Still, Miami was not out of danger. Because the storm is 350 to 400 miles wide,
forecasters said the metro area of 6 million people could still get
life-threatening hurricane wind and storm surge of 4 to 6 feet.

Irma - at one time the most powerful hurricane ever recorded in the open
Atlantic - left more than 20 people dead across the Caribbean as it steamed
toward the U.S.

It was chugging toward Florida on Saturday as a Category 3, with wind strength
down considerably from its peak of 185 mph earlier in the week. But it was
expected to strengthen again before hitting the Sunshine State.

On Saturday night, just after 10 p.m. Eastern time, wind gusts at hurricane
strength were recorded in the Florida Keys, the U.S. National Hurricane Center
said. At the time, Irma's center of circulation was less than 100 miles
southeast of Key West.

Meteorologists predicted Irma would plow into the Tampa Bay area by Monday
morning.

Tampa has not been struck by a major hurricane since 1921, when its population
was about 10,000, National Hurricane Center spokesman Dennis Feltgen said. Now
the area has about 3 million people.

The new course threatens everything from Tampa Bay's bustling twin cities of
Tampa and St. Petersburg to Naples' mansion- and yacht-lined canals, Sun City
Center's retirement homes, and Sanibel Island's shell-filled beaches.

The course change caught many people off guard and triggered a major round of
evacuations in the Tampa area. Many businesses had yet to put plywood or
hurricane shutters on their windows, and some area residents grumbled about the
forecast.

"For five days, we were told it was going to be on the east coast, and then 24
hours before it hits, we're now told it's coming up the west coast," said Jeff
Beerbohm, 52, an entrepreneur in St. Petersburg. "As usual, the weathermen, I
don't know why they're paid."

Nearly the entire Florida coastline remained under hurricane watches and
warnings, and leery residents watched a projected track that could shift either
to spare or to savage parts of the state. Forecasters warned of a storm surge as
high as 15 feet.

"This is going to sneak up on people," said Jamie Rhome, head of the hurricane
center's storm surge unit.

With the new forecast, Pinellas County, home to St. Petersburg, ordered 260,000
people to leave, while Georgia scaled back evacuation orders for some coastal
residents. Motorists heading inland from the Tampa area were allowed to drive on
the shoulders.

On Saturday morning, the state was already beginning to feel Irma's effects.
More than 75,000 people had lost power, mostly in and around Miami and Fort
Lauderdale, as the wind began gusting.

At Germain Arena not far from Fort Myers, on Florida's southwestern corner,
thousands waited in a snaking line for hours to gain a spot in the hockey
venue-turned-shelter.

"We'll never get in," Jamilla Bartley lamented as she stood in the parking lot.

Suzy and George Burstein fled from the home they had rebuilt after Hurricane
Andrew in 1992. "It's so much stress, it's a little crazy," said Suzy Burstein,
58, who runs the special education program at an elementary school in suburban
Miami.

For 14 hours, the Bursteins shared the turnpike with several hundred thousand
others, finally reaching Gainesville, where their daughter Tori and son Jeremy
are students at the University of Florida.

"The drive up was so hard, so bad," Suzy Burstein said.

The governor activated all 7,000 members of the Florida National Guard, and
30,000 guardsmen from elsewhere were on standby.

In the Orlando area, Walt Disney World, Universal Studios and Sea World all
prepared to close Saturday. The Miami, Fort Lauderdale, Tampa and Orlando
airports shut down. The Sunshine Skyway Bridge spanning Tampa Bay was closed.

Given its mammoth size and strength and its projected course, Irma could prove
one of the most devastating hurricanes ever to hit Florida and inflict damage on
a scale not seen here in 25 years.

Hurricane Andrew smashed into suburban Miami in 1992 with winds topping 165 mph,
damaging or blowing apart more than 125,000 homes. The damage in Florida totaled
$26 billion, and at least 40 people died.

Boat captain Ray Scarborough was 12 when Andrew hit and remembers lying on the
floor in a hall as the storm nearly ripped the roof off his house. This time, he
and his girlfriend left their home in Big Pine Key and fled north for Orlando.

"They said this one is going to be bigger than Andrew. When they told me that,"
he said, "that's all I needed to hear."

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Washington Post Graphic map - Hurricane Irma: Potential path of the
storm center as of 8 p.m. Saturday Source: NOAA  Funky Matas skateboards along
South Beach as the effects of Hurricane Irma are felt in Miami Beach, Fla.,
Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (AP Photo/David Goldman)  Senior Hurricane Specialist
Lixion Avila, conducts the 5 p.m. Hurricane Irma forecast coordinating
conference Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, at the National Hurricane Center in Miami.
At right, a video monitor displays an infrared image of Irma. (AP Photo/Andy
Newman)  Zookeeper Ryan Martinez leads an Indian white-rumped vulture into a
crate as animals are moved into a shelter at the Zoo Miami in preparation for
Hurricane Irma on Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, in Miami. (Al Diaz/Miami Herald via
AP)  Residents walk near downed power lines felled by Hurricane Irma, in
Caibarien, Cuba, Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. There were no reports of deaths or
injuries after heavy rain and winds from Irma lashed northeastern Cuba. Seawater
surged three blocks inland in Caibarien. (AP Photo/Desmond Boylan)  Thousands of
people wait in line to get into a Hurricane Irma shelter at the Germain Arena in
Estero, Fla., on Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (AP Photo/Jay Reeves)  A man walks
along the beach with heavy winds and threatening skies in Hollywood, Fla., as
Hurricane Irma approaches the state on Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (Paul
Chiasson/The Canadian Press via AP)  Storm clouds associated with the outer
bands of Hurricane Irma shroud the downtown skyline Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, in
Tampa, Fla. Several parts of the Tampa Bay area are under a mandatory evacuation
order for the approaching storm. (AP Photo/Chris O'Meara)  A car drives around a
tree downed by winds from Hurricane Irma, Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, in Golden
Beach, Fla. (AP Photo/Wilfredo Lee)  A police car patrols the beach in
anticipation for Hurricane Irma, in Hollywood, Fla., Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017.
(Paul Chiasson/The Canadian Press via AP)  A young boy plays in the waves
churned up by Hurricane Irma on Hollywood Beach, Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, in
Fort Lauderdale, Fla. (AP Photo/Wilfredo Lee)  Evacuees are moved to another
building with more bathrooms while sheltering at Florida International
University ahead of Hurricane Irma in Miami, Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (AP
Photo/David Goldman)  A man rides his bike along the beach against high winds as
Hurricane Irma approaches, in Hollywood, Fla., Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (Paul
Chiasson/The Canadian Press via AP)  Hazel Salazar walks her two small dogs past
boarded up store front windows on the beach side in Daytona Beach, Fla., on
Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, as Hurricane Irma approaches. Jacob Langston/Orlando
Sentinel via AP)  A young girl and her family seek shelter from Hurricane Irma
at the West Boynton Park and Recreation Center in Boynton, Beach, Fla., on
Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (Jim Rassol /South Florida Sun-Sentinel via AP)  People
seek shelter from Irma with their pets at the West Boynton Park and Recreation
Center in preparation for Hurricane Irma in Boynton, Beach, Fla., on Saturday,
Sept. 9, 2017. (Jim Rassol /South Florida Sun-Sentinel via AP)  Evacuees are
moved to another building with more bathrooms while sheltering at Florida
International University ahead of Hurricane Irma in Miami, Saturday, Sept. 9,
2017. (AP Photo/David Goldman)  The winds and sea are whipped up off of the
Rickenbacker Causeway in Miami as Hurricane Irma approaches on Saturday, Sept.
9, 2017. ( Mike Stocker/South Florida Sun-Sentinel via AP)  People seek shelter
from Irma with their pets at the West Boynton Park and Recreation Center in
preparation for Hurricane Irma in Boynton, Beach, Fla., on Saturday, Sept. 9,
2017. (Jim Rassol /South Florida Sun-Sentinel via AP)  I-95 is clear of traffic
near Hallandale Beach Blvd. as people prepare for Hurricane Irma on Saturday,
Sept. 9, 2017 in Hallandale, Fla. ( Mike Stocker/South Florida Sun-Sentinel via
AP)  Ramsey Abdelkader, right, helps Sherri Skala, left, and Jennifer Morales
fill sand bags to help protect their restaurant Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, in
Clearwater Beach, Fla. Business and residents were under a mandatory evacuation
order as Hurricane Irma continued to churn towards Florida. (AP Photo/Chris
O'Meara)  Anna Leanaz carries her mattress as evacuees are moved to another
building with more bathrooms while sheltering at Florida International
University ahead of Hurricane Irma in Miami, Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (AP
Photo/David Goldman)  Miroslava Roznovjakova leans onto a piece of plywood while
her husband Ray Hayyat adds some last minute pieces of wood to their store in
Daytona Beach, Fla., on Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, as Hurricane Irma approaches.
Jacob Langston/Orlando Sentinel via AP)  Hector Padron carries his mattress as
evacuees are moved to another building with more bathrooms while sheltering at
Florida International University ahead of Hurricane Irma in Miami, Saturday,
Sept. 9, 2017. (AP Photo/David Goldman)  Waves crash on the Jacksonville Beach
Fishing Pier in Jacksonville Beach, Fla., as Hurricane Irma approaches Florida
on Saturday Sept. 9, 2017. (Bob Mack/The Florida Times-Union via AP)  Annette
Davis kisses her son Darius, 3, while staying at a shelter in Miami after
evacuating from their home in Florida City, Fla., ahead of Hurricane Irma
Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (AP Photo/David Goldman)  The Interstate remains empty
as the outer bands of Hurricane Irma reached South Florida early Saturday, Sept.
9, 2017 in Miami. Gov. Rick Scott is urging anyone living in an evacuation zone
in southwest Florida to leave by noon as the threat of Hurricane Irma has
shifted west. (David Santiago/Miami Herald via AP)  Tim Grollimund looks at the
projected path of Hurricane Irma on his phone while staying in a shelter in
Miami after evacuating his home in Key Largo along the Florida Keys, Saturday,
Sept. 9, 2017. (AP Photo/David Goldman)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 435 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           September 10, 2017 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

'This is your last chance': Irma puts a bull's-eye on Tampa

BYLINE:  By TAMARA LUSH and JAY REEVES  Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 926 words


ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. - Hurricane Irma's leading edge bent palm trees and spit
rain as the storm swirled toward Florida with 120 mph wind Saturday on a
projected new track that could expose St. Petersburg - not Miami or even Tampa -
to a direct hit.

St. Petersburg, like Tampa, has not taken a head-on blow from a major hurricane
in nearly a century.

The National Hurricane Center's latest tweak to Irma's forecasted track has the
storm hugging the Florida's west coast off Fort Myers, but possibly not making
landfall there before moving back to the Gulf of Mexico. By moving the likely
track a few crucial miles west, the storm would be able to regain strength over
water before its deadliest wind hits St. Petersburg and Clearwater, rather than
the more populated Tampa.

After that, the storm is now expected to skirt the coast again a bit north of
Horseshoe Beach, then finally go inland around Fish Creek, northwest of Ocala,
with a hurricane-force wind field well over 100 miles wide.

Irma's forward motion slowed to 6 mph as the storm stuttered off the coast of
Cuba. Forecasters say it could still increase in strength, but their forecast
didn't show it.

An estimated 70,000 Floridians huddled in shelters as Irma closed in on the
Keys, where the storm's center was expected to swirl over land Sunday morning.

"This is your last chance to make a good decision," Gov. Rick Scott warned
residents in Florida's evacuation zones, which encompassed a staggering 6.4
million people, or more than 1 in 4 people in the state.

Earlier in the day, Irma executed a westward swing toward Florida's Gulf Coast
that appeared to spare the Miami metropolitan area of the catastrophic direct
hit that forecasters had been warning of for days.

Still, Miami was not out of danger. Because the storm is 350 to 400 miles wide,
forecasters said the metro area of 6 million people could still get
life-threatening hurricane wind and storm surge of 4 to 6 feet.

Irma - at one time the most powerful hurricane ever recorded in the open
Atlantic - left more than 20 people dead across the Caribbean as it steamed
toward the U.S. It was chugging toward Florida on Saturday as a Category 3, with
wind down considerably from its peak of 185 mph earlier in the week. But it was
expected to strengthen again before hitting the Sunshine State.

On Saturday night, just after 10 p.m. Eastern time, wind gusts at hurricane
strength were recorded in the Florida Keys, the U.S. National Hurricane Center
said. At the time, Irma's center of circulation was less than 100 miles
southeast of Key West.

Meteorologists predicted Irma would plow into the Tampa Bay area by Monday
morning.

Tampa has not been struck by a major hurricane since 1921, when its population
was about 10,000, National Hurricane Center spokesman Dennis Feltgen said. Now
the area has about 3 million people.

The new course threatens everything from Tampa Bay's bustling twin cities of
Tampa and St. Petersburg to Naples' mansion- and yacht-lined canals, Sun City
Center's retirement homes, and Sanibel Island's shell-filled beaches.

The course change caught many people off guard and triggered a major round of
evacuations in the Tampa area. Many businesses had yet to put plywood or
hurricane shutters on their windows, and some area residents grumbled about the
forecast.

"For five days, we were told it was going to be on the east coast, and then 24
hours before it hits, we're now told it's coming up the west coast," said Jeff
Beerbohm, 52, an entrepreneur in St. Petersburg. "As usual, the weathermen, I
don't know why they're paid."

Nearly the entire Florida coastline remained under hurricane watches and
warnings, and leery residents watched a projected track that could shift either
to spare or to savage parts of the state. Forecasters warned of a storm surge as
high as 15 feet.

"This is going to sneak up on people," said Jamie Rhome, head of the hurricane
center's storm surge unit.

With the new forecast, Pinellas County, home to St. Petersburg, ordered 260,000
people to leave, while Georgia scaled back evacuation orders for some coastal
residents. Motorists heading inland from the Tampa area were allowed to drive on
the shoulders.

More than 170,000 homes and businesses in Florida have lost power. Florida Power
and Light said on its website that more than half of those outages were in the
Miami-Dade area, where about 600,000 people have been ordered to evacuate.

The company has said it expects millions of people to lose power, with some
areas experiences prolonged outages. The utility company said it had assembled
the largest pre-storm workforce in U.S. history, with more than 16,000 people
ready to respond.

The governor activated all 7,000 members of the Florida National Guard, and
30,000 guardsmen from elsewhere were on standby.

In the Orlando area, Walt Disney World, Universal Studios and Sea World all
closed. The Miami, Fort Lauderdale, Tampa and Orlando airports shut down. The
Sunshine Skyway Bridge spanning Tampa Bay was closed.

Given its mammoth size and strength and its projected course, Irma could prove
one of the most devastating hurricanes ever to hit Florida and inflict damage on
a scale not seen here in 25 years.

Hurricane Andrew smashed into suburban Miami in 1992 with winds topping 165 mph,
damaging or blowing apart more than 125,000 homes. The damage in Florida totaled
$26 billion, and at least 40 people died.

Boat captain Ray Scarborough was 12 when Andrew hit .

"They said this one is going to be bigger than Andrew. When they told me that,"
he said, "that's all I needed to hear."

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Washington Post Graphic map - Hurricane Irma: Potential path of the
storm center as of 8 p.m. Saturday Source: NOAA  Thousands of people wait in
line to get into a Hurricane Irma shelter at the Germain Arena in Estero, Fla.,
on Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (AP Photo/Jay Reeves)  Evacuees fill Germain Arena,
which is being used as a fallout shelter, in advance of Hurricane Irma, in
Estero, Fla., Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (AP Photo/Jay Reeves)  Senior Hurricane
Specialist Lixion Avila, conducts the 5 p.m. Hurricane Irma forecast
coordinating conference Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, at the National Hurricane
Center in Miami. At right, a video monitor displays an infrared image of Irma.
(AP Photo/Andy Newman)  Zookeeper Ryan Martinez leads an Indian white-rumped
vulture into a crate as animals are moved into a shelter at the Zoo Miami in
preparation for Hurricane Irma on Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, in Miami. (Al
Diaz/Miami Herald via AP)  Residents walk near downed power lines felled by
Hurricane Irma, in Caibarien, Cuba, Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. There were no
reports of deaths or injuries after heavy rain and winds from Irma lashed
northeastern Cuba. Seawater surged three blocks inland in Caibarien. (AP
Photo/Desmond Boylan)  A man walks along the beach with heavy winds and
threatening skies in Hollywood, Fla., as Hurricane Irma approaches the state on
Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (Paul Chiasson/The Canadian Press via AP)  Storm clouds
associated with the outer bands of Hurricane Irma shroud the downtown skyline
Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, in Tampa, Fla. Several parts of the Tampa Bay area are
under a mandatory evacuation order for the approaching storm. (AP Photo/Chris
O'Meara)  A car drives around a tree downed by winds from Hurricane Irma,
Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, in Golden Beach, Fla. (AP Photo/Wilfredo Lee)  A police
car patrols the beach in anticipation for Hurricane Irma, in Hollywood, Fla.,
Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (Paul Chiasson/The Canadian Press via AP)  A young boy
plays in the waves churned up by Hurricane Irma on Hollywood Beach, Saturday,
Sept. 9, 2017, in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. (AP Photo/Wilfredo Lee)  Evacuees are
moved to another building with more bathrooms while sheltering at Florida
International University ahead of Hurricane Irma in Miami, Saturday, Sept. 9,
2017. (AP Photo/David Goldman)  A man rides his bike along the beach against
high winds as Hurricane Irma approaches, in Hollywood, Fla., Saturday, Sept. 9,
2017. (Paul Chiasson/The Canadian Press via AP)  Hazel Salazar walks her two
small dogs past boarded up store front windows on the beach side in Daytona
Beach, Fla., on Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, as Hurricane Irma approaches. Jacob
Langston/Orlando Sentinel via AP)  A young girl and her family seek shelter from
Hurricane Irma at the West Boynton Park and Recreation Center in Boynton, Beach,
Fla., on Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (Jim Rassol /South Florida Sun-Sentinel via
AP)  People seek shelter from Irma with their pets at the West Boynton Park and
Recreation Center in preparation for Hurricane Irma in Boynton, Beach, Fla., on
Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (Jim Rassol /South Florida Sun-Sentinel via AP)
Evacuees are moved to another building with more bathrooms while sheltering at
Florida International University ahead of Hurricane Irma in Miami, Saturday,
Sept. 9, 2017. (AP Photo/David Goldman)  The winds and sea are whipped up off of
the Rickenbacker Causeway in Miami as Hurricane Irma approaches on Saturday,
Sept. 9, 2017. ( Mike Stocker/South Florida Sun-Sentinel via AP)  People seek
shelter from Irma with their pets at the West Boynton Park and Recreation Center
in preparation for Hurricane Irma in Boynton, Beach, Fla., on Saturday, Sept. 9,
2017. (Jim Rassol /South Florida Sun-Sentinel via AP)  I-95 is clear of traffic
near Hallandale Beach Blvd. as people prepare for Hurricane Irma on Saturday,
Sept. 9, 2017 in Hallandale, Fla. ( Mike Stocker/South Florida Sun-Sentinel via
AP)  Ramsey Abdelkader, right, helps Sherri Skala, left, and Jennifer Morales
fill sand bags to help protect their restaurant Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, in
Clearwater Beach, Fla. Business and residents were under a mandatory evacuation
order as Hurricane Irma continued to churn towards Florida. (AP Photo/Chris
O'Meara)  Anna Leanaz carries her mattress as evacuees are moved to another
building with more bathrooms while sheltering at Florida International
University ahead of Hurricane Irma in Miami, Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (AP
Photo/David Goldman)  Miroslava Roznovjakova leans onto a piece of plywood while
her husband Ray Hayyat adds some last minute pieces of wood to their store in
Daytona Beach, Fla., on Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017, as Hurricane Irma approaches.
Jacob Langston/Orlando Sentinel via AP)  Hector Padron carries his mattress as
evacuees are moved to another building with more bathrooms while sheltering at
Florida International University ahead of Hurricane Irma in Miami, Saturday,
Sept. 9, 2017. (AP Photo/David Goldman)  Waves crash on the Jacksonville Beach
Fishing Pier in Jacksonville Beach, Fla., as Hurricane Irma approaches Florida
on Saturday Sept. 9, 2017. (Bob Mack/The Florida Times-Union via AP)  Annette
Davis kisses her son Darius, 3, while staying at a shelter in Miami after
evacuating from their home in Florida City, Fla., ahead of Hurricane Irma
Saturday, Sept. 9, 2017. (AP Photo/David Goldman)  The Interstate remains empty
as the outer bands of Hurricane Irma reached South Florida early Saturday, Sept.
9, 2017 in Miami. Gov. Rick Scott is urging anyone living in an evacuation zone
in southwest Florida to leave by noon as the threat of Hurricane Irma has
shifted west. (David Santiago/Miami Herald via AP)  Tim Grollimund looks at the
projected path of Hurricane Irma on his phone while staying in a shelter in
Miami after evacuating his home in Key Largo along the Florida Keys, Saturday,
Sept. 9, 2017. (AP Photo/David Goldman)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 436 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             October 9, 2017 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

A weakened Nate brings flooding, power outages to Gulf Coast

BYLINE:  By JEFF AMY - Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 947 words


BILOXI, Miss. - Hurricane Nate brought a burst of flooding and power outages to
the U.S. Gulf Coast before weakening rapidly Sunday, sparing the region the kind
of catastrophic damage left by a series of hurricanes that slammed the southern
U.S. and Caribbean in recent weeks.

Nate - the first hurricane to make landfall in Mississippi since Katrina in 2005
- quickly lost strength, with its wind diminishing to a tropical depression as
it pushed northward into Alabama and toward Georgia with heavy rain. It was a
Category 1 hurricane when it came ashore outside Biloxi early Sunday, its second
landfall after initially hitting southeastern Louisiana on Saturday evening.

The storm surge from the Mississippi Sound littered Biloxi's main beachfront
highway with debris and flooded a casino's lobby and parking structure
overnight.

By dawn, however, Nate's receding floodwater didn't reveal any obvious signs of
widespread damage in the city where Hurricane Katrina had leveled thousands of
beachfront homes and businesses.

No storm-related deaths or injuries were immediately reported.

Mississippi Gov. Phil Bryant praised state and local officials and coastal
residents for working together to avoid loss of life.

Lee Smithson, director of the state emergency management agency, said damage
from Nate was held down in part because of work done and lessons learned from
Katrina.

"If that same storm would have hit us 15 years ago, the damage would have been
extensive and we would have had loss of life." Smithson said of Nate. "But we
have rebuilt the coast in the aftermath of Katrina higher and stronger."

Nate knocked out power to more than 100,000 residents in Mississippi, Alabama,
Louisiana and Florida, but crews worked on repairs and it appeared many of the
outages had been restored within 24 hours.

As of Sunday evening, Alabama Power said it had electricity back to more than
64,000 customers and some 36,000 remained without power, while utilities and
cooperatives in Mississippi said it had restored power to more than 21,000
customers.

In Louisiana, there were scattered outages during the storm, while Florida Gov.
Rick Scott said 6,800 customers had lost power in his state.

Before Nate sped past Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula late Friday and entered the
Gulf of Mexico, it drenched Central America with rain that left at least 22
people dead.

But Nate didn't approach the intensity of Harvey, Irma and Maria - powerful
storms that left behind massive destruction during 2017's exceptionally busy
hurricane season.

"We are thankful because this looked like it was going to be a freight train
barreling through the city," said Vincent Creel, a spokesman for the city of
Biloxi.

The head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency said the four hurricanes
that have struck the U.S. and its territories this year had "strained"
resources, with roughly 85 percent of the agency's forces deployed.

"We're still working massive issues in Harvey, Irma, as well as the issues in
Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, and now this one," FEMA Administrator Brock
Long told ABC's "This Week."

The federal government declared emergencies in Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama
and Florida.

Nate initially made landfall Saturday evening in Louisiana, but fears that it
would overwhelm the fragile pumping system in New Orleans proved to be
unfounded. The storm passed to the east of New Orleans, and Mayor Mitch Landrieu
lifted a curfew on the city known for its all-night partying.

"Hurricane Nate had the potential to wreak havoc on Louisiana, but thankfully,
we were largely spared major damage," Gov. John Bel Edwards said in a statement.

In Alabama, Dauphin Island Mayor Jeff Collier said he woke up about 3 a.m.
Sunday to discover knee-deep water in his yard. Although some homes and cars on
the island had flooded, Collier said he hadn't heard of anyone needing rescue.

"We didn't think it would be quite that bad," he said. "It kind of snuck up on
us in the wee hours of the morning."

At landfall in Mississippi, the fast-moving storm had maximum sustained wind
near 85 mph, the U.S. National Hurricane Center in Miami said.

Nate steadily weakened after its first landfall in a sparsely populated area of
Plaquemines Parish, La.

Nate is expected to bring 3 to 6 inches of rain to the Deep South, eastern
Tennessee Valley and southern Appalachians through Monday. The Ohio Valley,
central Appalachians and Northeast could also get heavy rain before the storm
leaves Maine on Tuesday.

Biloxi city employees worked before dawn to clear Highway 90, where sand, logs
and even a large trash bin had been washed onto the four-lane, beachfront road.
Despite the debris, there was little to no visible damage to structures. A
handful of businesses had reopened before dawn, and the storm surge that washed
across the highway had receded by 6 a.m.

Mississippi DOT crews had to remove more than 1,000 pumpkins blown onto Highway
90 in Pass Christian, west of Gulfport.

Mississippi Emergency Management Agency spokesman Greg Flynn said about 1,100
people spent the night in shelters.

"Thankfully, right now we have no major damage reports," he said.

Hancock County Emergency Management Agency Director Brian Adam said Nate's storm
surge flooded low-lying roads, but he hadn't heard any reports of flooded homes.

"We turned out fairly good," he said as he prepared to survey neighborhoods.

In Alabama, the storm flooded homes and cars on the coast and inundated at least
one major road in downtown Mobile.

Officials rescued five people from two sailboats in choppy water before the
storm - two people from a sailboat in Lake Pontchartrain and three who were in
the water after a boat struck rocks in the Mississippi Sound.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  A gazebo is blown over the Mississippi Gulf Coast welcome sign near
the intersection of Hewes Avenue and U.S. 90 in Gulfport, Miss., Sunday, Oct. 8,
2017, after Hurricane Nate made landfall on the Gulf Coast. (Justin Sellers/The
Clarion-Ledger via AP)  Lawrence Carriere checks on the home of his neighbor
after a tree fell on it and crashed through the roof, in Biloxi, Miss., in the
aftermath of Hurricane Nate, Sunday, Oct. 8, 2017. (AP Photo/Gerald Herbert)
Pumpkins are strewn about Highway 90 along the Gulf of Mexico in Pass Christian,
Miss., in the aftermath of Hurricane Nate, Sunday, Oct. 8, 2017. (AP
Photo/Gerald Herbert)  Biloxi public works employees clear debris from U.S. 90
in Biloxi Sunday, Oct. 8, 2017, after Hurricane Nate made landfall on the Gulf
Coast. (Justin Sellers/The Clarion-Ledger via AP)  Crimson Peters, 7, left,
Tracy Neilsen, 13, center, and Macee Nelson, 15, ride in an inner tube down a
flooded street after Hurricane Nate, Sunday, Oct. 8, 2017, in Coden, Ala. (AP
Photo/Brynn Anderson)  A boat is beached in a drainage canal in front of the Ken
Combs pier near Courthouse Road in Gulfport, Miss., Sunday, Oct. 8, 2017, after
Hurricane Nate made landfall on the Gulf Coast.  A sail boat is beached near
Margaritaville and the Golden Nugget in Biloxi, Miss., Sunday, Oct. 8, 2017,
after Hurricane Nate made landfall on the Gulf Coast. (Justin Sellers/The
Clarion-Ledger via AP)  Waves caused by Hurricane Nate pound the Okaloosa Island
Fishing Pier on Sunday, Oct. 8, 2017, in Fort Walton Beach, Fla. (Nick
Tomecek/Northwest Florida Daily News via AP)  A large truck drives through a
flooded Water St. in downtown Mobile, Ala., during Hurricane Nate, Sunday, Oct.
8, 2017, in Mobile, Ala. Hurricane Nate came ashore along Mississippi's coast
outside Biloxi early Sunday, the first hurricane to make landfall in the state
since Hurricane Katrina in 2005. (AP Photo/Brynn Anderson)  Rain drops fall on a
flooded street in downtown Mobile, Ala., during Hurricane Nate, Sunday, Oct. 7,
2017. Hurricane Nate came ashore along Mississippi's coast outside Biloxi early
Sunday, the first hurricane to make landfall in the state since Hurricane
Katrina in 2005. (AP Photo/Brynn Anderson)  David Amerson, left, and T.J.
Krueger, right, wade through a flooded street during Hurricane Nate, Sunday,
Oct. 8, 2017, in Mobile, Ala. Hurricane Nate came ashore along Mississippi's
coast outside Biloxi early Sunday, the first hurricane to make landfall in the
state since Hurricane Katrina in 2005. (AP Photo/Brynn Anderson)  An abandoned
boat takes on water on the Mississippi Gulf Coast, Saturday, Oct. 7, 2017, near
Biloxi, Miss., as the outer bands of Hurricane Nate begin to batter the shore.
(Justin Vicory/The Clarion-Ledger via AP)  Captain Ashley Johnson, left, and
Wayne Hall, right, work to secure the boat "Jeraline" in preparation for
Hurricane Nate, expected to make landfall on the Gulf Coast, Saturday, Oct. 7,
2017, in Bayou La Batre, Ala. Storm surge threatened low-lying communities in
southeast Louisiana, eastward to the Alabama fishing village of Bayou La Batre.
(AP Photo/Brynn Anderson)  Many docks and boat ramps like this one on Cinco
Bayou are submerged in water due to flooding from Hurricane Nate on Sunday, Oct.
8, 2017, in Fort Walton Beach, Fla. (Nick Tomecek/Northwest Florida Daily News
via AP)  News crews film a sailboat that washed ashore along the Gulf of Mexico
in Biloxi, Miss., in the aftermath of Hurricane Nate, Sunday, Oct. 8, 2017. (AP
Photo/Gerald Herbert)  A crew from Gulf Power works to repair a damaged line
from Hurricane Nate on Sunday Oct. 8, 2017, on Okaloosa Island in Fort Walton
Beach, Fla. (Nick Tomecek/Northwest Florida Daily News via AP)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 437 of 881 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          November 23, 2016 Wednesday

Hurricane risk to northeast USA coast increasing, research warns

LENGTH: 922  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: American Association for the Advancement of Science has issued the
following news release:



 The Northeastern coast of the USA could be struck by more frequent and more
powerful hurricanes in the future due to shifting weather patterns, according to
new research.





 Hurricanes have gradually moved northwards from the western Caribbean towards
northern North America over the past few hundred years, the study led by Durham
University, UK, found.



 The researchers suggest that this change in hurricane track was caused by the
expansion of atmospheric circulation belts driven by increasing carbon dioxide
emissions.



 New York and other major cities along the Northeast coast of the USA could come
under increased threat from these severe storms and need to be better prepared
for their potential impact, the researchers said.



 The findings are published in the journal Scientific Reports. Researchers
reconstructed hurricane rainfall for the western Caribbean dating back 450 years
by analysing the chemical composition of a stalagmite collected from a cave in
southern Belize, Central America.



 They found that the average number of hurricanes at the Belize site decreased
over time. When the hurricane history of Belize was compared with documentary
hurricane records from places such as Bermuda and Florida, this information
showed that Atlantic (Cape Verde) hurricanes were moving to the north rather
than decreasing in total numbers.



 Although natural warming over the centuries has had some impact on shifting
hurricane tracks, the researchers found a marked decrease in hurricane activity
in the western Caribbean coinciding with the late 19th Century industrial boom
associated with increasing carbon dioxide and sulphate aerosol emissions to the
atmosphere.



 The researchers said that initial regional cooling of the Northern Hemisphere
due to increased industrial aerosol emissions should have pushed the hurricane
tracks southward since Industrialisation.



 But they added that rising amounts of atmospheric carbon dioxide had overridden
this effect by expanding the Hadley cell -- a pattern of circulating air in the
Earth's tropical belt -- pushing hurricane tracks further north, away from the
western Caribbean towards the Northeastern USA.



 This suggests that from the late 19th Century, manmade emissions have become
the main driver behind shifting hurricane tracks by altering the position of
global weather systems, the researchers said.



 If future trends in carbon dioxide and industrial aerosol emissions continue as
expected, hurricanes could shift even further northward, exacerbating the risk
to the Northeast coast of the USA, they added.



 In 2012, Hurricane Sandy struck the Caribbean and much of the eastern seaboard
of the United States, stretching as far north as Canada. At least 233 people
died as a result of the storm.



 A large number of US states were affected by Hurricane Sandy with New York and
New Jersey suffering the greatest impacts. The estimated cost of the damage
caused by Hurricane Sandy in the USA is said to have run into tens of billions
of dollars.



 The study's lead author, Dr Lisa Baldini, in the Department of Geography,
Durham University, said: "Our research shows that the hurricane risk to the
Northeastern coast of the United States is increasing as hurricanes track
further north.



 "Since the 19th Century this shift was largely driven by man-made emissions and
if these emissions continue as expected this will result in more frequent and
powerful storms affecting the financial and population centres of the
Northeastern United States.



 "Given the devastation caused by Hurricane Sandy it is important that plans are
put in place to protect against the effects of similarly destructive storms
which could potentially occur more often in the future."



 Co-author Dr Amy Frappier, of the Geosciences Department, Skidmore College,
USA, said the research showed Atlantic hurricanes were responding to warming. Dr
Frappier said: "Aerosols from volcanoes and industrialisation in the Northern
Hemisphere have a cooling effect, which tend to shift moisture belts and
hurricane tracks southward, closer to the equator.



 "On the other hand, warming from more carbon dioxide in the air tends to expand
the Earth's tropical belt, pushing hurricane tracks further north away from the
western Caribbean and towards the Northeastern US.



 "This suggests that the tracks of Atlantic hurricanes have responded more to
warming than to regional cooling." The researchers added that the northward
shift in hurricane tracks may not reduce the risk of tropical cyclones in the
Caribbean.



 Co-author Dr James Baldini, in Durham University's Department of Earth
Sciences, said: "Although hurricane tracks have gradually moved northwards away
from the western Caribbean, rising sea surface temperatures could promote the
development of cyclonic storms within the western Caribbean.



 "Consequently tropical cyclone activity across the western Caribbean may remain
essentially stable over the current century, which has important implications
for water availability in this region.



 "However, increased sea surface temperatures also provide extra energy,
potentially fuelling larger storms. We therefore need to prepare for the effects
of more frequent landfalls of larger storms along the Northeast coast of the
United States and stronger storms impacting the Caribbean."





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 438 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     April 9, 1988, Saturday, City Edition

Forecaster sees more hurricanes on '88 horizon

BYLINE: DAVID K. ROGERS

SECTION: METRO AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA



ATLANTA - The 1988 hurricane season awaits with more hurricanes that    are more
powerful than we've faced in recent years, the nation's only    real hurricane
forecaster said Friday.

     And at some point, he added, the relative dearth of hurricanes over    the
last 20 years will end, placing in harm's way the millions of    Americans who
have resettled to the nation's coastal areas in the last    two decades.

     "With the large increases of coastal populations and building
construction which has taken place since 1970 and will likely occur in    the
future, we may well be in store for many more future hurricane    problems than
we have had in the recent past," he said.

     That assessment came Friday from hurricane researcher William M.    Gray in
his report to the closing session of the annual National    Hurricane
Conference.

     Now in his fourth year of publicly forecasting hurricane trends and
totals, Gray, an atmospheric researcher at Colorado State University,    has
continued to gain credibility with his predictions. His    well-attended lecture
Friday and the near-frenzy to get copies of his    report afterward attested to
his growing following.

     Although he will not predict the total number of Atlantic    hurricanes for
this year until late May - just before the official    start of the 1988
hurricane season - Gray did share on Friday what his    latest information
portends.

     For 1988, "We should expect a return to more active and intense
hurricane activity," he told his audience.

     By already having two of the four measurements he needs to make his
predictions, Gray said he cannow see a clear trend emerging that more
hurricanes than average, perhaps six, could spin to life this season.

     For the past 40 years, six hurricanes per year have been about    average,
but the trend has been steadily downward for the past 20    years. And since
1980 - with the exception of 1985 - the decline has    continued. In 1987, just
three hurricanes came to life.

     Gray said that his preliminary assessment came largely from some    very
special wind measurements.

     Prevailing easterly winds located about 15 miles above the city of
Balboa in Panama are weak this year, he said. Those high-altitude winds    and
another set of prevailing winds off the African coast, about seven    and a half
miles above the Earth's surface, act to shear off the tops    of smaller storm
systems that would normally grow into hurricanes.

     But when those two wind systems weaken, as now appears likely, the
potential for hurricane formation grows.

     In addition to the wind systems, Gray predicted that the    increasingly
well-known El Nino phenomenon, a small but significant    warming of sea water
in the eastern Pacific Ocean along the equator,    will also have relatively
little effect this year. A weak El Nino    decreases the upper winds over the
Caribbean, winds that would normally    inhibit hurricane formation.

     A fourth clue, the relative atmospheric pressure over the southern
Caribbean Sea, must still be measured, he said. The amount of sea-level
pressure can serve to steer tropical storms into areas that make them    ripe
for growth into hurricanes.

     The relative strength of those four factors have worked together to
suppress hurricanes for almost 20 years, he said.

     "The coastal populations of the U.S. and the Caribbean Basin have    been
fortunate that intense hurricane activity has been so low since    1970," Gray
wrote in the paper he submitted Friday.

     "It is impossible to tell how long this downturn of intense    hurricane
activity and destruction potential will continue. It is to be    expected that a
return to more intense hurricane activity will occur    when the atmosphere's
global winds systems experience a change . . ."



 A PUBLIC APOLOGY

   A Pinellas County official who said Thursday that police were    "assaulted
with bottles and rocks thrown by Junior Leaguers" after    the departure of
Hurricane Elena in 1985 publicly apologized for that    remark Friday. In a
letter to the St. Petersburg Times and presidents    of two Pinellas Junior
League chapters, Pinellas Director of Justice    Planning Vance E. Arnett said
he was sorry for the remark he made    during a presentation at the National
Hurricane Conference in Atlanta.    "There was no involvement of any Junior
League member in any    incident," he said.



LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE GRAPH, David Williams; shows the number of hurricanes
per year from 1969 to 1987

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 439 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     July 30, 1988, Saturday, City Edition

Slow start may mean mild hurricane season

BYLINE: DAVID K. ROGERS

SECTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 488 words



Not one named tropical storm has formed in the first two months of    the
six-month hurricane season, an unusually slow beginning.

     National Hurricane Center officials in Miami said Friday that the    lack
of storms and hurricanes could portend a mild season.

     Nonetheless, hurricane expert William Gray is standing pat on his
prediction that more hurricanes than normal - seven - will form this    season.


     His calculations "still indicate a relatively active season,"    Gray said
Friday from Fort Collins, Colo., as he completed the    mid-season update of his
annual forecast. "The trends seem to be    holding to what they were in the June
forecast."

     Gray's updated prediction says seven hurricanes will form from 11    named
tropical storms this year, totals slightly higher than average    for the past
40 years but significantly higher than the storm average    for the 1980s.

     Having said that, however, Gray also agreed with hurricane center
officials who said the slow start may indicate a mild hurricane season,    which
runs from June 1 to Nov. 30.

     Hurricane center specialist Bob Case said the first named tropical    storm
usually appears by July 1.

     Active seasons still are possible if a named storm appears by late    July,
Case said, "but once you're into the middle of August, by the    10th or so, big
seasons are very, very hard to find."

     But it does happen.

     "In 1949, the first (tropical) storm didn't occur until August 21,    and
we had 13 storms and hurricanes that season. In 1950, the first    storm was
August 11 and we also had 13 storms and hurricanes."

     Gray, professor of atmospheric sciences at Colorado State    University in
Fort Collins, has been offering his hurricane forecasts    each June since since
1984. By Aug. 1, the beginning of the season's    most active phase, Gray
updates his predictions.

     Gray says hurricanes this season also should be more destructive    than
most years. The potential for hurricane devastation "in 1988    should be higher
than in any previous season since 1981." Gray, whose    predictions generally
have been accurate, relies on ocean temperatures,    high-altitude wind speeds,
wind direction and barometric pressures    across the Caribbean region.

     But Gray and Case both acknowledge that the fickle nature of    hurricanes
make them tough to predict, then track.

     "Remember," Case said, "we're talking about average hurricane    seasons
and average hurricanes. An average is nothing more than the    combination of
annual extremes that are added together over a period of    time, then divided
to come up with a number that has probably never    occurred."



LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; William Gray

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 440 of 881 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     August 1, 1987, Saturday, City Edition

Hurricane forecast is revised

BYLINE: WILLIAM FOX

SECTION: METRO AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 582 words



So what happened to hurricane season? Here it is Aug. 1, two months    into the
season, and not a storm has formed.

     That's not too unusual, experts say. The great majority of    hurricanes
form between mid-August and mid-October, and virtually all    of the most
dangerous storms occur during that period.

     Nevertheless, a leading hurricane researcher has predicted that    this
will be a below-average year, with seven tropical storms forming    and four
growing into hurricanes. A tropical storm has winds of at    least 39 mph and
becomes a hurricane when winds reach 74 mph. An    average year would see 10
named storms, with six growing into    hurricanes.

      William M. Gray of Colorado State University issued his revised
hurricane forecast Friday.

     He said the season is likely to be less active than he thought when    he
issued his initial forecast June 1, predicting eight tropical storms    and five
hurricanes.

     Since Gray put out his first forecast in 1984, he has been close to    the
mark each year. Last year's forecast was off by one: Gray predicted    seven
named storms, with four becoming hurricanes; six named storms    developed, four
of them hurricanes.

     Gray said he reduced this year's forecast because an El Nino is
lingering longer than expected. An El Nino, a warming of the sea    surface in
the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean, helps reduce hurricane    activity by
causing winds at 40,000 feet to blow strongly from the west    over the
Caribbean. These winds shear off the tops of tropical    disturbances before
they can become full-fledged tropical storms or    hurricanes.

     The lack of hurricanes so far this year did not influence Gray's
forecast. Tropical conditions sometimes can change quickly, as 1950    showed.
All was quiet that year until Aug. 11, when the first hurricane    spun to life
in the Atlantic. By the end of October, 10 more hurricanes    and two tropical
storms had formed, making 1950 one of the most active    years on record.

     With hundreds of miles of coastline, much of it densely populated,
Florida is especially vulnerable to hurricanes.

     "Florida has had a total of 53 hurricanes since 1899," said Bob    Case, a
forecaster at the National Hurricane Center in Miami. "The    next closest state
is Texas with 34. North Carolina is a distant third    with 21."

     The last hurricane to strike the Tampa Bay area was in 1921,    although
Hurricane Elena threatened in 1985. Elena, which caused    $ 100-million damage
in Pinellas County alone, never got closer than 80    miles away from the
Suncoast.

     "In the last 20 years, Florida is literally in a drought compared    to
previous activity," Case said. The few hurricanes that have struck    have been
weak, he added. The last major hurricane - one with winds 110    mph or higher -
to hit southern Florida was Betsy in 1965. From 1900    through 1965, 17 major
hurricanes struck, an average of one every 3.9    years, Case said.

 "A major hurricane coming into Tampa Bay is capable of crippling the    area
and, without evacuation from the beaches, could literally cause    thousands of
people's deaths," he warned. "Elena was just a tease in    that respect."



LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: COLOR GRAPH, TERRY MORSE; graph showing number of hurricanes in the
Atlantic, Gulf and Caribbean that began in each month from 1886 through 1986

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 441 of 881 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                           September 10, 2017 Sunday

The Latest: Forecasters say Irma now aimed at Keys, Tampa

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: NATION_; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 1095 words


The Latest on Hurricane Irma (all times local): 8:45 a.m. The National Hurricane
Center says the eye of powerful Hurricane Irma is expected to hit southwest
Florida and Tampa sometime Sunday, but the entire state will feel the storm's
effects. Hurricane Center spokesman and meteorologist Dennis Feltgen said
Saturday that while Miami won't get the core of Irma it will still get
life-threatening hurricane conditions. The Category 4 storm pounded Cuba early
Saturday with maximum sustained winds of 130 mph (215 kph). It was expected to
strengthen before hitting Florida. ------ 8 a.m. Hurricane Irma's winds have
slowed slightly while it rakes Cuba, but the massive storm is expected to
strengthen again as it approaches Florida. The U.S. National Hurricane Center in
Miami said Saturday morning that Irma remained a Category 4 storm with maximum
sustained winds of 130 mph (215 kph). Forecasters expect the storm to pick
strength back up as it moves away from Cuba.

The storm's center was about 10 miles (15 kilometers) northwest of Caibarien,
Cuba. That's also about 225 miles (365 kilometers) south of Miami.
Meteorologists say damaging winds from Irma's outer bands were already arriving
in South Florida. The storm was expected to reach the Florida Keys on Sunday
morning before moving up the state's Gulf Coast. ---- 7:45 a.m. EDT
Meteorologists say damaging winds are blowing into South Florida as Hurricane
Irma approaches. The National Weather Service said Saturday morning that
damaging winds were moving into areas including Key Biscayne, Coral Gables and
South Miami. Gusts of up to 56 mph (90 kph) were reported on Virginia Key off
Miami as the storm's outer bands arrived. The center of the storm was about 245
miles (395 kilometers) southeast of Miami early Saturday as it raked the
northern coast of Cuba. The latest forecast track predicts the center of the
storm will move along Florida's Gulf Coast through Monday. ------ 6:25 a.m.
France's public insurance agency estimates that Hurricane Irma inflicted 1.2
billion euros ($1.44 billion) in damage on infrastructure in the French overseas
islands of Saint Martin and Saint Barthelemy. In a statement Saturday, the
Caisse Central de Reassurance, France's public-sector reinsurer that provides
coverage for natural disasters, said that amount covers damage to houses,
vehicles and businesses. It added that Hurricane Irma is "one of the biggest
natural catastrophes to have occurred in France in 35 years." The agency said
affected residents have 10 days to make a claim starting from Saturday, when the
status of a natural disaster was officially declared ------ 6:10 a.m. France's
Director of Public Safety has held a press conference in Paris on the recovery
efforts in the French overseas island territories of Saint Martin and Saint
Barthelemy that are reeling from Hurricane Irma. Jacques Witkowski said Saturday
that "there are 1,100 people, both civilian and military, deployed on the
islands" to help with recovery. But he said they were also tasked with
evacuation of residents ahead of another hurricane, Jose, which is expected to
violently pummel islands in the Caribbean later on Saturday. Witkowski said the
eye of Hurricane Jose will pass close to the islands of Saint Martin and Saint
Barthelemy. ------ 5:20 a.m. The National Hurricane Center says Irma has
weakened slightly to a Category 4 hurricane, as it moves over the Camaguey
Archipelago of Cuba. Irma had briefly regained Category 5 strength late Friday,
but now has maximum sustained winds of 155 mph (249 kph). The hurricane is about
245 miles (394 kilometers) from Miami and moving about 12 mph (19.3 kph) toward
the west-northwest. In the Atlantic, Hurricane Jose is a Category 4 hurricane,
about 190 miles (306 kilometers) east-southeast of The Northern Leeward Islands,
moving toward the islands at 13 mph (20.92 kph) with winds reaching 150 mph. In
the Gulf of Mexico, Hurricane Katia made landfall late Friday north of
Tecolutla, Mexico and weakened to a tropical storm. By early Saturday morning it
was 135 miles (217 kilometers) south of Tampico, Mexico, moving sluggishly at
only 2 mph (3.2 kph) near the Sierra Madre Mountains with maximum winds of 40
mph (64.4 kph). It was expected to weaken further throughout the day. ------
3:20 a.m. Dutch marines have dropped flyers from a helicopter warning
beleaguered inhabitants on the devastated nation of St. Maarten to head to
shelters as Hurricane Jose barrels through the Caribbean. Jose, a Category 4
storm with 150 mph winds, was forecast to pass close to St. Maarten over the
weekend, delivering a second damaging blow to the former Dutch colony that
suffered catastrophic damage when Category 5 Hurricane Irma slammed into it on
Wednesday. Peter Jan de Vin, a Dutch military commander on the island of Curacao
who is helping coordinate relief efforts on St. Maarten, tweeted a picture
Saturday morning of a marine dropping flyers out of a helicopter flying low over
one of St. Maarten's shattered seafront neighborhoods. ------ 2:20 a.m. The
National Hurricane Center says the eye of Irma is moving over the Camaguey
Archipelago of Cuba as a Category 5 hurricane. The center says Irma made
landfall there late Friday and has maximum sustained winds of 160 mph (257 kph).
The hurricane is about 275 miles (443 kilometers) from Miami and moving about 12
mph (19.3 kph) toward the west. In the Gulf of Mexico, Hurricane Katia made
landfall late Friday north of Tecolutla, Mexico and weakened to a tropical
storm, with winds reaching 45 mph (72.4 kph). In the Atlantic, Hurricane Jose is
a Category 4 hurricane, about 240 miles (386 kilometers)east-southeast of the
Northern Leeward Islands, moving roughly westward at 14 mph (23 kph)with winds
reaching 150 mph. ------ 12:35 a.m. A newly strengthened Irma is taking aim at
south Florida with 160 mph (257 kph) winds after battering Cuba and leaving more
than 20 dead across the Caribbean, as another hurricane follows close behind.
Irma regained Category 5 status late Friday. Thousands of people in the
Caribbean fought desperately to find shelter or escape their storm-blasted
islands, and more than 6 million people in Florida and Georgia were warned to
leave their homes. Many residents and tourists were left reeling after the storm
ravaged some of the world's most exclusive tropical playgrounds, known for their
turquoise waters and lush green vegetation. Among them: St. Martin, St. Barts,
St. Thomas, Barbuda and Anguilla. Irma threatened to push its way northward from
one end of Florida to the other beginning Sunday morning.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Eds: APNewsNow. Will be updated. With AP Photos. Eds: Adds new photo. AP
Video. With AP Photos.

GRAPHIC: A lone pedestrian walks through the usual bustling South Beach ahead of
Hurricane Irma in Miami Beach, Fla., Friday, Sept. 8, 2017. Florida has asked
5.6 million people to evacuate ahead of Hurricane Irma, or more than one quarter
of the state's population, according to state emergency officials. (AP
Photo/David Goldman)Kathleen Paca, 56, spray paints "We're Open Irma" on plywood
window protections at the infamous South Beach dive bar Mac's Club Deuce on
Sept. 7, 2017. The word "Irma" covered "Wilma," the 2005 hurricane when the
plywood last was used. Paca and other regulars at the Deuce, as it's known to
locals, had no qualms about staying home as Irma approached, even with the storm
projected to be one of the strongest to ever make landfall in Florida. "Where am
I going to go?" Paca said. "It's not going to be that bad. I'm on the second
floor and have impact windows. I've thrown coconuts at my windows and they don't
break." (AP Photo/Jason Dearen)This photo provided by Caribbean Buzz shows the
destruction left in the wake of Hurricane Irma Friday, Sept. 8, 2017, in the
U.S. Virgin Islands The death toll from Hurricane Irma has risen to 22 as the
storm continues its destructive path through the Caribbean. The dead include 11
on St. Martin and St. Barts, four in the U.S. Virgin Islands and four in the
British Virgin Islands. There was also one each in Barbuda, Anguilla, and
Barbados. The toll is expected to rise as rescuers reach some of the hardest-hit
areas. (Caribbean Buzz via AP)This photo provided by Caribbean Buzz shows boats
clustered together after Hurricane Irma Friday, Sept. 8, 2017. The death toll
from Hurricane Irma has risen to 22 as the storm continues its destructive path
through the Caribbean. The dead include 11 on St. Martin and St. Barts, four in
the U.S. Virgin Islands and four in the British Virgin Islands. There was also
one each in Barbuda, Anguilla, and Barbados. The toll is expected to rise as
rescuers reach some of the hardest-hit areas. (Caribbean Buzz via AP)This photo
provided by Caribbean Buzz shows the destruction left in the wake of Hurricane
Irma Friday, Sept. 8, 2017, in the U.S. Virgin Islands The death toll from
Hurricane Irma has risen to 22 as the storm continues its destructive path
through the Caribbean. The dead include 11 on St. Martin and St. Barts, four in
the U.S. Virgin Islands and four in the British Virgin Islands. There was also
one each in Barbuda, Anguilla, and Barbados. The toll is expected to rise as
rescuers reach some of the hardest-hit areas. (Caribbean Buzz via AP)FILE - In
this Tuesday, Aug. 28, 2012 file photo, waves from the Santa Rosa Sound crash
over the Navarre Beach causeway in Navarre, Fla., as Isaac approaches the Gulf
Coast. The National Hurricane Center warns that the worst damage from 2017's
Hurricane Irma could be from storm surge that could top 12 feet high in some
areas of the Florida coast. (Nick Tomecek/Northwest Florida Daily News via
AP)This photo provided by Caribbean Buzz shows boats clustered together after
Hurricane Irma Friday, Sept. 8, 2017. The death toll from Hurricane Irma has
risen to 22 as the storm continues its destructive path through the Caribbean.
The dead include 11 on St. Martin and St. Barts, four in the U.S. Virgin Islands
and four in the British Virgin Islands. There was also one each in Barbuda,
Anguilla, and Barbados. The toll is expected to rise as rescuers reach some of
the hardest-hit areas. (Caribbean Buzz via AP)FILE - In this Friday, Oct. 7,
2016 file photo, Brian Johns walks through waters from a storm surge as debris
litters the ground while he tries to video the effects of Hurricane Matthew in
Daytona Beach, Fla. The National Hurricane Center warns that the worst damage
from 2017's Hurricane Irma could be from storm surge that could top 12 feet high
in some areas of the Florida coast. (AP Photo/Eric Gay)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 Paddock Publications, Inc.
