
                           FOCUS - 1 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            January 5, 2016 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Editorial: A river city perpetually surprised by floods should wise up

BYLINE:  By the Editorial Board

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 857 words


Now that the water has receded and the highways have reopened; now that cleanup
is well underway and 24 funerals have been planned across Missouri and Illinois;
now that a federal disaster has been declared and the loans can be processed,
what have we learned from the Great Holiday Week Flood of 2015?

Probably nothing. At least nothing that we didn't know before and chose to do
almost nothing about.

In a city at the confluence of the nation's two greatest rivers, floods are a
fact of life. Like drought in Southern California, tornadoes in Kansas, snow in
Buffalo. Public policy can mitigate the effects of severe weather, but flood
control has political implications.

Individuals, if they can afford it, move out of the reach of rivers.
Communities, too, can leave the flood plains empty so the rivers can stretch.
But that means homes and businesses don't get built. Taxes don't get paid,
people aren't put to work, powerful people don't get their way.

If past is prologue, that's not going to happen. Over the past few days, TV
showed a lot of pictures of Gov. Jay Nixon and Sen. Roy Blunt at flood sites,
Expressing Concern. Four years ago, after 2011's Great Flood along the Missouri
and Mississippi, both men opposed the Corps of Engineers' decision to blow a
hole in the Birds Point Levee in southeast Missouri to save the city of Cairo,
Ill., from disaster. Their concern was for a handful of Missouri farmers, not
the people of Cairo.

There's very little to be gained politically from flood mitigation, and a great
deal to be lost. There's no money in flood control, which depends entirely on
action by the United States Congress, where money speaks loudest.

The only time there's consensus for it is when the waters are rising. By the
time meetings get held and decisions get made, the waters have receded. The
Great Flood of 2011 was followed by the Great Drought of 2012. Since then more
flood plain development has been approved.

Besides, like generals who always prepare for the last war, we're always
worrying about the last flood and every flood is different. In some places, the
Holiday Week flood exceeded high-water marks set by the Great Flood of 1993. But
that was a slow-motion catastrophe that unfolded over weeks as rain in the upper
basins of the river made its way downstream.

The 2011 flood was a disaster on the Missouri in the western part of the state,
but by the time the crest got to St. Louis, the levees raised after 1993 were
entirely adequate. They weren't overtopped. They weren't undermined by boils.

Will they be adequate next time? It depends what the next flood looks like.
Pictures and video make every flood look like any other, but that's an illusion.

The Holiday Week flood looked a lot like the winter floods of December 1982 that
sent the Meramec River out of its banks and submerged Valley Park. It was the
last straw for Valley Park, which used to flood in heavy dews. After 1982, the
levee there was raised to 44 feet. Water trickled over the top at 44.1 last
Thursday, but except for the western part of town, the levees were enough. This
time.

Of course that meant more water everywhere downstream, from Interstate 44 and
Missouri Highway 141 to Arnold. The first two laws of ecology propounded by the
late Barry Commoner of Washington University were that everything is connected
to everything else, and everything has to go somewhere.

The Holiday Week Flood was a freak, a localized wintertime deluge that - absent
abnormal weather conditions in other parts of the Northern Hemisphere - could
not have happened. No way that much moisture could be contained in normally cold
winter air.

It's no consolation along the Meramec, nor in Texas where the same weird winter
storm spawned killer tornadoes, but we weren't alone with our bizarre year-end
weather. Meteorologists are having a field day explaining how the "polar vortex"
was disturbed by a "bomb cyclone" of warmer air transferred ("advected")
northward. Last Wednesday, it was warmer at the North Pole (33 degrees) than it
was in Chicago.

And then there's El Niño, the cyclical weather pattern disturbing ocean currents
in the Pacific, causing floods in South America that make ours look puny.
Meanwhile, Great Britain is being lashed by near-record rain and snowfall, which
may have to do with something called the "Cool Blob." That melting polar ice is
creating colder-than-usual subsurface temperatures in the North Atlantic.

As systems react to these changes, it suggests to some climate forecasters that
we'll see colder-than-normal temperatures in parts of the United States later
this winter. Others aren't so sure: Climate is weather observed over long
periods of time, and at any one time and one place, odd things happen.

But wild swings and more frequent extremes are happening as the climate changes.
Smart policymakers would read this to mean not only more frequent floods, but
more severe weather and deeper droughts. They would not, for example, approve
building new homes and shopping centers in 500-year flood plains because nobody
knows what that means anymore.

This would be a smart way to go. Which would be something different.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:    EDITORIAL: OUR UNSURPRISING PART OF GLOBAL WEATHER WEIRDNESS: FLOODS

GRAPHIC:  A view oft the flood waters from the Meramec River that cover I-44
near Highway 141 on Thursday, Dec. 31, 2015. The water level is starting to drop
from the record high level. This view is from the highway looking west towards
Highway 141. Photo by J.B. Forbes, jforbes@post-dispatch.com

DOCUMENT-TYPE: EDITORIAL

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                           FOCUS - 2 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                             June 13, 2006 Tuesday

Floods greatest risk to homes, group asserts

BYLINE: Dayton Daily News

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 623 words


What's the most common disaster to hit a home? Fire, right? Wrong.

In the course of a 30-year mortgage, a home has a four times greater risk of
flooding than burning, according to the Ohio Committee for Severe Weather
Awareness, a statewide group of government agencies and emergency aid
organizations.

Dayton remembers the great flood of 1913. But even smaller floods wreak havoc.
Flooding along the Ohio River killed 20 people in March 1997, according to the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources.

But guess what? Homeowner's and renter's insurance generally doesn't cover flood
losses. The often catastrophic nature of flooding has kept most insurers from
writing flood coverage, according to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Congress created the National Flood Insurance Program to make protection
available. FEMA manages it.

But many vulnerable structures aren't protected, according to FEMA. It says
approximately 280,000 structures are in Ohio's mapped floodplain areas with a
value of $11 billion, but only about 10 percent are protected by flood
insurance.

Any home within a mapped floodplain that is under a federally backed mortgage is
required to have floodplain insurance, said Johnathon Sorg, an ODNR floodplains
specialist.

It's a fact some homeowners may be learning the hard way as FEMA updates
floodplain maps across the United States, Sorg said last week.

If a change in the update puts a home within the floodplain area, a homeowner
may have to add flood insurance coverage. Likewise, a change that puts a home
outside the floodplain zone may allow the owner to drop the coverage.

If either happens, "The lender will contact them," Sorg said.

On the net:

National Flood Insurance Program: floodsmart.gov

Ohio Committee for Severe Weather Awareness: ocswa.ohio.gov.

Flood insurance fact and fiction

Fiction: Flood damage is covered by my homeowner's insurance. Fact: Flood damage
is normally not covered under a homeowner's policy. The owner must obtain
coverage under a separate flood insurance policy. Fiction: Flood insurance is
unavailable. Fact: Flood insurance is available in most Ohio communities. More
than 700 Ohio communities participate in the National Flood Insurance Program.

Fiction: You must live in a floodplain to buy flood insurance.

Fact: Any building in a community that participates in the NFIP is eligible
whether or not the building is in a floodplain.

Fiction: Flood insurance is expensive.

Fact: The average cost of a flood insurance policy in Ohio is $483 per year.

Fiction: My insurance agent can't sell flood insurance.

Fact: Any licensed property indemnity agent or broker can sell the standard
flood insurance policy.

Source: Ohio Department of Natural Resources, http://
www.dnr.state.oh.us/water/pubs/ fs_div/fctsht13.htm

During a flood watch

Listen to a radio or TV for the latest storm information.

Fill bathtub, sinks and jugs with clean water in case water becomes
contaminated.

Move valuable household possessions to upper floors or to safer grounds if time
permits.

If you are instructed by local authorities, turn off all utilities at the main
power switch and close the main gas valve.

Be prepared to evacuate.

Source: Ohio Committee for Severe Weather Awareness, www.ocswa.ohio.gov

During a flood warning

If indoors, turn on a battery-powered radio or NOAA Weather Radio to get the
latest emergency information. If your area is advised to evacuate, do so
immediately.

If outdoors, climb to high ground and stay there. Avoid walking through any
floodwaters.

If you are driving and have come to a flooded area, turn around and go the other
way. Many deaths have resulted from attempts to move stalled vehicles from
flooded roadways.

Source: Ohio Committee for Severe Weather Awareness, www.ocswa.ohio.gov

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                           FOCUS - 3 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                           September 7, 2004 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

AFTER FRANCES Residents Along Rivers Told To Expect Flooding

BYLINE: NEIL JOHNSON, njohnson@tampatrib.com

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 403 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


WEATHER SERVICE MAKES PREDICTIONS FOR AREA

By NEIL JOHNSON

njohnson@tampatrib.com

TAMPA -- Residents along every river in West Central Florida will face the
possibility of flooding over the next few days from the 6 to 8 inches of rain
left by Hurricane Frances.

Some rivers were at flood stage when the storm swept over the region. Some will
remain above flood stage through Friday.

Here are predicted flood-stage levels and flooding potential information from
the National Weather Service:

* The Hillsborough River at Zephyrhills will reach flood stage this morning,
crest at 10.48 feet Wednesday afternoon and recede below flood stage Friday
afternoon.

* The Alafia River at Lithia reached flood stage Saturday, crested at 16.5 feet
Monday evening and is expected to recede below flood stage Thursday morning.

* The Anclote River at Elfers reached flood stage Monday afternoon, will crest
at 22.2 feet this afternoon and is expected to recede below flood stage
Wednesday afternoon.

* Cypress Creek at Worthington Gardens will reach flood stage this afternoon and
crest at 5.3 feet Wednesday afternoon, remaining above flood stage through
Friday.

* The Little Manatee River at Wimauma reached flood stage Monday and will crest
at 14.6 feet this afternoon, then recede below flood stage Thursday.

* The Peace River at Bartow reached major flood stage Monday, crested at 9.78
feet Monday evening and is expected to remain above flood stage through Friday.

The Peace River at Arcadia, already above flood stage, crested at 15.3 feet
Thursday morning and is expected to be above major flood stage through Friday.

The Peace River at Zolfo Springs reached flood stage Sunday, will crest at 20.2
feet this morning and is forecast to remain above flood stage through Friday.

* The Manatee River at Myakka Head reached flood stage Saturday, crested at 15.3
feet Monday evening and is forecast to recede below flood stage Wednesday
afternoon.

* The Myakka River at Myakka River State Park reached flood stage Saturday and
will crest at 8.5 feet Wednesday evening.

* The Withlacoochee River at Croom will reach flood stage this morning, crest at
9.8 feet Wednesday afternoon and remain above flood stage through Friday.

* The Withlacoochee River at Trilby reached flood stage Monday afternoon and
will crest at 14.4 feet Wednesday afternoon.

Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: AFTER FRANCES

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
Tribune photo by JIM REED The play area and toys of Nicole Nedley's children
were partially submerged in her flooded Riverview back yard Monday.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                           FOCUS - 4 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                      Saint Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                             March 1, 1997 Saturday

WITH FLOOD THREATS IN FORECAST, STATE ISSUES WARNING: GET INSURED;
MID-APRIL DANGERS MAKE IT VITAL TO PREPARE NOW

BYLINE: Wayne Wangstad, Staff Writer

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 846 words


A state official Friday urged property owners in high-potential flood areas to
apply for flood insurance promptly amid new forecasts that parts of the state
could have their worst flooding in years.

"If I were buying flood insurance I would do it as soon as possible," said Jim
Franklin, director of the state emergency management division. The insurance
must be in effect 30 days before a flood, he noted.

The area with the greatest flood potential is the Red River Valley, where the
north-flowing Red River of the North could exceed record levels, according to
data released by the National Weather Service at a news conference Friday.

State flooding potential "is the most serious since I have been here," said the
weather service's chief meteorologist, Craig Edwards, who arrived in December
1991.

"We can't keep the floods from happening; Mother Nature is going to take its
course," he said. "We are not presenting the worst-case scenario, only the most
likely scenario."

Based on computer modeling, the service predicts that all of Minnesota's rivers
will surpass flood stage this spring, even if the state receives no additional
precipitation. With just average amounts of snow and rain in March, Minnesota
could endure record-breaking floods.

The second week of April appears to hold the greatest threat for flooding in
west-central and southern Minnesota. Flooding in the Red River would be a little
bit later, Edwards said.

In a flood forecast Feb. 14, weather officials had said there was hope for some
relief if temperatures warmed and precipitation was low.

However, Edwards said they expect above-normal precipitation in the next 10 days
and below-normal temperatures in March, which will mean little melting this
month.

The storm that moved into Minnesota on Friday, for example, should leave a
quarter to half-inch of moisture over the state, and another storm system should
leave about a half-inch on Monday night and Tuesday.

The next 10 days should bring above normal precipitation with no melting. Cooler
than normal temperatures are forecast for northern Minnesota during the next 30
days, which means no rapid snow melt, Edwards said.

He said the best scenario would be for near-normal temperatures in central and
southern Minnesota, with moderate temperatures in northwestern Minnesota "so we
don't have 20 to 25 inches of snow on the ground by the end of March."

The weather service data shows that the Red River could, given normal March
rain, exceed record flood stages at the North Dakota cities of Wahpeton, Fargo,
Grand Forks, Drayton and Pembina, and in Minnesota at Halstad.

In 1993, weather service hydrologist Gary McDevitt noted, most of the flooding
in the state was on the Minnesota River. This year, however, the Minnesota and
Mississippi rivers probably will combine to create flooding downstream from
their confluence in St. Paul as well.

Franklin, in noting that flood insurance must be in effect 30 days before a
flood, said most record flood stages have occurred in mid-April in the past.

In a 100-year flood plain, an average flood policy on a $100,000 home, including
a basement and the home's contents, would cost about $745 a year, said Paul
Wylde, a spokesman for State Farm Insurance.

A 100-year flood plain means that there is a 1 percent chance of flood in any
given year. Most of Minnesota is made up of 500-year flood plains, or just 0.05
percent chance, however. State Farm has just 1,300 flood policies in Minnesota,
about a quarter of all policies in the state, Wylde said.

"As a state, that's pretty low," he said.

Representatives from various governmental agencies met Friday before Edwards,
McDevitt and Franklin briefed reporters on the flood potential. Franklin said
state agencies are reviewing emergency plans in anticipation of the flooding
threat.

For example, he said, the state Agriculture Department is checking to determine
that chemicals are not being stored in flood-prone areas and that livestock feed
will be available.

Franklin also said sugar beet growers in northwestern Minnesota have been
allowed to operate overweight trucks on roads so they can move their product
before the flooding threat peaks.

On Thursday, the Minnesota House approved a bill that would provide $6 million
for use in flood emergencies and $14 million for winter snow emergencies. Next
week, the Senate may review a bill that would provide $2 million for flood
emergencies, with $18 million earmarked for snow removal.

The American Red Cross expects to help approximately 700 families, mostly in the
Red River area, if the floods arrive as forecast.

"We will probably serve around 30,000 meals and distribute upwards of 3,000
cleanup kits," said Barb Fonkert, disaster director of the St. Paul chapter of
the American Red Cross. She said the Red Cross is seeking additional volunteers.

The organization helped 225 families in the Warren, Minn., area north of Grand
Forks, N.D., last spring when rains caused the Red River to flood in April and
May.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map
Spring flooding potential
Graphic: Pioneer Press
SPRING FLOOD OUTLOOK
The National Weather Service's flood outlook, released Friday, shows
both static and potential river crest levels this spring, depending on
melting and precipitation between now and mid-April. This chart shows
flood state levels at selected cities; crest levels for the 1993 flood
year, where available; and level and date of record floods. (see
microfilm)

                     Copyright 1997 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                           FOCUS - 5 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright (c) 2013 Fordham Urban Law Journal
                           Fordham Urban Law Journal

                                 October, 2013

                           Fordham Urban Law Journal

                           40 Fordham Urb. L.J. 1739

LENGTH: 23927 words

ARTICLE AND ESSAY: NEW CHALLENGES FOR URBAN AREAS FACING FLOOD RISKS

NAME: Debbie M. Chizewer* and A. Dan Tarlock**

BIO: * A.B. Princeton University, 1988, J.D. Boston University School of Law,
1991.

** A.B. Stanford University, 1962, LL.B. Stanford University, 1965.
Distinguished Professor of Law, Chicago-Kent College of Law and Honorary
Professor UNESCO Centre for Water Law, Policy, and Science, University of
Dundee, Scotland.

HIGHLIGHT: A flood doesn't exist except in our memory banks. It's a temporal
event. It is not the river and it's not the land. It's neither here nor there.
n1


 TEXT:
 [*1740]

   Introduction

 Hurricane Sandy has delivered another painful reminder that urban areas need to
find new ways to confront the increasingly difficult task of flood preparation.
A flood occurs "when water runoff from the land exceeds the capacity of the
stream channel." n2 Excepting the Inner Mountain West and Southern California, a
map of vulnerable flood areas picks up almost all major urban areas in the
United States. n3 Between 1929 and 2003, urban floods in the United States
caused an estimated $ 171 billion in property damage. n4 Floods have caused the
most losses of any natural disaster in the United States. n5 Billions of dollars
have been invested in flood prevention structures. But, as "first responders" in
the battle to prevent and respond to flood damage, local governments will see
urban flood damages rise for four primary reasons. First, federal flood control
policy over eighty years has created the illusion that infrastructure and
post-disaster relief can provide maximum protection from flood damages. n6
Second, more cost-effective avoidance strategies, such as  [*1741]  less
intensive flood plain development and restoration, have been undermined by the
federal flood insurance program, which has encouraged intense development in
river and coastal flood plains instead of redirecting it to less vulnerable
areas. n7 Third, global climate change is projected to produce more intense
flood and coastal storm surge events. n8 Fourth, damage prevention
responsibility is being de facto devolved to local governments as the federal
government and the states, with notable exceptions, are investing less of the
scant, available dollars in flood infrastructure construction. n9

   This Article examines the challenges and opportunities that urban areas face
in developing effective flood control strategies in light of climate change and
decreasing federal and state flood control expenditures. n10 The evolution of
flood control policy and law in the United States reveals a gradual shift in
thinking from the concept of "maximum protection," provided largely by the
federal government, toward the notion that flood damage must be viewed as a risk
that can be minimized, but not totally avoided. These risks can be managed at
the local and regional level under the principles of  [*1742]  integrated flood
plain management (IFPM). Integrated flood plain management uses a combination of
structural measures, flood management to produce less intensive flood plain
development, and flood plain restoration to reconnect rivers to their flood
plains to take advantage of the landscape's ability to retard the spread of
water. n11 While the United States has not developed comprehensive or mandatory
requirements regarding flood management or the use of IFPM, the European Union's
Floods Directive requires its member states to develop risk-based flood
management. n12 With the EU Floods Directive as a framework for assessing
innovative local approaches to flood management, this Article argues that flood
management theory has advanced considerably but that flood management practice
has not kept the pace needed to avert massive flood damages.

   Part I of this Article surveys the flood risks that local governments
confront during "normal" flood events as well as from climate change. Part II
briefly traces the evolution of United States flood control policy from local
responsibility to the federal government and back to local governments in
partnership with state and federal governments. This shift reflects the growing
recognition that effective flood control requires partnerships among multiple
levels of government that can each contribute distinct expertise and resources.
Part III addresses the available options for local governments, as they play a
more prominent role in flood management. Part IV reviews innovative local or
regional flood damage prevention programs in Fargo-Moorhead, North Dakota, Cedar
Rapids, Iowa, and Sacramento, California, and it evaluates these programs
against the emerging model of integrated flood plain management.

[*1743]

   I. Urban Areas Face Increased Flood Risks

 "Water draws people to it." n13 Rivers operate to channel rainwater and move it
to the sea or to a closed basin. When the amount of water exceeds the channel
capacity, the water flows on to adjoining land, the flood plain. In places such
as Ancient Egypt, flood cycles were originally seen as blessings because they
sustained riverine ecosystems and the flood plain economies dependent on them.
n14 Floods caused social problems when they did not come. n15 However, as more
people settled in flood plains, floods became a social problem because they both
disrupted agricultural production and caused extensive damage to settlements.
Nations such as China soon responded by accepting flood control responsibility.
n16

   Most inland United States urban settlements were drawn to the advantages of
rivers and lakes. n17 These areas face three types of flood risks. The first is
that heavy rain events have always been are part of "natural" climate
variability. n18 Factors such as cyclical changes in the temperature of the
surface of the sea can both decrease and increase precipitation. n19 Second,
climate change is projected to exacerbate flood risks because heavier, prolonged
rain events will occur. Similar to all climate change science controversies,
debate persists about the impact that rising greenhouse levels have on flood
events. n20 The authoritative United States Geological Service recently found
only the Southwest, the region least vulnerable to floods, showed a relationship
between increased CO<2> levels and the size of floods over  [*1744]  the past
100 years. n21 In the end, the causal debate is largely irrelevant for urban
areas. Extreme weather events, such as floods, have clearly increased. n22
Because the international community has been unable to agree on an effective
mitigation strategy, the only choice for at-risk areas is to adapt by trying to
minimize the possible adverse consequences. The primary consequence for all
those involved in flood management is that historic assumptions of stationarity
have been undermined. Hydrology has long assumed that water behaves in a
predictable fashion and that variations in floods and droughts occur within a
relatively narrow band. n23 As applied to flood control, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has required that flood plain maps and land use
regulation rely on the concept of the 100-year flood. n24 A 100-year flood is a
flood that has a probability of occurring once in a 100 years. The standard has
been widely criticized because it gives the false illusion that such a flood
will in fact occur only every 100 years. n25 Floods are much more variable and
climate change will produce more "statistically frequent" n26 and more extreme
flood "events."

   The third problem is the legacy of past local, state and federal flood
control strategies. The country's investment in levees, dams and floodways have
prevented damage, but they also have had a perverse effect: structural flood
plain protection encourages more settlement, which in turn increases the number
of people and property impacted  [*1745]  when a flood occurs. n27 The result is
a classic moral hazard problem. A moral hazard is a socially undesirable, often
inefficient, behavior encouraged by the expectation that it will not be punished
and often will be rewarded. n28

   The moral hazard problem is especially acute in flood prone areas where the
existence of levees often leads to an illusionary sense of safety for flood
plain residents. The illusion is a dangerous one, because our infrastructure is
old and increasingly unsafe. Congress acknowledged this problem when, in 2007,
it ordered the United States Army Corps of Engineers (the Corps) to undertake an
assessment of levees over which it has oversight, including levees initially
constructed by the Corps and subsequently turned over to the states. n29 A 2013
follow-up Associated Press article, based on Freedom of Information Act
requests, found that "inspectors taking the first-ever inventory of flood
control systems overseen by the federal government have found hundreds of
structures at risk of failing and endangering people and property in 35 states."
n30 Many dams are also  [*1746]  unsafe. n31 Post-flood compensation available
through flood insurance and ad hoc disaster payments from the federal government
feed the illusion and subsidize the cost of moral hazard behavior. n32 The rub
is that "since lump-sum government-relief payments usually do not relate to
risk, no incentives are provided to potential victims to take effective
preventative measures." n33

   II. Flood Control Policy: Local or Federal Responsibility?

 Flood control in the United States sprung up locally as the need to halt the
water arose. Over time, the federal government has taken a larger or smaller
role in the endeavor depending on the reigning philosophy and resources. In the
nineteenth century, Jeffersonian ideologies ensured that flood damage prevention
was a local or state responsibility. n34 That legacy is still with us. Today,
the United States still has no unified levee system; there are over 100,000
miles of levees in various states of disrepair and deterioration, and
eighty-five percent are locally owned. n35 In the twentieth century, many cities
began relying more heavily on the federal government to protect them from flood
damage through upstream storage reservoirs and  [*1747]  levee systems. For the
first six decades of the twentieth century, increased understanding of river
hydrology n36 and the development of engineering technology for large dams
increased the options for structural flood control. These developments paved the
way for the acceptance of a powerful, central state in the twentieth century as
the entity to control nature, n37 thus promoting human progress. But, since the
rise of the environmental movement in the late 1960s, which strongly opposed new
dams, the federal government decreased its investment in water resources
development, although flood control projects remain politically popular. n38 The
federal investment in proactive flood control measures has further decreased.
n39 In addition, the recognition that local governments have a better
understanding of local conditions has contributed to the shift away from federal
responsibility and towards multi-level governmental or local responsibility. n40

   A. The Transition from Local to National Control

 The ancient technique of levee construction was used extensively in the United
States in the nineteenth century, especially along the lower Mississippi. New
Orleans began constructing levees even earlier, some time between 1718 and 1727.
n41 After the Civil War, a battle between two competing flood control theories,
levees designed  [*1748]  to deepen the channel versus jetties at the mouth of
the river, raged. n42 The Corps, which had begun to link levee construction with
its then sole mission of navigation enhancement along the River, opted for a
"levees only" policy. n43

   The "levees only" approach prevailed until the Great Mississippi flood of
1927 revealed its flaws. The Corps's policy could not prevent flood damage, in
part, because coverage was fragmented due to the failure of local governments
and private parties to coordinate their projects. n44 In 1879, the Mississippi
River Commission was formed to address this problem and, in 1882, it adopted a
coordinated levee construction policy. n45 However, this strategy failed because
the Corps could not compel the construction of a coordinated system. n46 In
1917, Congress took a first step toward federal responsibility for flood
prevention with the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1917 (1917 Act). n47 The
1917 Act authorized federal levee construction but only on the condition that
the levees would be turned over to local interests for maintenance. n48

   It took the 1927 Mississippi River flood to change fundamentally United
States policy. The response to the 1927 flood led directly to increased federal
responsibility. The Flood Control Act of 1928 (1928 Act) n49 made flood control
a Corps mission of equal if not greater  [*1749]  importance to navigation and
forced the Corps to recant its long-standing opposition to the Progressive
Conservation idea of basin-wide, multiple purpose water projects. n50 The 1928
Act itself continued the levees only policy, but took a major step toward
federal responsibility for comprehensive river basin management by authorizing $
325 million for the federal construction of levees and outlets on land subject
to flood easements. n51 More importantly, the 1928 Act laid the foundation for
the construction of upstream reservoirs and formally committed the Corps to the
Progressive Conservation Era vision of a river basin-wide approach to water
management. For the first time, the Corps was directed to include "the
establishment of a reservoir system" in its basin-wide planning for the
Mississippi. n52

   Flood control dams date from the third or second millennium B.C.E., n53 but
they did not come into widespread use until the nineteenth century in Europe.
n54 In the United States, the modern flood control dam is the legacy of a
visionary engineer, Arthur Morgan. n55 In response to the disastrous 1913 flood
in Dayton, Ohio, n56 Morgan convinced the city to build upstream flood control
storage  [*1750]  reservoirs on the Miami River. n57 Well into the 1920s, the
Corps initially opposed dams as its new rival, the Bureau of Reclamation, was
building multiple purpose dams, primarily for irrigation and hydroelectric power
production. n58 The Corps was dragged into dam building by Congress. Starting in
1925, Congress required that the Federal Power Commission and the Corps prepare
river basin plans for the "improvement" of streams for navigation, hydroelectric
power, irrigation and flood control. n59 The 308 Reports, named after the
section of the statute, were submitted to Congress in 1927, n60 and the 1928
Flood Control Act required that a 308 Report for the Mississippi be prepared
which included, inter alia, a determination of whether additional flood control
could be "attained through the control of flood waters in the drainage basins of
the tributaries by the establishment of a reservoir system." n61

   The acceptance of floodwater retention was enshrined in United States law and
policy during the Great Depression and the aftermath of World War II. During his
four terms, President Franklin Roosevelt first embraced dams as engines of
employment to deal with unemployment. n62 After the Allied victory became
certain, he saw them as sources of employment for returning World War II
veterans. n63 Congress agreed, and two New Deal statutes committed the United
States to multiple purpose dams where flood control was a primary purpose. The
1936 Flood Control Act n64 declared that flood control on navigable rivers and
their tributaries was a "proper activity of the Federal Government in
cooperation with States, their political subdivisions and localities." n65 It
also introduced benefit-cost as the standard for project construction, n66 in an
attempt to rationalize  [*1751]  federal spending. Retention was first put into
large-scale practice by the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). n67 During World
II an effort was made to apply the lessons of the TVA to the Missouri River. n68
Other flood control dams followed in the 1950s and 1960s. Nationwide, the Corps
currently operates approximately 700 flood control dams on large and small
rivers. n69

   The dream of comprehensive federal river basin development lived on until the
1970s. After the New Deal, federal support for large dam construction continued,
but only on an individual project-by-project basis. The Eisenhower
Administration (1953-1961) followed a "no-new starts" water resources
development policy, and stressed increased local responsibilities for new
projects. n70 This policy was reversed in the Kennedy-Johnson administrations
(1961-1969); new Corps dams were built in the 1960s in the Southeast and
Midwest. n71 President Johnson was a committed dam builder, n72 and he tried to
revive New Deal-style river basin planning. The Water Resources Planning Act of
1965 authorized the creation of regional river basin commissions coordinated by
the federal Water Resources Council. n73

   In the 1970s, though, Congress turned away from large-scale, basin-level
project financing. Instead, periodic Water Resource Development Acts (WRDAs) n74
authorized water projects passed on by the House Committee on Transportation or
the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works. n75 Even if a project is
included in a  [*1752]  WRDA, it must also receive an appropriation. n76 The
project-by-project nature of the WRDA, including the need to seek appropriations
for individual projects, necessarily has impacted the Corps's institutional
approach to managing levee projects. n77 This movement away from large-scale
project financing symbolizes a reduction in federal flood management engagement
more generally.

   B. The Retreating Federal Role

 The pendulum of responsibility for flood control is swinging back toward local
governments. n78 First, budget woes and a growing resistance to spending federal
dollars on local flood control have called into question federal financial
support. Second, the federal government has begun to take the position that it
can serve best as a consultant or guide to local governments, which are better
situated to understand the regional circumstances.

   The federal government's investment in flood management has plateaued or
declined over the last thirty years. The amount of federal money available for
both new flood management projects has decreased with the exception of money
made available for emergency response and post-emergency infrastructure
projects. n79 Congressional authorization of Corps's projects through the WRDAs
had for many years been the epitome of "pork-barrel" politics where more
powerful representatives were more successful in getting their home projects
authorized, regardless of the objective merit or need of the competing projects.
n80 Now, projects are competing for fewer dollars as Congress has signaled a
shift to pushing the responsibility back to states and local governments;
indeed, the moratorium on earmark appropriations has responded to "pork barrel"
concerns but also stymied Corps's projects. n81 Even when a project is
authorized, it may  [*1753]  await appropriations for several more years,
leaving local governments in limbo and at risk for more catastrophic flooding.
Currently, more than 1000 authorized studies and construction projects await
money. n82 The President's budget requests have included few new studies and new
construction activities in recent years. n83 While the budgeted project funding
has declined, emergency funding through supplemental appropriations has been
substantial since 2001; n84 the reactive nature of flood control funding raises
questions regarding the cost-effectiveness and safety of the current reliance on
emergency measures.

   As the federal role shrinks, federal agencies such as the Corps, the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and FEMA are redefining their role as
information providers and one of many actors in state and local efforts to
address flood management. n85 Out of necessity, the federal government also has
taken the position that local governments are best situated to understand the
conditions and make planning decisions for the flood-prone areas in question.
n86 Under this rationale, the federal government can serve as an expert
advisor/consultant. For example, sparked by flooding in Iowa, the EPA worked
with state and local governments to consider how land use planning can
incorporate adaptation principles to factor in climate change. n87 The EPA's
collaboration through this pilot project in Iowa grew from and reflects the
philosophy outlined in the White House Council on Environmental Quality's 2010
report regarding adapting to climate change:

   In particular, Federal leadership, guidance, information, and support are
vital to planning for and implementing adaptive actions. Because climate impacts
span political boundaries, the Federal Government must respond in partnership
with communities, tribes, and states - many of which are already beginning to
implement  [*1754]  adaptation measures. Effective adaptation requires that
stakeholders in affected regions coordinate their responses to climate impacts
on shared infrastructure and resources. n88

   As local governments take more of a leadership role in adaptation, their
approaches to flood management must be evaluated closely.

   III. Local Government Options

 Local governments have at least six options to limit flood damage: (1) passive
adaptation, (2) reliance on federal protection through upstream dams, levees and
floodways government, (3) floodplain retreat, (4) prohibition of risky new flood
plain development, (5) regional flood management participation, and (6) practice
risk-based integrated flood management planning. n89 Some of these approaches
require proactive land use planning and regulation, while others involve
accepting a range of possible flood conditions, partially reacting to flood
conditions, or looking to state or federal government to prepare for or react to
flood conditions to develop flood management plans and to finance the
infrastructure necessary to implement them. None of the options is mutually
exclusive, and each has a role to play in responding to the challenges of
minimizing urban flood damages. This part will address each of these options in
turn.

   A. Passive/Reactive Options

 A city can elect to undertake no permanent flood control measures and engage in
passive adaptation by retreating when floods come or using temporary measures to
prevent the waters from spreading. Few cities can now retreat, but some cities
practice a variant of passive adaptation by trying to site structures in the
floodplains only if they can tolerate high water and rely on temporary dykes to
prevent the spread of water. n90 This strategy has been used by cities with
narrow flood plains and ample bluffs and hills as Davenport, Iowa has. n91

    [*1755]  Cities can also do nothing and let the federal government assume
responsibility for flood damage prevention. For example, the Corps's six
mainstem dams on the Missouri River provide flood protection for the downstream
cities of Omaha, Kansas City and Saint Louis, n92 but sole reliance on upstream
dams is too risky. Upstream dams must be supplemented by levees. n93 In
addition, the federal government enjoys immunity from damages stemming from the
operation of a federal flood control project to manage a flood. n94 The strategy
can, however, work for some cities. New Orleans, of course, is the poster child
of reliance on the federal largesse. After Hurricane Katrina, the federal
[*1756]  government built a $ 14.5 billion levee system for the city, n95
ignoring all suggestions for a more passive approach to future, inevitable flood
events. n96 For cities not "blessed" with New Orleans' heritage, this strategy
faces the fact that the Corps currently has a backlog of $ 60 billion in
approved, but unfunded, flood control projects. n97 The bottom line is that
there is an undue emphasis on levees, which can never prevent all damage, at the
expense of passive solutions such as the restoration of the pre-modification
river flows and adjacent flood plains.

   Retreating from the intensive use of existing developed land in harm's way is
not impossible. Cities can attempt to maximize the amount of undeveloped flood
plain so that flood waters do not damage property. Retreat has generally not
been deemed feasible because it is a politically unpopular and expensive
strategy, which requires the purchase of existing developed properties. However,
it is slowly emerging as a viable approach in both rural and urban areas.
Several small towns along the Mississippi River were relocated after the 1993
flood. n98 This strategy may be more widely used in the future as the link
between floods and climate change is better established. In his 2013 State of
New York address, "[Governor Cuomo] said homeowners in flood-prone zones should
be allowed to sell their homes back to the government and move out of the area,
while others could elevate their homes to protect from future flooding." n99
Ultimately, retreat is closely related to the more proactive approach of land
use planning that prevents flood plain development.

[*1757]

   B. Proactive Options

   1. Prohibit Risky Flood Management

 More effective flood damage reduction requires greater human adjustment to
floods in the form of settlement patterns and building construction. n100 This
is now the conventional wisdom among flood experts. In the United States, human
adjustment is the legacy of the late geographer Gilbert White, one of the great
students of water and disaster policy in the twentieth century. His seminal 1942
University of Chicago thesis, Human Adjustment to Floods, n101 remains the Bible
of modern flood control thinking. "Few publications can claim to have
transcended the original field in which they were written, by shaping a wide
range of research areas and philosophies." n102 At the height of the New Deal
and its faith in engineering solutions to nature's imperfections, Human
Adjustment to Floods posited the then heretical argument that structural flood
defense created a classic moral hazard problem; the expectation that dams and
levees (as disaster relief) would protect flood plains led governments to
encourage flood plain development. n103 Ironically, when the structural defense
failed to stop the inevitable flood waters, property and other damages were
actually greater than before.

   White's thesis fundamentally changed decision-makers' thinking about floods
and helped bring about the federal flood insurance program. White's vision, as
articulated by the policy forum honoring his work, still applies to goals for
flood management in the mid-twenty-first century:



   There is a stronger trend in 2050 toward higher density development,
clustering, in-filling of urban areas, and planning for green infrastructure.
The full range of flooding events is taken into account in planning, including
low-probability, high-consequence storms. Many no-build zones - such as deep
coastal storm surge zones, deep riverine floodplains, and other high-hazard or
environmentally sensitive areas - are in place, analogous to the  [*1758]
floodways and coastal barrier resources system units of the 20th century. These
no-build areas are respected in order to sustain the natural benefits they
provide to society, including high-quality water, appropriate habitat for fish,
wildlife, and flora; groundwater recharge; recreation; and open spaces, in
addition to flood damage abatement. Some communities have been relocated in
whole or in part. n104

 But practice does not often follow theory no matter how good it is. With the
exception of a few leaders, elected representatives and local zoning and
building regulators have not fully absorbed the message. n105 It is easier to
compensate victims and promise better engineering solutions. In 2013, Congress
appropriated $ 51.5 billion for Hurricane Sandy relief. n106 However, many
observers, including large segments of the insurance industry, are concerned
that expenditures for rebuilding homes and businesses and dune restoration
continue to encourage building in flood-prone areas. n107

   Thus, government promotion of moral hazards along the nation's shorelines and
floodplains by encouraging people to remain or return to an unsafe situation is
a hard cycle to break. Yet, the Stanford University Climate Adaptation Poll,
conducted in March 2013, shows that "Americans overwhelmingly believe that
people and businesses most at risk from sea level rise and damaging storms, not
the general  [*1759]  public or government, should foot the bill for related
preparation and recovery efforts." n108

   Cities have long had the discretion to try and minimize flood damage by
limiting flood plain development proactively. n109 Thanks to Gilbert White, this
strategy is at the heart of modern flood control policy driven by the Flood
Control Act of 1968. Section 1301 provides:



   It is the further purpose of this chapter to (1) encourage State and local
governments to make appropriate land use adjustments to constrict the
development of land which is exposed to flood damage and minimize damage caused
by flood losses, (2) guide the development of proposed future construction,
where practicable, away from locations which are threatened by flood hazards,
(3) encourage lending and credit institutions, as a matter of national policy,
to assist in furthering the objectives of the flood insurance program, (4)
assure that any Federal assistance provided under the program will be related
closely to all flood-related programs and activities of the Federal Government,
and (5) authorize continuing studies of flood hazards in order to provide for a
constant reappraisal of the program and its effect on land use requirements.
n110

 The Act is administered by FEMA and it instructs the Director to, "from time to
time develop comprehensive criteria designed to encourage, where necessary, the
adoption of adequate State and local measures which, to the maximum extent
feasible, will (1) constrict the development of land which is exposed to flood
damage where appropriate ... ." n111

   Community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program is
technically voluntary, but in fact it is not. For example, 1466 out of  [*1760]
1550 New York cities, town and villages participate. n112 The carrot that the
Act provides is federally subsidized flood insurance. The stick is that the Act
prohibits lenders from lending in flood plains unless the community has a
FEMA-approved land use ordinance. n113 The assumption is that the insurance
program "could also link the availability of flood insurance to land-use
regulation and building codes that would, in theory, reduce long-term flood
risk." n114 The Act has not reduced flood damage risks as much as the drafters
hoped. n115

   The federal flood insurance program has stimulated a great deal of flood
prevention land use regulation, but the Act, as administered, has allowed local
governments to encourage too much moral hazard behavior. n116 The nub of the
problem is that cities must steer between the enormous pressure to develop land
and the regulatory incentives provided by the program. The reasons are legal and
political. Land use law recognizes that the prevention of risky flood plain
development, even if partially done for parental reasons, is a valid  [*1761]
police power objective. n117 Ordinances typically do not prohibit all
development but allow a variety of compatible uses such as agriculture and
recreation that does not destroy the character of the district. n118 Even
existing pre-ordinance structures need not remain forever. These are
non-conforming uses, and there is no constitutional right to build after a
substantial portion of a building is destroyed by an "Act of God." n119 A model
ordinance provides:



   Any non-conforming structure that is located less than the required setback
from the normal high water mark of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge
of a wetland, or from the property line, or which otherwise fails to meet the
dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and which is removed, or damaged or
destroyed by more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
such damage, destruction or removal may be reconstructed or replaced provided
that a permit is obtained within one year of the date of said damage,
destruction or 85 removal and provided that such reconstruction or replacement
is in compliance with the setback or other dimensional requirements to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board ... . n120

 Flood control ordinances face the risk of a Fifth Amendment takings challenge.
n121 Courts have rejected many Fifth Amendment challenges to flood plain
ordinances, n122 but cities are reluctant to use  [*1762]  the full extent of
their police powers for legal and political reasons. The Supreme Court's takings
jurisprudence still has somewhat of a chilling effect on local regulation
because the Court has not given as much weight to the paternal and neighbor
damage prevention rationales compared to state courts. n123 Thus, the law
encourages ordinance challenges and increases the risk of costly legal
challenges. n124

   The National Flood Insurance Program relieves some of the legal and political
pressures, but cities have not taken advantage of the opportunity to maximize
floodplain management. Cities need to participate in the flood map program so
that development qualifies for mortgage financing. FEMA's primary means of
controlling local land use is its power to map local flood plains. n125 The
agency has long used the 100-year flood standard to delineate flood plains and
to map 100-year flood elevations, and thus cities need only prevent development
within this mapped area. n126 The result is that many communities adopt only
minimum floodplain regulations for the  [*1763]  mapped floodplain allowing
development in the rest of the community. n127 The focus on the 100-year flood
plain ignores other at-risk areas in the community and provides disincentives to
adopt a more comprehensive local flood damage mitigation strategy. n128 Cities
can be proactive throughout their jurisdiction; for example, the subdivision
approval process provides opportunities for cities to require retention and
absorption areas. n129

   Cities that join the program have actively sought to constrict the reach of
FEMA's flood plain map with administrative variances. n130 The Act provides a
procedure to challenge a FEMA map. Each year the agency issues thousands of
Letters of Map Change that often constrict previously mapped flood plain
boundaries. n131 As an extra development bonus, cities have benefitted from
FEMA's lack of enforcement of the insurance mandate. The Congressional Research
Service estimated that only fifteen to twenty-five of at-risk properties in the
Northeast have flood insurance. n132

    [*1764]  Out-of-date flood maps also have enabled city development. Many
flood maps have not been updated based on more accurate methodologies, do not
include detailed topography, or reflect real estate growth. n133 FEMA is
preparing new maps, which must delineate a range of flood plains up to a
500-year flood and factor in topography and projected rainfall. n134 Since 2009,
FEMA has used a Risk Mapping Assessment and Planning (Risk MAP) program, which
is an integrated flood-risk management approach. In 2012, Congress reauthorized
the National Flood Insurance Program, after an impasse of several years, and
required FEMA to develop risk models and flood zones that account for
"non-accredited levee scenarios." n135 However, "climate change" was expressly
stripped from the final version of the bill, but FEMA can "reincorporate"
climate change data because it must use the best science in projecting sea level
rise. n136 The stakes are high. New maps include more homes in a risk area, thus
triggering an insurance mandate. An inaccurate flood map could result in flood
damages to uninsured properties and larger than expected expenditures of federal
disaster assistance. n137 An analysis of the new maps being prepared for New
York City reveals both strengths and weaknesses:



   When the federal government released updated flood maps for the New York City
region last week, residents were shocked to find that the number of houses and
businesses in the region's flood zone had doubled since the maps were last
revised, in 1986. But it now appears that those maps might have underestimated
the extent of New York's flood risk, because they don't factor in the effects of
future climate change. Scientists say that by the 2080s, sea levels off the
city's coast could rise by as much as five feet from melting  [*1765]  glaciers,
making storm surges more severe and causing floods much further inland than the
new maps indicate. n138


   2. Regional Flood Management Program Participation

 Flood damage is best addressed at large scales - at a river basin, for example,
or at least a sub-part that faces common flood risks. However, many local
governments, especially upstream communities, simply shift risks to other
communities. n139 Localities can avoid passing on their flood problems to their
neighbors when they participate in a regional flood management program.
Collaboration across communities in a particularly flood prone area not only
reduces risk shifting, but it also provides opportunities for cost sharing and
restoration of the broader ecosystem. Regional collaboration could feed into a
risk-based, integrated flood management approach.

   3. Risk-Based Integrated Flood Management

 Throughout the world, modern flood control proceeds from the assumption that
risk-based adjustment will provide the basis for future flood protection
strategy, n140 and that strategy will represent a crucial element of the
transition from unsustainable to sustainable urban development. n141 Interest in
integrated flood risk management reflects the acceptance of the proposition that
total structural damage is unattainable. An analysis of two major flooding
events in recent years, the 1993 Upper Mississippi Flood and Hurricane Katrina
in 2006, supports this view. After the Mississippi flood, which caused  [*1766]
from $ 12 to $ 16 billion in damages, a federal task force was formed to
investigate the causes of the flood led by Brigadier General Gerald E. Galloway,
a distinguished water resources planner. n142 The resulting "Galloway Report"
endorsed Gilbert White's call for a comprehensive federal flood management
program rather than the piecemeal, uncoordinated one that existed then and
continues to this day, and promoted the adoption of the principle of
watershed-based flood management. n143 The Report is also especially notable for
its exploration of the role that the undeveloped or restored riparian areas and
wetlands could play in flood water retention. n144

   In the United States, agencies such as the Corps have embraced risk-based
planning, but compared to Europe the United States lacks a coherent and binding
flood control strategy. One can find many endorsements of risk-based planning in
various plans and policy reviews. For example, after Hurricane Katrina damaged
some 350 miles of flood walls and levees, the Corps and National Research
Council undertook evaluations of what went wrong and reached two major
conclusions. n145 First, the system of levees and flood walls in place was not
an integrated, coordinated, and well-maintained system. The second was that
flood protection in at-risk areas such as New Orleans must be based on an
integrated risk-based system that expressly rejects the expectation that
complete structural protection against all hydrologic contingencies is possible.

   Despite this acknowledgement of the need for a risk-based approach, the only
binding legal model of risk-based flood management is the 2007 EU Floods
Directive (Directive). n146 European Union directives are binding on the member
states. n147 While they state only general outcomes that must be achieved in the
member states through a combination of management and new  [*1767]  legislation,
n148 they require new management processes and laws. The Directive integrates
flood management into the previous Water Framework Directive. n149 The Directive
requires that all member states develop river basin management plans, and
corrects a deficiency in the Water Framework Directive by including flood risk
minimization as a management objective. n150

   The Floods Directive proceeds from the premise that floods cannot be totally
prevented, but rather the major risks can be managed. n151 To this end, all
member states must identify the portions of rivers within their boundaries with
significant flood risks and then prepare flood hazard maps that display three
scenarios, as well as the probable adverse consequences should such a flood
occur. n152 The scenarios are:



   (a) floods with a low probability, or extreme event scenarios;



(b) floods with a medium probability (likely return period = 100 years);



(c) floods with a high probability, where appropriate. n153

 The maps form the basis for risk management plans, which, the Floods Directive
instructs,



   shall take into account relevant aspects such as costs and benefits, flood
extent and flood conveyance routes and areas which have the potential to retain
flood water, such as natural floodplains, the environmental objectives of
Article 4 of Directive 2000/60/EC [The Water Framework Directive], soil and
water management, spatial planning, land use, nature conservation, navigation
and port infrastructure.



 Flood risk management plans shall address all aspects of flood risk management
focusing on prevention, protection, preparedness, including flood forecasts and
early warning systems and taking into account the characteristics of the
particular river basin or sub-basin. Flood risk management plans may also
include the promotion of sustainable land use practices, improvement of water
retention as well as the controlled flooding of certain areas in the case of a
flood event. n154

  [*1768]  EU Directives face many implementation problems, but they can lead to
the development of new and useful science-based standards n155 and innovative
national legislation. n156

   IV. Evaluation of Flood Management Case Studies

 As local governments take on more responsibility for flood management, they
will inevitably look to other local governments for successful models. This
section considers three case studies which can provide guidance to other cities
around the nation: (1) Fargo, North Dakota-Moorhead, Minnesota, (2) Cedar
Rapids, Iowa, and (3) Sacramento, California. These regions make effective case
studies because they are particularly vulnerable to flooding based on their
topography and development history. More importantly, each city has advanced
innovative flood management initiatives consistent with principles described in
the EU Floods Directive.

   Fargo-Moorhead, Cedar Rapids, and Sacramento have taken steps that will help
them manage floods in a more integrated manner, including the recognition of
uncertainty in weather conditions and the need for better flood forecasting and
the development of regional plans, and the use of some nonstructural solutions
to reduce flood damage. Despite the advances in planning, however,
implementation remains challenging. For instance, local governments have not
consistently turned the language of integrated management into changes in land
use ordinances. These local governments that have worked to develop more
regional solutions have at times confronted obstacles relating to lack of
coordination. These cases also demonstrate that the lack of federal
requirements, substantial guidance, or consistent funding support continues to
impede state and  [*1769]  local governments from achieving optimal flood
management planning.

   A. Background - Case Study Areas

   1. Fargo, North Dakota-Moorhead, Minnesota

 The Red River of the North originates at the confluence of the Otter Tail and
Bois de Sioux Rivers south of Fargo, North Dakota. It flows northward into
Canada and forms most of the boundary between Minnesota and North Dakota. n157
The Red River's northward flow, distinctive in North America, contributes to
more substantial spring floods because snow in the southern headwaters of the
basin often melts before snow in the northern areas, leading to ice jams as the
flow travels northward. n158 In addition, the Red River Basin is located within
the broad, flat bottom valley of glacial Lake Agassiz. This topography causes
the main stem and tributary rivers in the glacial lake plain area of the basin
to overflow frequently onto broad floodplains. n159 The Red River Basin includes
a large percentage of agricultural land, and the urban areas of Fargo, North
Dakota and Moorhead, Minnesota. n160 These metropolitan areas have a combined
total population of 200,000. n161

   The Red River floods regularly. Flood damage has, on occasion, been
catastrophic and has included severe structural damage to private and public
facilities and infrastructure, extensive crop loss, major environmental
degradation, and loss of life. Basin-wide flood damages (including both Canada
and the U.S.) after the flood of 1997 were estimated at $ 5 billion. n162
Wetland destruction for farmland and climate change have increased the amount of
precipitation and flooding in the region; the Red River has exceeded the
National Weather Service flood stage of 18 feet in 48 of the past 109 years, and
[*1770]  every year from 1993 through 2011. n163 The flood of record at
Fargo-Moorhead was the 2009 spring flood with a stage of 40.8 feet on the Fargo
gage. n164 Equivalent expected annual flood damages in the Fargo-Moorhead
metropolitan area are estimated to be over $ 194.8 million in the future if no
further action is taken. n165

   2. Cedar Rapids, Iowa

 Cedar Rapids, located in east-central Iowa, is the state's second largest city
with a population of 125,850 and sits on both banks of the Cedar River. n166 It
is located within a shallow bowl surrounded by gentle rolling slopes. Iowa's
rolling prairies and hilly oak woodlands meet at Cedar Rapids. Upland water from
the entire watershed flows into Cedar Rapids. The Cedar River channel that flows
through downtown does not allow for high volumes of water. Development patterns
upland and the reduction of wetlands and natural vegetation, associated with
development, have increased runoff and impacted the quantity and quality of the
river's waters within Cedar Rapids. Much of downtown Cedar Rapids lies within
the 100-year floodplain of the Cedar Rapids River. A combination of rainfall and
snowmelt or heavy rainfall alone has caused the major floods. n167

   As with many American cities, the development of Cedar Rapids necessarily
relied on and altered the river. Industry's rise in Cedar Rapids correlates with
the development of navigation on the Cedar River upstream to Cedar
Falls/Waterloo and downstream to ports along the Mississippi River. n168 As
urban and industrial development led to more flooding, efforts were undertaken
to prevent the river from impairing business and residential development. The
first dam was built across the Cedar River in 1841 to provide hydropower to a
[*1771]  sawmill. n169 More millworks were developed approximately 1.4 miles
upstream from Cedar Rapids. n170 The arrival of the first railroad in mid-1859
further shaped Cedar Rapid's growth by enabling the city's business to transport
goods to Chicago. n171

   3. Sacramento, California

 Sacramento, the capital city of California, was founded in 1849. n172 It is
located at the confluence of the Sacramento and American Rivers. n173 The city
of Sacramento has a population of 472,178, and the larger metropolitan area is
home to approximately 1.4 million people. n174 Sacramento sits in the
north-central part of the Central Valley. n175 The Central Valley is a broad,
gently sloping valley, bounded on the west by the Coast Range, on the north by
the Cascade Range, and on the east by the Sierra Nevada Range. n176 The Valley
drains into the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta (Delta). The lower-lying lands
along the Valley's two major rivers, the Sacramento River and the San Joaquin
River, were floodplains that were regularly inundated for long periods during
large, seasonal flood events. n177 The most devastating floods are caused by
warm Pacific winter storms that sweep in from the west or southwest, picking up
moisture over thousands of miles of ocean, causing torrential rains when
intercepted by the mountains surrounding the Valley. n178

   Like Cedar Rapids, the rivers' current condition necessarily reflects the
region's development. John Marshall's discovery of gold at Sutter's Mill in 1848
and the ensuing Gold Rush changed California  [*1772]  dramatically. n179 The
rapid industrialization of the mining and resulting debris load on the river
amplified flooding in Sacramento and the Central Valley. n180 Agricultural
development also contributed to the severity of floods and also led to the
construction of levees at the edge of the Sacramento and San Joaquin river
channels. n181 These levees were built up, rather than engineered, with readily
available material including waste from the gold mining operations. n182 The
vegetation that would have provided natural buffers for the water flow is almost
entirely demolished. n183 Current environmental conditions and population growth
place the Central Valley in a position that if a mega flood, such as those from
the early 1860s, occurred now, the damage to property and business would be more
than $ 725 billion. n184

   With these pictures in mind, the next section uses the lens of the EU Floods
Directive to evaluate current efforts to manage floods in these three areas.

   B. Evaluation of Case Studies

 The EU Floods Directive provides a model for integrated flood management
against which we can evaluate the innovative flood management efforts in
Fargo-Moorhead, Cedar Rapids, and Sacramento. As outlined in Part III, the EU
Directive requires member states to develop flood risk management plans that
"address all aspects of flood risk management focusing on prevention,
protection, [and] preparedness." n185 This section considers how Fargo-Moorhead,
Cedar Rapids, and Sacramento address key elements of prevention and protection
including the need to take into account climate change data, the importance of
regional collaboration and  [*1773]  ecosystem restoration, the role of land use
planning, and structural improvements.

   1. Considering Climate Change Data

 As local governments develop flood management plans, the usefulness of their
plans depends on the ability to assess flood risk and their willingness to use
climate change data in that process. The EU Floods Directive emphasizes the
importance of factoring in climate change, but unlike in Europe the debate over
the cause and existence of climate change lingers in the United States. The need
to incorporate better flood forecasting has not escaped planners addressing
floods in Sacramento, Cedar Rapids, and Fargo-Moorhead. The three regions have
acknowledged climate change to varying degrees.

   Leaving no doubt about its concern about climate change, the EU Floods
Directive mentions climate change seven times. n186 It justifies the need for
the directive by pointing out that "climate change contributes to an increase in
the likelihood and adverse impacts of flood events" and that previous directives
do not "take into account the future changes in the risk of flooding as a result
of climate change." n187 It directs member states to develop flood risk
management plans that take into account the impacts of climate change and
requires member states to update plans periodically to incorporate climate
change data. n188

   The State of California has gone the farthest to demonstrate a commitment to
better flood risk management and need for climate change modeling. The Central
Valley Flood Protection Act of 2008 (also known as Senate Bill 5 (SB5)) directly
acknowledges the inability of levees to "offer complete protection from
flooding." n189 It requires the Department of Water Resources (DWR) to prepare a
flood management plan for the Central Valley, and requires cities to enact a
plan that follows the DWR plan. n190 SB5 and the resulting Central Valley Flood
Protection Plan (CVFPP) represent unparalleled efforts for integrated flood risk
management in the United States. They address the need to reassess flood risk,
to  [*1774]  improve existing structural approaches and to develop more
nonstructural measures to reduce the impact of floods.

   The CVFPP expressly recognizes the need to account for climate change:



   Climate change will lead to a greater fraction of seasonal precipitation
occurring, as rain rather than snow and sea levels will rise. These trends
appear to be already established and, if they continue as expected, they will
put increasing stress on California's flood management system. Floodplain risk
assessments and development constraints will likely be adjusted accordingly.
n191

 DWR has gone further by working on the development of a methodology to estimate
climate change impacts on flood hydrology. n192 It understands the risk in not
digging deeper to understand climate change's impacts - "climate change impacts
for extreme events, such as flooding and droughts, will result not from changes
in averages, but from changes in local extremes." n193

   DWR also has been working on ways to manage the uncertainty associated with
climate change, and make "prudent decisions" that emphasize investments that can
"accommodate a broader range of climate change scenarios." n194 These efforts
promise a better understanding of the impact of changed climate conditions on
flood risk as well as the potential for better planning to account for these
changes.

   Scholars and leaders in Iowa also have been willing to consider climate
change, but the State's responses fall short of California's efforts. In 2007,
the Iowa Legislature created the Iowa Climate Change Advisory Council to develop
a plan to reduce greenhouse gases. n195 While the council was disbanded after
its first report in 2008, efforts to respond to climate change have not been
forgotten. Iowa received a call to action during the epic floods of 2008 - when
eighty-  [*1775]  five out of ninety-nine counties in Iowa received federal
disaster designations. In the book, Watershed Year: Anatomy of the Iowa Floods
of 2008, written shortly after the Iowa floods, Dr. Takle, Climate Science
Program Director at Iowa State University, argues that "it is likely that the
dice have been loaded toward a higher probability of extreme flood events, with
more occurring now than 30 years ago, and with even higher-frequency
precipitation conditions leading to such floods in the future." n196 In 2009,
the Iowa Legislature created the Iowa Flood Center at the University of Iowa to
develop models for "flood frequency estimation" and "real-time forecasting of
floods." n197

   After the 2008 floods, local governments, the state, and the federal
government took a broader look at flood control planning in Iowa and
acknowledged changing weather conditions. What began as collaboration among the
EPA, FEMA, and Iowa to provide smart growth technical assistance to communities
hit by the flood n198 grew into a pilot project on climate change adaptation.
n199 Acknowledging that local governments are on the front lines for handling
floods and for planning for floods, the EPA worked directly with state and local
partners in Iowa to provide guidance for adaptation plans for managing the
impacts of climate change. n200 The EPA recommended that local governments do
more to integrate hazard mitigation planning with land use planning, and it
encouraged federal and state governments to provide incentives to local
governments who  [*1776]  undertake this integrated approach to planning. n201
It also urged the better incorporation of climate change information into this
planning by downscaling the national data into an understanding of local
predictions and implications. n202 While receptive to the idea, Cedar Rapids'
leaders were stretched during the aftermath of the floods and did not undertake
a deep audit of its municipal code to identify opportunities to reduce risk.

   Decision-makers in the Fargo-Moorhead area have not directly embraced a
connection between climate change and increased flooding, but they cannot
totally avoid the problem. The states of North Dakota and Minnesota issued a
directive requesting a report, identifying long-term solutions for flooding,
from the Red River Basin Commission (RRBC). n203 The RRBC represents a
collaborative effort across boundaries, including representatives from Manitoba,
Minnesota, North Dakota, and South Dakota in the United States and Canada and
watershed management districts in each state. n204 The RRBC has for many years
aimed to create a "vision of comprehensive, integrated watershed stewardship and
management," n205 that includes a mix of structural and non-structural proposals
for the region. The RRBC plans guide decision-makers, but lack enforcement
authority. n206

   The RRBC's most recent 2011 report considered the factors contributing to
basin flooding. n207 In considering climate variability, the RRBC report states
that "if changes in climate are going in predicted directions (illustrated, for
example, in the rise in US coastal waters), we can expect impacts in the
northern mid-section of the continent to include, among others, more
vulnerability to both spring  [*1777]  and summer flood events." n208 Yet, it
then asks whether the increased frequency and magnitude of floods are a
reflection of climate change. n209 To answer the question, the RRBC relies on a
hydrologic, hydraulic, and climate report, prepared by engineers for the Army
Corps of Engineers and the RRBC; the engineers' report stops short of linking
the increased flooding and temperature changes to human-causes, but it
emphasizes the need to "account for increased uncertainty as related to the
Fargo Moorhead studies" n210 - i.e., the reader must take the additional steps
to connect the dots.

   When governments make a commitment to understand and utilize climate change
data, they will likely develop better forecasting models as well as account for
remaining uncertainty. Planning based on this richer analysis could improve the
outcomes when floods do occur. Without the explicit recognition of climate
change, local governments may not dedicate the resources needed to improve the
value of the data and they may underestimate the extreme flood events.

   2. Regional Collaboration and Ecosystem Restoration

 As local governments take on more responsibility for flood control than the
federal government, they may be tempted to focus narrowly on building visible
structures within the city that demonstrate to their residents that they are
ready for floods. These quick fixes often do not provide as many long-term
benefits as regional approaches. Regional collaboration enables partners to
improve ecosystems, avoid risk shifting, and reduce each city's share of project
costs. The EU Floods Directive recognizes the importance of the big picture
approach and requires collaboration among members and at appropriate scales. The
Floods Directive requires member states to "coordinate within river basin
districts" and to "refrain from taking measures or engaging in actions which
significantly increase the risk of flooding in other Member States." n211

    [*1778]  The case study areas also recognize the importance of developing
regional plans. The RRBC's 2011 report calls for more collaboration and notes
some of the benefits:



   [a] recent study of the emphases and actions of Red River basin water(shed)
districts found, among other conclusions, that those water(shed) districts which
had joint agreements with other boards saw more projects move ahead. The
projects that were chosen, moreover, tended to promote areas such as water
quality, retention, and restoration over more traditional emphases. n212

 In the Sacramento area, the CVFPP creates a regional plan and establishes
guidelines and requirements for local government to develop supporting plans.
n213 The DWR takes the big picture view of flood protection needs and it calls
on local partners to ensure that the plan incorporated the knowledge and
perspective of the region's many stakeholders. The DWR has assumed the
responsibility to stay abreast of and coordinate its actions with the other
actors and efforts in the region to promote better flood protection. n214 SB5
mandates that the CVFPP consider means for improving system-wide ecosystem
function in its development of a plan, "including, but not limited to,
establishment of riparian habitat and seasonal inundation of available flood
plains where feasible." n215 Specifically, the CVFPP urges the movement away
from a notion of environmental mitigation that happens at the end of plan
development and toward a model where environmental benefits will be considered
early in the process. Perhaps in a nod to the importance of consensus-building
in flood control planning, it notes "this will help improve overall flood
project delivery and may broaden public support for flood projects." n216

    [*1779]  Cedar Rapids had started thinking more broadly about ways to
improve the riverfront even before the 2008 flood. Utilizing the existing
planning effort, the Cedar Rapids Corridor Redevelopment Plan (CRCRP), the city
undertook a planning process after the flood that engaged the community in a
conversation. n217 It examined flood impacts in context of the unique
characteristics of Cedar Rapids and explored alternative redevelopment options
for flood management, neighborhood redevelopment and downtown reinvestment. The
CRCRP addressed six key themes: housing and neighborhood character,
transportation and connectivity, recreation and open space, arts and cultural
opportunities, business reinvestment, and community services. The community
involvement generated widespread support for the end product. n218

   Iowa communities have looked for regional solutions as well. At the state
level, the Rebuild Iowa Advisory Commission (RIAC) issued a 120-Day Report to
the Governor in which it recommended that the state "lead in developing guidance
and support for integrated, regional planning to address recovery and leverage
multi jurisdictional strengths for ongoing initiatives" and noted "there is
unequivocal unanimity in the call for multijurisdictional, regional planning
across Iowa." n219 In its Iowa Climate Change Report, the EPA explained that "as
many Iowa communities have found, communities can get more out of their
resources by collaborating on multijurisdictional hazard mitigation plans and
using larger watershed planning and regional land use planning tools." n220 It
specifically suggests that communities take advantage of Councils of Governments
to work across jurisdictional boundaries and ensure that upstream and downstream
communities are coordinating their efforts. n221

   The Iowa Flood Center at the University of Iowa, established by the Iowa
Legislature in 2009, n222 recently received $ 1.5 million from  [*1780]
Department of Housing and Urban Development to fund construction of watershed
improvement projects to support flood mitigation in three watersheds, including
farm ponds and wetlands. n223 While Cedar Rapids is not included in the Upper
Cedar River Watershed, which will be part of the program, these efforts likely
represent the beginning of a series of projects that will improve regional
planning. Moreover, Cedar Rapids will need to pay close attention to the Upper
Cedar projects to evaluate potential downstream impacts on its community.

   3. Nonstructural Approaches

 As local governments develop flood management approaches based on regional
environmental conditions, they can employ a number of nonstructural measures to
reduce flood risk. The EU Floods Directive states that "with a view to giving
rivers more space, they should consider where possible the maintenance and/or
restoration of floodplains." n224 While the Floods Directive does not provide
more specificity, member states have begun the process of considering how to
"make room for the river," as the effort has been dubbed in the Netherlands.
n225 The Dutch Government noted that although dyke reinforcement will reduce
flood risks, when floods inevitably occur they will result in greater damage.
Thus, it developed a plan to reduce development and levees in thirty cities; the
goal of the project is to increase capacity of the river and avoid flooding
while improving the overall "economical and environmental quality in the river
region" and allowing for a longer term solution in light of climate change. n226

   In the case study areas, local governments have, in some instances, "made
room for the river." Fargo, Moorhead, and Cedar Rapids  [*1781]  have bought
homes located in the most flood prone areas and turned the land into green space
to give the river a buffer to spread without damaging property. Moorhead has a
list of several low elevation properties adjacent to the river that it would
like to buy to install higher levels of flood risk management; n227 to date, 101
properties have been purchased. n228 Fargo maintains a prioritized list of
potential buyouts and actively seeks to purchase and remove floodplain homes;
Fargo has purchased 125 homes from willing sellers since 1997. n229 As part of
its recovery from the 2008 flood, Cedar Rapids - in collaboration with FEMA,
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and LOST - identified
structures to participate in voluntary property acquisitions. n230 At this
point, 1700 homes have been bought and demolished. n231 These buyouts enable
local governments to restore natural systems, reduce flood damage and move
residents out of harm's way. Sacramento has not invested in purchasing
flood-prone homes to the same degree, but has bought at least twenty homes,
destroyed them, and turned the land into parkland. n232 These buyout
transactions have important safety and flood management benefits. They can get
bogged down, however, in bureaucracy of determining property value and the
funding of the purchases, and during that waiting period homeowners may avoid
[*1782]  investing in flood protection. n233 The expansion of greenways, through
the purchase and destruction of residential structures, offers more room for the
river but reduces tax revenue from those residential property owners. On the
other hand, local governments are saving money in emergency response costs for
homes that would likely get flooded.

   The case study areas have changed building codes to require higher levels of
flood protection in new buildings and in renovated buildings. Cedar Rapids
developed increased standards of protections for buildings in the floodplain
such as requiring them to be protected up to one foot above the 100-year flood
level. n234 Moorhead imposes flood-proofing requirements for new construction,
and limits construction in the floodway. n235 Fargo also addresses elevation and
setbacks in its floodplain zone; it requires buildings to be raised 2.5 feet
about the base flood level. n236 Fargo also "provides for a cost share of up to
seventy-five percent by the city in improvements made by individual homeowners
to improve their level of flood risk management." n237

   Despite these positive measures, none of the case study areas have
incorporated climate change data into land use planning at this point. It is
possible that one of the Central Valley local governments will make some zoning
changes. SB5 and CVFPP contemplate that cities will change zoning ordinances to
advance the flood management program and goals, n238 and provide as part of a
summary that the plan aims to "increase the engagement of local agencies willing
to participate in improving flood protection, ensuring a better connection
between state flood protection decisions and local land use decisions." n239
Nothing in this language, however, requires any particular land use changes nor
does it provide examples. Cities  [*1783]  within the Central Valley have until
July 2015 to complete their implementation plans. n240

   Cedar Rapids' floodplain management ordinance requires the integration of
current flood and hydrologic models in analyzing proposed projects in the
floodway, floodplain, and flood-prone areas. n241 Arguably, it can incorporate
climate change into the flood models. Still, Cedar Rapids has not prohibited
building in the floodplain, but rather has incentivized rebuilding of property
located in the 500-year flood area that was damaged by the 2008 flood.
Incentives offered under the Community Development Block Grant program offer
forgivable loans for the twenty-percent deposit needed to purchase the property.
n242

   Along the Cedar River, one town changed its zoning ordinance to prohibit
building in the 500-year floodplain. Upstream from Cedar Rapids, the small town
of Cedar Falls, a Waterloo bedroom community with a population of 39,993, n243
followed through and enacted a zoning ordinance to prohibit new development and
limit replacement of existing structures in the 500-year flood plain: "No new
lots shall be established within the 500-year flood boundaries after January 1,
2010." n244 And, "an existing structure located on the original lot of record,
if located within the 500-year flood plain, will be allowed to be maintained and
upgraded or enlarged in conformance with this section, but shall not be replaced
with a new structure." n245 Critical facilities - hospitals, schools, and
facilities for the disabled and elderly - must be located outside the 500-year
floodplain boundaries. n246 Considering that nearly twenty-five percent  [*1784]
of the Cedar Falls is in the 500-year floodplain, n247 this is a significant
decision. Following Cedar Falls's lead, an Iowa state legislator introduced the
Cedar Falls ordinance as model legislation for the state. n248 The proposed
legislation encouraged enhanced watershed management, better risk communication
to residents, and more floodplain regulation. The legislation did not pass. n249

   The notion of prohibiting building construction or redevelopment in
flood-prone riverfront areas challenges longstanding norms and the essential
character of cities that grew up on rivers. Moving forward, communities that
develop a better understanding of the flood risks - in terms of safety and
emergency response costs - may decide that some of the most flood-prone areas
should be used as green spaces. In cases where local governments cannot or will
not make room for the river, they can ensure that the levees and floodwalls are
as effective as possible. The issue will become even more important in the
future because the International Panel on Climate Change has begun to include
human settlement patterns in the discussion of mitigation and adaptation
strategies. n250

   4. Structural Solutions and Federal Government Involvement

 An integrated flood management plan necessarily includes the use of levees and
floodwalls and dedicated floodways to protect cities from rising waters. The EU
Floods Directive expects member states to assess the "effectiveness" of existing
man-made flood infrastructure n251 and envisions plans that will include
measures to reduce floods (which assumes man-made structures). As obvious and
basic as this assessment and maintenance requirement sounds, a recent evaluation
of the federally managed flood infrastructure in the  [*1785]  United States
revealed extensive vulnerabilities. n252 Fargo-Moorhead, Cedar Rapids, and
Sacramento all have plans in process designed to improve existing flood
infrastructure. Because these projects can be extremely expensive and have
broader implications for the surrounding area, federal involvement is
appropriate. In each of these cases, however, the federal government's
involvement in developing structural solutions has done more to highlight the
weaknesses of United States flood policy than to demonstrate effective,
innovative solutions.

   In the Red River Basin, Fargo and Moorhead requested that the Corps help them
develop a flood management plan, but the resulting flood management plans have
created a risk-shifting problem, by increasing flooding in other areas, and
ultimately threaten the project's political viability at the state level. The
Corps's first proposal, set forth in the Draft Environmental Impact Statement in
June 2010, proposed the structural solution of a thirty-six-mile-long diversion
canal around Fargo-Moorhead. n253 The Corps selected a plan that would create an
earthen diversion channel 100 to 300 feet in width with a maximum depth of
twenty-nine feet and a construction footprint of 6560 acres. The cost for the
project would be approximately $ 1.4 billion. n254 "At 36 miles long, three
stories deep and two football fields across from bank to bank, the project would
be one of the nation's most ambitious flood control efforts in history." n255

   Downstream interest and environmental groups were very unhappy with this plan
and they demonstrated that the Corps had underestimated the likely downstream
flooding impacts and scope. n256 The proposed diversion canal would not only
cause significant flooding, it would cross the border into Canada. In response
to comments and further assessment of the downstream impacts, the  [*1786]
Corps redesigned the project, incorporating a new and substantial flood
staging/retention component immediately upstream of Fargo-Moorhead, consisting
of a 50,000 acre-foot storage basin (4360 acres) behind a nearly twelve-mile
embankment and an adjacent 150,000 acre-foot floodplain staging area. n257 In
April 2011, the Corps published a Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement
(SEIS) for this revised project. n258 The proposal, now consisting of the
storage basin, the staging area, and the diversion channel, became more complex
than the 2010 channel-only project.

   Naturally, the changed plan shifted upstream the burden and community
concern. n259 Thirty-three entities have come together under a joint powers
authority to oppose the current plan and threaten suit. n260 They argue that the
new plan will permanently displace Oxbow, Hickson, and Bakke Addition and
subject more than 54,700 acres south of Fargo to more water. n261 These towns
argue that under the North Dakota Constitution, the government will be taking
their property by eminent domain for private economic gain in the form of
opportunity for growth of Fargo. n262 In response to these concerns, ring
[*1787]  dikes will be built around at least some of these at-risk towns. n263
The Corps continues to revisit its plan n264 and the state environmental
agencies are still examining the project under the respective state
environmental protection acts. n265

   Similarly, the Corps's flood management plan for Cedar Rapids has created no
tangible results to date. It provides flood reduction management to the east
side of the Cedar River in downtown Cedar Rapids, which includes a majority of
the commercial and industrial structures in the downtown area. n266 The plan is
comprised of a system of 3.15 miles of earthen levees, floodwalls, and closure
structures. n267 Concrete floodwalls comprise approximately two thirds of the
total alignment length. n268 The Corps's preferred plan would be constructed to
a stage of 32.4 feet, approximately 1.3 feet higher than the June 2008 flood
crest, which the Corps characterized as providing a "substantial degree of risk
reduction to the area." n269 It would substantially reduce flood risk to the
east bank of the river in Cedar Rapids, which includes approximately 600
residents and 9340 employees. n270

   Cedar Rapids was not satisfied with the Corps's decision to eliminate the
plan that would provide flood protection to both sides of the river and raised
environmental justice concerns in its comments to the Corps's proposed flood
management project. n271 In particular,  [*1788]  many of the residents in the
flood-affected homes were located on the west side of the Cedar River in working
class neighborhoods with a high percentage of the elderly, poor and disabled, as
well as female heads of households. n272 The City of Cedar Rapids argued that
the Corps's benefit cost analysis fails to account for the impact that a
subsequent flood would have on Cedar Rapids considering that it suffered such
major consequences in 2008 and has been left vulnerable. n273

   The City of Cedar Rapids was not alone in suggesting that the City's
preferred alternative should be considered in more depth, evaluating its level
of flood damage reduction compared to the other alternatives. The Corps sent out
the Feasibility Study for an independent peer review and the resulting report,
issued in 2010, recommends that the Corps give greater consideration to the
economic evaluation in light of the sustained damage from the 2008 flood; the
report suggests that the environmental justice issues require a deeper analysis.
n274 Still, the Corps moved forward. Lacking was the Corps's stated
justification for its decision to override the environmental justice
consideration in this situation. As of 2013, Cedar Rapids has been left trying
to find funding to protect the west side of the Cedar River. n275

   In the Sacramento region, the CVFPP promises "stronger levees, enhanced flood
capacity, a healthier ecosystem, improved preparations for and responses to
flood emergencies, greater resiliency, and leaner, more efficient operations."
n276 California also increased the required level of protection in urban areas,
reflecting its acknowledgement of a likely increase in flood conditions. n277
The CVFPP aims to improve urban flood protection so that it can withstand the
200-year flood. n278 It provides guidelines, and references  [*1789]
anticipated DWR levee design requirements, for local governments regarding levee
construction and maintenance. These guidelines aim to improve original levee
construction so that (1) they are resilient even when overtopping occurs, (2)
setbacks are provided when possible to reduce damage from overtopping, and (3)
mitigating measures are in place such as secondary levees, berms, and raised
roads. n279 These developments are encouraging because they reflect an
acceptance that levees will fail and that steps can be taken to prepare for that
failure.

   The Corps has been involved in improving existing federal reservoir projects
impacting the Central Valley, such as the Folsom Dam. The Corps and the
Department of Interior's Bureau of Reclamation collaborated to develop the
Folsom Dam Auxiliary Spillway project, a $ 962-million effort to help Sacramento
achieve 200-year level flood protection. n280 The Bureau of Reclamation is
charged with operating and maintaining the Folsom Dam and the Corps is
responsible for reducing the flood damage. n281 The auxiliary spillway, designed
to complement the Folsom Dam function, will improve the speed and effectiveness
of releasing water from Folsom Lake in high water events. Water will be
transported through a 3000-foot spillway chute from a control structure to the
American River; it will include a stilling basin to slow water to a pace that
the river can handle. n282 These efforts are under way. n283

   Neither the Cedar Rapids nor Fargo-Moorhead federal plans have been built to
date. Both have been approved by the Corps and presented for inclusion in the
President's Budget. But, President Obama's proposed 2014 budget reduces the Army
Corps's budget and does not include any of these projects or any other river
flood projects for that matter. n284 The WRDA 2013, which could benefit the
[*1790]  Cedar Rapids and Fargo-Moorhead projects, passed the United States
Senate, but still awaits a vote by the House and then appropriations. n285 As
discussed in Part II above, the funding of Corps's projects through the budget
process leads to extended delays, causing the state and local governments to
take stop-gap measures to reduce flood risks. It also creates situations where,
by the time these projects are built, they may no longer represent the most
up-to-date solution.

   The lack of standards and maintenance of existing levees and the failure to
improve levees not only increase the risk to citizens in harm's way, but also
may raise liability concerns for the local and state governments. In 2006, the
Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency (SAFCA) issued a white paper, noting a
number of the factors compelling action to evaluate and improve flood protection
including the rapid urban growth. n286 SAFCA encouraged the California
legislature to develop a comprehensive plan to provide statewide standards for
levees, and clarify issues regarding liability of the state and local
governments for flooding. n287 SAFCA's call to address liability concerns stems
from Paterno v. State of California, n288 where the State was ordered to pay
more than $ 400 million dollars for damages associated with the failure of the
Linda levee, which had been built long ago by local governments and later
adopted into the State's system of levees. In the court's words, "the State must
be charged with knowledge of how the levee was built. It operated the levee for
decades and had ample opportunity to examine it. If it chose not to do so for
fiscal reasons, that would indicate the loss should be absorbed by the State."
n289 In response to the Paterno case, the California legislature passed AB 70 in
2007; AB 70 states that if the local government "unreasonably" approved new
development in  [*1791]  a previously undeveloped area, it must contribute its
fair and reasonable share for any liability associated with flooding. n290 The
Paterno case should serve as a warning for other local and state governments
charged with increased responsibility for flood management.

   Conclusion

 These three case studies illustrate the profound evolution in flood management
theory that has occurred since the 1968 enactment of the federal flood insurance
program. This change is beginning to appear in the flood plain. There is a
growing recognition that the use of climate change data, or at least improved
flood forecasting data, will improve flood preparation. The consideration of
ecosystem restoration and expanded green space along riverfronts reflects a
shift in thinking about the need to look beyond structural solutions.
Unfortunately, the transition to integrated flood management remains more theory
than practice. The legacy of reliance on structural protection exerts a powerful
force on all levels of government and remains the preferred option. The
incomplete transition to integrated flood management stems, in large part, from
the lack of coherent guidance from the federal government compared to the EU
Floods Directive. The federal government also has failed to provide adequate
proactive funding for innovative approaches to flood management. Thus, local
governments continue to underestimate risks, encourage moral hazard behavior,
and engage in up or downstream risk shifting.

   Local governments and regional entities have an opportunity to lead the way
for the federal government by modeling integrated flood management. They must
address directly the tension between urban growth and increased flood risks to
achieve this goal. Local governments must accept and communicate to its
residents the need for land use planning that reflects a more accurate
assessment of flood risks, including making room for the river. If local
governments pay attention as the innovative and bold plans, such as the Central
Valley's effort, move forward, momentum may build for more sustainable
approaches to flood management. The federal government also can build on these
improvements by developing  [*1792]  comprehensive guidelines and financial
incentives that reinforce budding success stories.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
GovernmentsLocal GovernmentsFinanceGovernmentsPublic ImprovementsSanitation &
WaterInsurance LawProperty InsuranceFlood Insurance

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  Carol Kino, Maya Lin's New Memorial is a City, N.Y. Times, Apr. 25, 2013,
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/28/arts/design/maya-lins-here-and-there-at-pace-g
allery.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0. Maya Lin considered the floods associated with
Hurricane Sandy a wake-up call to reconsider how we should live with nature in
the future. Id. For a thorough analysis of why this will be difficult, see
Jedediah Purdy, American Natures: The Shape of Conflict in Environmental Law, 36
Harv. Envtl. L. Rev. 169 (2012), and for a fictional view of what Mother Nature
may have in store for the United States, see Nathaniel Rich, Odds Against
Tomorrow (2013).





n2.  James M. Wright, National Association of Flood Plain Managers, The Nation's
Responses to Flood Disasters: A Historical Account 12 (2000), available at
http://www.floods/org/PDF/hist_fpm.pdf.





n3.  See Flooding: Devastating Floods and Heavy Rains, Nat'l Res. Def. Council,
www.nrdc.org/health/climate/floods.asp (last visited Oct. 14, 2013) (presenting
the map of vulnerable flood areas).





n4.  National Flood Damages, U.S. Army Corps Engineers,
http://www.corpsnedmanuals.us/FloodDamageReduction/FDRID008NatlFldDamage.asp
(last visited Oct. 14, 2013).





n5.  Ass'n of State Flood Plain Managers, Flood Mapping the Nation: A Cost
Analysis for the Nation's Flood Map Inventory 3 (2013) (citing Nat'l Research
Council, Mapping the Zone: Improving Flood Map Accuracy (2009)).





n6.  Wright, supra note 2, at 12 (citing Dennis S. Mileti, Disaster by Design: A
Reassessment of Natural Hazards in the United States (1999)) ("The ... flood
control laws of the early 20th century, were due, in part, to the prevailing
view that we could build our way out of almost any problem, with engineers
revered in American society then as only rock stars and sports heroes are today.
Many still believe technology can be used to control nature, although engineers
no longer enjoy such reverence in our society.").





n7.  Retreat from areas vulnerable to floods has been an integral part of flood
damage prevention strategy since Gilbert White's pioneering work in the 1940s,
discussed infra notes 96-99. Retreat runs through all modern discussions of
flood management. See, e.g., World Health Org., Floods: Climate Change and
Adaptation Strategies for Human Health 6 (2002), available at
http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/wcasp/meetings/documents/floodresult.pdf
("Disincentives to building in flood plains are also likely in the future with
the refusal of insurance companies to insure new developments.").





n8.  See infra notes 78-88 and accompanying text.





n9.  See Robert A. Caro, The Years of Lyndon Johnson: The Path to Power 369
(1990).





n10.  To limit the Article's scope, we draw a somewhat artificial distinction
between floods and flooding. Flooding, as we define it, refers to localized
accumulations of water from the small-scale alteration of land surfaces and
stream channels. To a victim, unwanted water is unwanted water. Existing laws do
much less to encourage the prevention of damage from major river and coastal
floods than the variety of legal doctrines and statutes that address liability
for localized flooding damage. See, e.g., Stillwater of Crowne Point Homeowners
Ass'n v. Kovich, 865 F. Supp. 2d 922, 946 (N.D. In. 2011) (holding the city
liable for issuing permits to block flow of creek in violation of state Flood
Control Act); see also Maxine Burkett, Litigating Climate Change: Adaptation:
Theory, Practice, and Corrective (Climate) Justice, 42 Envtl. Rep. News &
Analysis 11144, 11152-56 (2012), available at
http://elr.info/news-analysis/42/11144/litigating-climate-change-adaptation-theo
ry-practice-and-corrective-climate.





n11.  Nat'l Wildlife Fed'n, Changing Course: Why Protecting Flood Plains is Good
for People and Wildlife 28 (2013). This idea is very slowly being put into
practice in the Puget Sound area of Washington State after a Biological Opinion
for the National Flood Insurance Program defined "the minimum requirements
necessary to prevent further harm to floodplain habitat from new development."
Id. To implement the opinion, "FEMA must revise its implementation of the NFIP
in Puget Sound to fully comply with the requirements of the Biological Opinion
and the Endangered Species Act. This includes making flood insurance rate maps
more accurate and incorporating future conditions such as climate change ... ."
Id.





n12.  See infra notes 146-56 and accompanying text.





n13.  Wright, supra note 2, at 3.





n14.  Toby Wilkinson, The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt 29 (2010).





n15.  Id.





n16.  The construction of dykes to halt the spread of flood waters and to
increase the current to flush silt downstream dates back to at least the tenth
century C.E. in China. Randall A. Dodgen, Controlling the Dragon: Confucian
Engineers and the Yellow River in Late Imperial China 14 (2001) (explaining that
efforts to control flooding on the Yellow River using levees and canals were
documented as early as the tenth century B.C.E.).





n17.  See, e.g., John Reps, Town Planning in Frontier America 59 (1965).





n18.  Martin Hoerling et. al., Regional Precipitation Trends: Distinguishing
Natural Variability from Anthropogenic Forcing, 23 J. Climate 2131, 2143 (2010),
available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/2009JCLI3420.1.





n19.  Id. at 2142.





n20.  Part of the problem is that current General Circulation Models "are not
designed to provide information" at the scale "for making flood planning
decisions." EPA & Cal. Dep't of Water Resources, Climate Change Handbook for
Regional Water Planning 5-57 (2011), available at
http://www.water.ca.gov/climatechange/docs/Climate_Change_Handbook_Regional_Wate
r_Planning.pdf.





n21.  U.S. Dept. of the Interior, Have Floods Changed with Increasing CO2
Levels?, U.S. Geological Surv. (Oct. 24, 2011),
http://www.usgs.gov/newsroom/article.asp?ID=3006 (discussing Robert Hirsch &
K.R. Ryberg, Have Floods Changed With Increasing CO2 Levels?, 57 J. Hydrologic
Sci. 1 (2012)).





n22.  Sarah Lyall, Heat, Flood or Icy Cold, Extreme Weather Rages Worldwide, N.Y
Times, Jan. 10, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/11/science/earth/extreme-
weather-grows-in-frequency-and-intensity-around-world.html.





n23.  Robin Kundis Craig, "Stationarity is Dead" - Long Live Transformation:
Five Principles for Climate Change Adaptation Law, 33 Harv. Envtl. L. Rev. 9, 37
(2010).





n24.  The concept dates to 1973 and was a compromise between Corps of Engineers
flood estimates for dams and levees, which ranged from 200 to 500 year events,
and calculations that cities used to construct storm water run-off facilities.
FEMA, The 100 Year Flood Myth, available at
http://training.fema.gov/EMIWeb/edu/docs/hazrm/Handout%203-5.pdf.





n25.  Jessica Ludy & G. Matt Kondolf, Flood Risk Perception in Lands Protected
by 100-Year Levees, 61 Nat. Hazards 829, 831-32 (2012), available at
http://www.floods.org/ace-files/documentlibrary/Hot_Topics/LudyKondolf2012_Flood
RiskPerceptionPaper.pdf; see also Rodger Pielke, Jr., Nine Fallacies of Floods,
42 J. Climate Change 413, 416 (1999), available at
http://sciencepolicy.colorado.edu/admin/publication_files/resource-78-1999.15.pd
f.





n26.  Id. at 418.





n27.  See infra notes 100-08 and accompanying text.





n28.  Richard Posner, An Economic Analysis of Law 136-37 (8th ed. 2011). The
concept originated with insurance company efforts, such as deductibles, to
induce beneficiaries to refrain from activities that would trigger the liability
under policy.





n29.  Water Resources Development Act of 2007 Pub. L. No. 110-114, § 2035, 121
Stat. 1041, 1091 (codified at 33 U.S.C. § 2344 (2006)). The Army Corps
determined that 122 levees under its control were at risk of failure. Nat'l
Research Council, Levees and the National Flood Insurance Program: Improving
Policies and Practice, at ix (2013), available at
http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=18309&page=R1.





n30.  John Flesher & Cain Burdeau, AP Impact: Deficient Levees Found Across
America, Associated Press, Jan. 17, 2013,
http://bigstory.ap.org/article/ap-impact-deficient-levees-found-across-america.
Not even New Orleans' upgraded levees are completely safe. The $ 10 billion
upgrade of the levees around New Orleans has provided greater security but is
not keeping pace with their rate of changing risk according to a report
commissioned by the South Louisiana Flood Protection Authority-East. Mark
Schleifstein, New Orleans Area Levee Improvements Already Outpaced by Science,
Engineering, Engineer Says, Times-Picayune (New Orleans), Jan. 17, 2013,
http://www.nola.com/environment/index.ssf/2013/01/science_engineering_already_ou
.html. The report, which is intended to guide future upgrades of the system,
notes that risk factors such as soil subsidence and sea level rise are unfolding
at higher rates than designers had hoped and planned for. Without additional
enhancements or changes to development patterns the area could face higher
flooding risks and the potential for changes in its eligibility for flood
insurance. The Association of Civil Engineers' 2013 Report Card of America's
Infrastructure gave the grade of D-, at risk, to the condition of levees in the
United States. See 2013 Report Card of America's Infrastructure: Levees, Am.
Soc'y Civ. Engineers,
http://www.infrastructurereportcard.org/a/#p/levees/overview (last visited Oct
14, 2013).





n31.  See Jeffrey Opperman et al., Integrated Floodplain-Reservoir Management as
an Ecosystem-Based Adaptation Strategy To Climate Change (2011),
http://ecosystemcommons.org/sites/default/files/andrewwarner_floodplains_climate
_change.pdf; see also Report Card of America's Infrastructure: Dams, Am. Soc'y
Civ. Engineers, http://www.infrastructurereportcard.org/a/#p/dams/overview (last
visited Oct 14, 2013) (noting that the average age of the 84,000 dams in the
United States is fifty-two years old).





n32.  See David R. Conrad & Edward A. Thomas, Reforming Federal Support for
Risky Development, in The Hamilton Project: 15 Ways to Rethink the Federal
Budget 4 (2013) (advocating for the elimination of federal subsidies for risky
development, including grants for infrastructure development and assumption of
costs for individual property losses in the wake of a catastrophe, because these
subsidies incentivize risky behavior).





n33.  Veronique Bruggeman et al., Insurance Against Catastrophe: Government
Stimulation of Insurance Markets for Catastrophic Risk, 23 Duke Envtl. L. &
Pol'y F. 185, 208 (2012).





n34.  See generally A. Dan Tarlock, United States Flood Control Policy: The
Incomplete Transition From the Illusion of Total Protection to Risk Management,
23 Duke Envtl. L. & Pol'y F. 151, 158 (2012); see also Robert Kelley, Battling
the Inland Sea: Floods, Public Policy, and the Sacramento Valley (1989) (telling
the story of the increasing centralization and scale of flood control in
California's Sacramento River Valley).





n35.  2013 Report Card of America's Infrastructure: Levees: Conditions &
Capacity, Am. Soc'y Civ. Engineers,
http://www.infrastructurereportcard.org/a/#p/levees/conditions-and-capacity
(last visited Oct. 14, 2013).





n36.  See generally Nat'l Research Council, Opportunities in Hydrologic Sciences
(1991), available at http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=1543 (tracing the
development of hydrologic sciences from the Greeks to the present day).





n37.  See Michele Landis Dauber, The Sympathetic State: Disaster Relief and the
Origins of the American Welfare State (2012) (tracing the evolution of the
central premise of federal disaster relief: disaster victims are the moral
equivalent of victims of an act of God).





n38.  See infra Part III.





n39.  See D. Andrew Austin, Trends in Discretionary Spending 27 (2012)
("Spending in some policy areas, such as community and regional development,
agriculture, natural resources and environment, and general government, has
grown very slowly or has been cut. Spending in other areas, such as war costs,
veterans' programs, international affairs, and Medicare administration has
expanded rapidly in the last decade."); see also State of California et al.,
California's Flood Future: Recommendations for Managing the State's Flood Risk
3-4 (2013) ("Most agencies believe that Federal funding programs will be
reduced, if not eliminated. Reductions in Federal spending signal that USACE
might not continue to fund studies or ongoing projects at the same rate as in
the past.").





n40.  See infra notes 74-83.





n41.  J. David Rogers, Evolution of the Levee System Along the Lower Mississippi
River, Mo. Univ. Sci. & Tech.,
http://web.mst.edu/[#x7E]rogersda/levees/Evolution%20of%20the%20Levee%20System%2
0Along%20the%20Mississippi.pdf (last visited Oct. 14, 2013).





n42.  See Christine A. Klein & Sandra B. Zellmer, Mississippi River Stories:
Lessons from a Century of Unnatural Disasters, 60 SMU L. Rev. 1471, 1479 (2007)
(describing the "levees-only" theory); see also Richard G. Weingardt, James
Buchanan Eads, 5 Leadership & Mgmt. in Engineering 70, 73 (2005).





n43.  For a history of the alternative theory which involved working with
natural riverine processes, and dominated nineteenth century flood control
theory, see Jeremy Purseglove, Taming the Flood: A History and Natural History
of Rivers and Wetlands 150 (1988). See generally Weingardt, supra note 42.





n44.  See Miss. River Comm'n, The Mississippi River & Tributaries Project:
History of the Lower Mississippi River Levee System 5 (2007), available at
http://www.mvd.usace.army.mil/Portals/52/docs/Levees%20info%20paper.pdf.





n45.  Id. at 6.





n46.  See Klein and Zellmer, supra note 42, at 1482-83.





n47.  Flood Control Act of 1928, ch. 569, 45 Stat. 534 (codified as amended at
33 U.S.C. §§702a-702m, 704 (2006)).





n48.  Id. § 1(d).





n49.  Flood Control Act of 1928, ch. 569, 45 Stat. 534 (codified as amended at
33 U.S.C. §§702a-702m, 704 (2006)). Section 2 stated that in view of the extent
of national concern for the control of these floods in the interests of national
prosperity, the flow of interstate commerce, and the movement of the United
States mails; and, in view of the gigantic scale of the project, involving flood
waters of a volume and flowing from a drainage area largely outside the States
most affected, and far exceeding those of any other river in the United States,
no local contribution to the project therein adopted was required. However,
Congress did not expressly endorse federal responsibility until 1936. See infra
notes 64-69.





n50.  Klein & Zellner, supra note 42, at 1484-85.





n51.  Flood Control Act of 1928, ch. 569, 45 Stat. 534, 535.





n52.  See 33 U.S.C. § 702j (2006). The roots of the legislation go back to the
Act of Mar. 3, 1925, ch. 467, 43 Stat. 1186, 1190 (1925), which mandated joint
Federal Power Commission and Corps studies of the feasibility of power
development on navigable streams. The resulting 308 studies, H.R. Doc. No.
69-308 (1927), laid the foundation for the subsequent expansion of the Corps's
planning responsibility and mission expansion.





n53.  See Robert B. Jansen, Dams from the Beginning, U.S. Soc'y on Dams,
ussdams.com/ussdeducation/Media/damsfrombegin.doc? (last visited Oct. 14, 2013)
(discussing the early history of dams, especially dam projects on the Nile
River); see also Steven Mithen, Thirst: Water and Power in the Ancient World
90-92 (2012) (reporting that the Mycenaens built a dam across the Manessi River
and diverted flood flows into another river below the city of Tyrins).





n54.  Asit K. Biswas & Cecilia Tortajada, Development and Large Dams: A Global
Perspective, 17 Water Resources Dev. 9, 9-10 (2001).





n55.  J. David Rogers, The 1913 Dayton Flood and the Birth of Modern Flood
Control Engineering in the United States, Mo. Univ. Sci. & Tech,
http://web.mst.edu/[#x7E]rogersda/umrcourses/ge301/Dayton%20Flood-Updated.pdf
(last visited Oct. 14, 2013).





n56.  The flood is well documented. See The Great Dayton Flood of 1913, Dayton
Hist. Books Online, http://www.daytonhistorybooks.com/page/page/1566099.htm
(last visited Oct. 14, 2013) (listing links to information about, and personal
accounts of the flood).





n57.  See Rogers, supra note 55.





n58.  See Samuel P. Hays, Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency: The
Progressive Conservation Movement, 1890-1920, at 208-11 (1959) (explaining the
hostilities of the Corps towards dam construction).





n59.  See Act of Mar. 3, 1925, ch. 467, 43 Stat. 1186, 1190.





n60.  See H.R. Doc. No. 69-308 (1926).





n61.  See 33 U.S.C. § 702j (2006).





n62.  See generally John R. Ferrell, The Big Dam Era (1993).





n63.  Id.





n64.  Pub. L. No. 74-738, 49 Stat. 1572 (1936) (codified as amended at 33 U.S.C.
§ 701a (2006)).





n65.  Id.





n66.  United States v. W. Va. Power Co., 122 F.2d 733, 736-37 (4th Cir. 1941).
Although the Corps and the Office of Management and Budget are committed to
formal benefit-cost analysis, Congress is not bound by good practice and has
unlimited discretion to decide whether a project it chooses to approve meets the
statutory standard.





n67.  See Richard N.L. Andrews, Managing the Environment, Managing Ourselves: A
History of American Environmental Policy 161-69 (1999).





n68.  For example, today there are thirty-seven flood-control projects
(including dams) in West Virginia. See Flood Control, W. Va. Encyclopedia,
http://www.wvencyclopedia.org/articles/2196 (last visited August 17, 2013).





n69.  Nat'l Research Council, National Water Resource Challenges Facing the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers 13 (2011).





n70.  See Daniel McCool, Command of the Waters: Iron Triangles, Federal Water
Development, and Indian Water 103-04 (Univ. of Ariz. Press, 1994) (1987).





n71.  Pub. L. 89-80, 79 Stat. 244 (1965).





n72.  Caro, supra note 9, at 767.





n73.  Water Resources Planning Act of 1965, Pub. L. No 89-80, § 201, 79 Stat.
246 (1965) (codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. § 1962b (2006)).





n74.  See Tarlock, supra note 34, at 175 (noting that the last WRDA was enacted
in 2007); see also Water Resources Development Act of 2007, Pub. L. No. 110-114,
121 Stat. 1041.





n75.  Id.





n76.  Nicole T. Carter & H. Steven Hughes, Cong. Research Serv., RL32065, Army
Corps of Engineers Water Resource Activities: Authorization and Appropriations 6
(2005).





n77.  Id.





n78.  This is a worldwide trend. See Olive Heffernan, No Going Back: With
Nations Doing Little to Slow Climate Change, Many People Are Ramping Up to Adapt
to the Inevitable, 491 Nature 659, 659-60 (2012).





n79.  See Nat'l Res. Council, supra note 69, at 2, 10-13 (noting that from 1983
to 2011, the Corps's capital stock portfolio value decreased by $ 85 billion
dollars).





n80.  See Carter & Hughes, supra note 76, at 6.





n81.  See Nicole T. Carter & Charles V. Stern, Cong. Research Serv. R41243, Army
Corps of Engineers Water Resource Projects: Authorization and Appropriations 1
(2013), available at http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R41243.pdf.





n82.  Id. at 2.





n83.  Id. at 3.





n84.  See generally Carter & Hughes, supra note 76.





n85.  See Comm. on U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs Water Resources Sci., Eng'g, and
Planning, Corps of Engineers Water Resources Infrastructure: Deterioration,
Investment, or Divestment? 49-50 (2013).





n86.  See infra notes 198-202 and accompanying text.





n87.  See Robert R.M. Verchick & Abby Hall, Adapting to Climate Change While
Planning for Disaster: Footholds, Rope Lines, and the Iowa Floods, 2011 BYU L.
Rev. 2203, 2236-37 (2011).





n88.  The White House Council on Envtl. Quality, Progress Report of the
Interagency Climate Change Adaptation Task Force: Recommended Actions in Support
of a National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 7-8 (2010).





n89.  See State of California et al., supra note 39, at 4-4 to 4-5.





n90.  The Mississippi River city of Davenport, Iowa is a prime example of this
strategy. Unlike its neighbors, Davenport does not have a flood wall. Instead,
it has purchased buildings along the River and developed an extensive park
system. However, it has now obtained federal funding to put a wall around its
water treatment plant. Ryan J. Foley, Davenport, Iowa Building Flood Wall, but
Is it Too Late?, Omaha.com (Mar. 27, 2011),
http://www.omaha.com/article/20110327/AP09/303279960.





n91.  Id.





n92.  In 1987, the Corps estimated that it had prevented $ 25 billion in
downstream flood damages in lower Missouri River basin states. North Dakota's
Usage of the Missouri River, Garrison Diversion,
http://garrisondiversion.org/pdf/North_Dakotas_Usage_of_the_Missouri_River.pdf
(last visited Oct. 14, 2013); see also U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, Northern
Division, Missouri River Mainstem Reservoir System: Post 2011 Flood Event
Analysis of Missouri River Flood Control Storage, at iv (2012) (discussing the
possibility of increasing flood protection storage on the Missouri by concluding
"that increasing the volume of flood control storage in the [Missouri River
Mainstem Flood Control] System would enhance flood risk reduction in a repeat of
the 2011 flood event, but would not have prevented record releases from the
reservoirs or widespread damages"). For example, a Corps analysis of the
possibility of increasing flood protection storage on the Missouri concluded
"that increasing the volume of flood control storage in the System would enhance
flood risk reduction in a repeat of the 2011 flood event, but would not have
prevented record releases from the reservoirs or widespread damages." Id.





n93.  See supra note 90.





n94.  The Flood Control Act of 1928 immunized the federal government for
liability from damage from the operation of a federal flood control project. See
Pub. L. No. 70-391, 45 Stat. 534 (codified as amended at 33 U.S.C.§§702a-702m,
704 (2006)). The Supreme Court engrafted a significant limitation of this
immunity by limiting the federal government's liability to damages determined by
the character of waters that caused the harm, as opposed to the character of a
federal flood-control project that was supposed to prevent the harm. See Central
Green Co. v. United States, 531 U.S. 425, 434-36 (2001). In re Katrina Canal
Breaches Consolidated Litigation, 647 F. Supp. 2d 644, 648 (E.D. La. 2009),
applied Central Green, and held that the federal government was liable for the
negligent construction of the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet (MRGO) navigation
channel's levee system. On appeal, the court upheld the district court's
interpretation of 33 U.S.C. § 702, but ultimately reversed and remanded the case
because, in keeping with Central Green, the flooding damage was not caused by
flood-control activity or negligence therein, but rather, due to the
construction of the MRGO, which fell within the discretionary function exemption
of the Federal Tort Claims Act. See In re Katrina Canal Breaches Consol. Litig.,
675 F.3d 381, 444 (5th Cir. 2012).





n95.  John Schwartz & Campbell Robertson, New Orleans Levees Hold, and Outsiders
Want In, N.Y. Times, Sept. 6, 2012,
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/07/us/new-orleans-levees-hold-and-outsiders-want-
in.html?_r=0.





n96.  See Oliver Houck, Can We Save New Orleans?, 19 Tulane Envtl. L.J. 1, 50-54
(2006).





n97.  See Nat'l Research Council, supra note 69, at 15.





n98.  Marisol Bello & Peter Eisler, Ill. Town Finds Life Does Go on After Flood,
U.S.A Today, June 20, 2008, http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/weather/
floods/2008-06-19-flood-town_N.htm.





n99.  Laura Nahmias & Lisa Fleisher, Gun Laws, Rebuilding Set Agenda for Cuomo,
Wall St. J., Jan. 9, 2013,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887323442804578232194190548254.html.
However, the nesting urge is strong and the state estimates that only ten to
fifteen percent of the 10,000 affected homeowners will accept buyouts. Thomas
Kaplan, Homeowners in Flood Zones Opt to Rebuild, Not Move, N.Y. Times, Apr. 26,
2013,
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/27/nyregion/new-yorks-storm-recovery-plan-gets-fe
deral-approval.html?_r=0.





n100.  See, e.g., Associated Programme for Flood Mgmt., WMO-No. 997, Legal and
Institutional Aspects of Flood Management 23 (2006).





n101.  Gilbert Fowler White, Human Adjustment to Floods: A Geographical Approach
to the Flood Problem in the United States (1945).





n102.  Neil Macdonald et al., The Significance of Gilbert White's 1945 Paper
Human Adjustment to Floods in the Development of Risk and Hazard Management, 36
Progress Physical Geography 125, 125 (2011), available at
http://ppg.sagepub.com/content/36/1/125.full.pdf+html.





n103.  See generally White, supra note 101.





n104.  Gilbert F. White Nat'l Flood Pol'y Forum, Floodplain Management 2050, at
13 (2007).





n105.  New York Governor Andrew Cuomo has proposed spending $ 400 million in
federal funds to purchase homes destroyed in whole or in part by Hurricane
Sandy. "The land would never be built on again. Some properties would be turned
into dunes, wetlands or other natural buffers ... ." Thomas Kaplan, Cuomo
Seeking Home Buyouts in Flood Zones, N.Y. Times, Feb. 3, 2013,
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/04/nyregion/cuomo-seeking-home-buyouts-in-flood-z
ones.html?pagewanted=all&_r=1&. New Jersey Governor Chris Christie has not
proposed such a drastic step but he has agreed to adopt FEMA floodplain maps,
which will require many homeowners to raise their homes and perhaps not rebuild
at all. James Osborne, Many at Shore Will Be Forced to Raise Their Homes to
Protect Against Future Storms, Phila. Inquirer Online, Jan. 23, 2013,
http://articles.philly.com/2013-01-26/news/36550334_1_new-flood-maps-floodplain-
maps-flood-insurance.





n106.  H.R. Con. Res. 41, 113th Cong. (2013) (enacted).





n107.  As a Forbes article noted, "taxpayers should be rightfully disappointed
that the package contains no provisions requiring stronger planning measures to
protect against more powerful future storms." Mindy Lubber, Rethinking Our Place
in a Post-Hurricane Sandy World, Forbes, Feb. 7, 2013,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/mindylubber/2013/02/07/rethinking-our-place-in-a-pos
t-hurricane-sandy-world/.





n108.  Rob Jordan, What's Ahead for Adaptation: Making America More Resilient,
Stanford Woods Inst. Envt (Apr. 4, 2013),
http://woods.stanford.edu/news-events/news/whats-ahead-adaptation-making-america
-more-resilient (summarizing a panel discussion addressing the policy
implications of the survey).





n109.  The courts have long accepted the proposition that the police power
extends to preventing people from engaging in risk behavior when it damages
them. See, e.g., Vartelas v. Water Res. Comm'n, 153 A.2d 822, 825-26 (Conn.
1959); Gove v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of Chatham, 831 N.E.2d 865, 871-72 (Mass.
2005) (flood plain ordinance which reduced the value of 1.8 lot on Cape Cod from
$ 192,000.00 to $ 23,000.00 was not a taking, inter alia, because a flood would
pose risk to rescue workers as well as the planned home's occupants).





n110.  Flood Control Act of 1968, Pub. L. No. 90-483, § 1301, 82 Stat. 739
(codified at 42 U.S.C. § 4001(e) (2006)).





n111.  42 U.S.C. § 4102(c)(1) (2006).





n112.  N.Y. Dep't of State, Local Government Handbook 139 (6th ed. 2011),
available at
http://www.dos.ny.gov/lg/publications/Local_Government_Handbook.pdf.





n113.  The role that lenders can play in increasing the amount of flood
insurance has begun to play out in the courts. Skansgaard v. Bank of America
illustrates the continuing resistance to the flood insurance program. See
Skansgaard v. Bank of Am., 896 F. Supp. 2d 944, 946-47 (W.D. Wash. 2011). A
mortgagor, located in a floodplain, initially purchased flood insurance to cover
only the principal balance of the loan. After the mortgage was sold, the new
bank required insurance for the replacement value of the improvements. The deed
of trust provided that "borrower shall insure all improvements on the property,
whether now in existence or subsequently erected, against loss by floods to the
extent required by the Secretary of HUD." Id. at 947. The district court held
that the clause was ambiguous as to whether the lender had the discretion to
require the additional insurance, and thus plaintiff's action for both breach of
contract and the implied covenant of fair dealing survived summary judgment. Id.
at 949. But see McKenzie v. Wells Fargo Home Mortg., Inc., No. C-11-04965 JCS,
2012 WL 5372120, at 19 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 30, 2012) (dismissing plaintiff's breach
of contract claim because defendants "did not breach their contract ... simply
by requiring flood insurance above the minimum amount specified in the NSFH
[Notice of Special Flood Hazard]"). As the issue of lenders requiring increased
flood insurance plays out in courts across the country, the courts may help
determine whether increased flood insurance becomes more accepted in the future.





n114.  Rawle O. King, Cong. Research Serv., R42850, The National Flood Insurance
Program: Status and Remaining Issues for Congress 12 (2013).





n115.  See infra notes 116-20 and accompanying text.





n116.  The reasons lie deep in the human psyche. The recent Congressional
Research Service report observed that "behavioral scientists have noted that
many individuals in flood-prone areas often dismiss low-probability catastrophic
events, misunderstand the risk spreading function of insurance, and tend to be
optimistic regarding the prospects of damage to their property." See King, supra
note 114, at 3.





n117.  See, e.g., Vartelas v. Water Res. Comm'n, 153 A.2d 822, 870-71 (Conn.
1959); Turnpike Realty Co. v. Town of Dedham, 284 N.E.2d 891, 899 (Mass. 1972);
Mansoldo v. State of New Jersey, 898 A.2d 1018, 1022 (N.J. 2006). For an early,
influential articulation of this position, see Allison Dunham, Flood Control Via
the Police Power, 107 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1098, 1107 (1959). See generally J.B. Ruhl
& James E. Salzman, Climate Change Meets the Law of the Horse, 62 Duke L. Rev.
975, 975 (2013) (presenting an analysis of how climate change might impact
existing law including the law of land use controls).





n118.  Gove v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of Chatham, 831 N.E.2d 865, 870-71 (Mass.
2005).





n119.  Julian Conrad Juergensmeyer & Thomas H. Roberts, Land Use Planning and
Development Regulation Laws § 4.37, at 141 (2003). Of course, the city must
prove that the structure suffered the requisite percentage of damage. See L.B.
Stanon v. Town of Pawleys Island, 455 S.E.2d 171, 172 (S.C. 1995).





n120.  Maine State Planning Office, How to Prepare a Land Use Ordinance: A
Manual for Local Officials 84-85, (2011), available at
http://www.maine.gov/doc/commissioner/landuse/docs/HowToPrepareALandUseOrdinance
_2011.pdf.





n121.  The problem is especially acute for retreat strategies. See J. Peter
Byrne, The Cathedral Engulfed: Sea-Level Rise, Property Rights, and Time, 73 La.
L. Rev. 69, 96-100 (2012).





n122.  In 2003, the leading expert on flood plain zoning concluded that:



   Courts have only held regulations invalid in a few of the more than 125
appellate state and federal cases addressing floodplain regulations over the
last decade including many challenges to regulations as a taking of private
property. For cases upholding regulations, see, for example Beverly Bank v.
Illinois Department of Transportation, 579 N.E.2d 815 (Ill. 1991) (Court held
that Illinois legislature had the authority to prohibit the construction of new
residences in the 100-year floodway and that a taking claim was premature.).
State of Wisconsin v. Outagamie County Board of Adjustment, 532 N.W.2d 147 (Wis.
App., 1995) (Court held that variance for a replacement of fishing cottage in
the floodway of the Wolf River was barred by county shore-land zoning
ordinance.). Bonnie Briar Syndicate, Inc. v. Town of Mamaroneck, et al, 94
N.Y.2d 96 (N.Y. 1999) (Court rejected claim that the rezoning of 150 acre golf
course property important for flood storage from residential to solely
recreational use was a taking of private property.). Wyer v. Board of
Environmental Protection, 747 A.2d 192 (Me. 2000) (Court held that denial of a
variance under sand dune laws not a taking because property could be used for
parking, picnics, barbecues, and other recreational uses).

 John A. Kusler, Ass'n of State Floodplain Managers, Common Legal Questions
about Floodplain Regulations in the Courts 2 (2003).





n123.  E.g., First English Evangelical Lutheran Church of Glendale v. Cnty. of
Los Angeles, 482 U.S. 304 (1987). See generally Tarlock, supra note 34, at
178-80.





n124.  See generally Stueve Bros. Farms, LLC v. United States, 107 Fed. Cl. 469
(Fed. Cl. 2012); Town of Nags Head v. Toloczko, 863 F. Supp. 2d 516 (E.D.N.C.
2012) (section 1983 action against town which prevented rebuilding of a cottage
which rested on public trust land after storm washed away a significant amount
of sand around the building).





n125.  See generally Unit 5: The NFIP Floodplain Management Requirements, FEMA,
http://www.fema.gov/pdf/floodplain/nfip_sg_unit_5.pdf (last visited Oct. 14,
2013).





n126.  Thomas V. Cech, Principles of Water Resources: History, Development,
Management, and Policy 78 (2003).





n127.  There is extensive literature linking urban development, which decreases
surface absorption capacity, and subsequent flooding. E.g., C.P. Konrad, Effects
of Urban Development on Floods, U.S. Geological Survey (Jan. 9, 2013, 7:36 PM),
http://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/fs07603/.





n128.  Will Hewes & Andrew Fahlund, Weathering Change: Policy Reforms that Save
Money and Make Communities Safer 5-6, available at
http://www.americanrivers.org/assets/pdfs/global-warming-docs/weathering-change/
weathering-change-full-report.pdf.





n129.  Smith v. Town of Mendon, 822 N.E.2d 1214 (N.Y. 2004) (condition of
issuance of a building permit requiring that the property owner grant a
conservation easement for some portions of the site, including flood hazard
areas upheld in 5-4 decision).





n130.  42 U.S.C. § 4101b(e) (2006) provides:



   Upon the adoption by the Administrator of any recommendation by the Technical
Mapping Advisory Council for reviewing, updating, or maintaining National Flood
Insurance Program rate maps in accordance with this section, a community that
believes that its flood insurance rates in effect prior to adoption would be
affected by the adoption of such recommendation may submit a request for an
update of its rate maps, which may be considered at the Administrator's sole
discretion. The Administrator shall establish a protocol for the evaluation of
such community map update requests.

 42 U.S.C. § 4101b(e) (2006).





n131.  For a review of the process and the difficulty of members of the public
getting accurate information on the scale of the appeals process, see U.S. Gov't
Accountability Office, GAO-11-17, FEMA Flood Maps (2010).





n132.  King, supra note 114, at 3 (citing Anita Lee, Sandy Catches
Northeasterners Without Flood Coverage, Sun Herald, Nov. 2, 2012, http://www.
weather.com/news/sandy-northeasterners-no-insurance-201211.





n133.  Hewes & Fahlund, supra note 128, at 6.





n134.  Several provisions of the Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012 contain new
standards, including the 500-year flood and the new mapping program. See, e.g.,
Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-141, § 100219, 126 Stat. 405
(amending 42 U.S.C. § 4101(f)(2) (2006)); see also Ass'n of State Floodplain
Managers, supra note 5; Jessica Grannis, Analysis of How the Flood Insurance
Reform Act of 2012 (H.R. 4348) May Affect State and Local Adaptation Efforts
Analysis (2012), available at
http://www.georgetownclimate.org/sites/default/files/Analysis%20of%20the%20Flood
%20Insurance%20Reform%20Act%20of%202012.pdf.





n135.  Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-141, 126 Stat. 405
(2012).





n136.  Evan Lehmann, "Global Warming' Disappears from Flood Legislation, Climate
Info.: Responding to User Needs (Jul. 3, 2012),
http://www.climateneeds.umd.edu/climatewire-08-01-12/article-01.php.





n137.  King, supra note 114, at 22-23.





n138.  Katherine Bagely, New NYC Flood Maps Miss Climate Threat to Sandy
Rebuilding, Bloomberg, Feb. 7, 2013,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-02-07/new-nyc-flood-maps-miss-climate-threat-
to-sandy-rebuilding.html.





n139.  When private citizens attempt to take matters into their own hands, as
some have done in Southampton, New York, without coordinating with efforts of
other members of the community, risk shifting can cause substantial harm. See
Michael Schwirtz, Dispute in Hamptons Set Off by Attempt to Hold Back Ocean,
N.Y. Times, Region Section, April 17, 2013,
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/18/nyregion/southampton-homeowners-build-barricad
es-to-hold-back-sea.html?_r=0 ("Some local officials said they were worried that
the owners were engaging in an arms race with nature, installing higher and
higher barricades that could rapidly hasten erosion - essentially sacrificing
public beaches to save private homes.").





n140.  The literature is vast. See generally Advances in Urban Flood Management
(R. Ashley et al. eds., 2007); World Meteorological Org., Urban Flood Risk
Management: A Tool for Integrated Flood Management (2008).





n141.  E.g., U.N. Human Settlements Programme, Planning Sustainable Cities:
Global Report on Human Settlements 2009, at 5 (2009).





n142.  See Interagency Floodplain Mgmt. Review Comm., Sharing The Challenge:
Floodplain Management into the 21st Century (1994).





n143.  Id. at 74.





n144.  Id. at 105-12.





n145.  See Nat'l Research Council, The New Orleans Hurricane Protection System:
Assessing Pre-Katrina Vulnerability and Improving Mitigation and Preparedness
4-5 (2009); S.L. Stockton & K.D. White, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers'
Collaborative Approach to Twenty-First Century Challenges Posed by Global
Change, in Climate: Global Change and Local Adaptation (Igor Linkov & Todd S.
Bridges eds., 2011) (discussing the Corps's report).





n146.  Council Directive 2007/60/EC, 2007 O.J. (L 288) 27, 27.





n147.  E.g., Case C-147/07, Comm'n v. France, 2008 E.C.R. 1-0000 (France failed
to meet water quality objectives of the Water Framework Directive).





n148.  See Council Directive 2007/60/EC, supra note 146, at 32.





n149.  Id.





n150.  Id.





n151.  Id. at 27 ("Floods are natural phenomena which cannot be prevented.").





n152.  Id. at 30.





n153.  Id.





n154.  Id. at 31.





n155.  The Water Framework Directive requires that pollution management
decisions be based on ecological effects rather than sole reliance on the
standard parameters of pollution, and this has led to innovative monitoring and
ecological assessment systems. See Daniel Hering et al., The European Water
Framework Directive at Age 10: A Critical Review of the Achievements with
Recommendations for the Future, 408 Sci. Total Env't 4007 (2010). For a less
sanguine conclusion, see Henrik Josefsson & Lasse Baaner, The Water Framework
Directive - A Directive for the Twenty-First Century?, 23 J. Envt'l Law 463
(2011).





n156.  Scotland Used the Floods Directive in 2009 to enact The Flood Risk
Management Act, "which deliberately focuses attention on the extent to which the
reduction of flood risk might be achieved through both structural and
non-structural options ... including the potential for "natural features' in the
landscape to help retain flood water ... ." Chris Spray, Tom Ball & Josselin
Rowlland, Bridging the Water Law, Policy, Science Interface: Flood Risk
Management in Scotland, 20 Water L. 165, 172 (2009).





n157.  Red River Basin Comm'n, Red River Basin Natural Resource Framework Plan
12 (2005).





n158.  Id. at 4.





n159.  Id. at 9-10





n160.  Id. at 13.





n161.  U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, Final Fargo Moorhead Metro Feasibility Study
and Environmental Impact Statement: Fargo-Moorhead Flood Risk Management Plan at
ES-2 (2011).





n162.  N. Great Plains Water Consortium, Climate Cyclicity and the Economic
Vitality of the Northern Great Plains, available at
http://www.undeerc.org/Water/pdf/Climate-Cyclicity.pdf.





n163.  U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, supra note 161, at ES-4.





n164.  Id.





n165.  Id.





n166.  U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, Feasibility Study with Integrated
Environmental Assessment, Cedar River, Cedar Rapids, Iowa, Flood Management
Project 101, 102 (2011), available at
http://www.mvr.usace.army.mil/Portals/48/docs/FRM/CedarRapids/CRMainReport-Jan11
.pdf.





n167.  Battelle Mem'l Inst., Final Independent External Peer Review Report:
Cedar River - Cedar Rapids, Iowa, Flood Risk Management Feasibility Study with
Integrated Environmental Assessment, at i (2010), available at
http://www.usace.army.mil/Portals/2/docs/civilworks/Project%20Planning/cedar_rap
ids_rep.pdf.





n168.  U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, supra note 166, at 97.





n169.  See id.





n170.  See id.





n171.  See id.





n172.  See A Brief History of Sacramento, City of Sacramento,
http://www.cityofsacramento.org/brief-history.html (last visited Oct. 14, 2013).





n173.  Id.





n174.  Sacramento (City), California, U.S. Census Bureau,
http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/06/0664000.html (last visited Aug. 30,
2013).





n175.  Sacramento Valley Bioregion - An Overview, CA.gov,
http://ceres.ca.gov/geo_area/bioregions/Sacramento_Valley/about.html (last
visited Oct. 14, 2013).





n176.  Mark W. Cowin et al., 2012 Central Valley Flood Protection Plan 1-2
(2011), available at
http://www.water.ca.gov/floodsafe/fessro/docs/flood_tab_cvfpp.pdf.





n177.  Id.





n178.  Id.





n179.  Ellen Hanak et al., Pub. Pol'y Inst. of Cal., Managing California's
Water: From Conflict to Reconciliation 22-24 (2011), available at
http://www.ppic.org/content/pubs/report/r_211ehr.pdf.





n180.  Id. at 24.





n181.  See Cal. Levees Roundtable, California's Central Valley Flood System
Improvement Framework 15 (2009).





n182.  Paterno v. State, 113 Cal. Rptr. 3d 998, 1002 (2003). For a discussion of
Paterno, see infra notes 285-87 and accompanying text.





n183.  Cf. infra note 212.





n184.  Ass'n of State Floodplain Managers, supra note 5, at 4. The projected
damages from a mega flood are three times the level deemed realistic from an
earthquake.





n185.  Council Directive 2007/60/EC, supra note 146, at 31





n186.  Id. passim.





n187.  Id. at 27





n188.  Id. at 30.





n189.  Central Valley Flood Protection Act of 2008, 2007 Cal. Legis. Serv. ch.
364, § 9 (S.B.5), (codified at Cal. Water Code § 9601(b) (West 2009)).





n190.  Id. P 3.





n191.  Cowin et al., supra note 176, at 1-16.





n192.  Id. at 3-22 to 3-24. DWR's new methodology, developed in collaboration
with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Geological
Survey, the Corps and the Bureau of Reclamation, bases its analysis on the
intensity of "fast-moving, concentrated streams of water vapor that can release
heavy rains." Cent. Valley Flood Mgmt. Planning Program, 2012 Central Valley
Flood Protection Plan: Vol. II, Attachment 7, at 8-30 (2012), available at
http://www.water.ca.gov/cvfmp/docs/2012CVFPP_Volume%20II_All_Files_June.pdf.





n193.  Cowin, et al., supra note 176, at 3-23.





n194.  Id. at 3-24. DWR has been piloting this approach on the Yuba-Feather
river systems.





n195.  Iowa Code Ann. § 455B.851 (West 2004).





n196.  Cornelia F. Mutel, A Watershed Year: Anatomy of the Iowa Floods of 2008,
at 116 (2010).





n197.  Iowa Code Ann. § 466C.1 (West 2004).





n198.  Verchick & Hall, supra note 87, at 2236.





n199.  In 2009, these federal agencies, the Iowa Economic Redevelopment Office
and other state agencies, as well as Cedar Rapids, collaborated to identify
existing or potential barriers to more sustainable development in current
development policies and codes. See EPA et al., Embracing the River: Smart
Growth Strategies for Assisting in Cedar Rapids' Recovery 3 (2009), available at
http://www.epa.gov/smartgrowth/pdf/ia_cedar_rapids.pdf. FEMA and EPA
subsequently entered into a Memorandum of Agreement to continue working together
to factor in sustainably community growth and recovery into hazard mitigation
planning. Memorandum of Agreement Between the Dept. of Homeland Sec., Fed.
Emergency Mgmt. Agency, and the Evntl. Prot. Agency (May 12, 2010), available at
http://epa.gov/smartgrowth/pdf/2011_0114_fema-epa-moa.pdf; see also EPA et al.
supra, at 3 (discussing cooperative efforts between federal agencies to address
the effects of flooding).





n200.  EPA, Iowa Climate Change Adaptation & Resilience Report 2 (2011),
available at http://epa.gov/smartgrowth/pdf/iowa_climate_adapation_report.pdf.





n201.  See id. at 55.





n202.  See id. at 21.





n203.  See Red River Basin Comm'n, Long Term Flood Solutions (LTFS) Project
(2011), available at www.redriverbasincommission.org/LTFS_handout_04_04_11.pdf.





n204.  LTPS Committees, Red River Basin Comm'n,
http://www.redriverbasincommission.org/Long_Term_Flood_Solutions/LTFS_Committees
/ltfs_committees.html (last visited Oct. 14, 2013).





n205.  Red River Basin Comm'n, Red River Basin Natural Resources Framework Plan
3 (2005), available at
http://www.redriverbasincommission.org/Services/NRFPnonsdlstchFINAL.pdf.





n206.  Id. at 17.





n207.  See Red River Basin Comm'n, Finding Long Term Flood Solutions Together:
Report to State and Federal Officials on a Comprehensive Plan of Flood
Strategies for the Basin of the Red River of the North 2009-2011 (2011),
available at https://www.llis.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/RedRiverBasin.pdf.





n208.  Id. at 14 (also mentioning that Manitoba is incorporating climate change
potential into its 700-year flood protection plan for Winnipeg).





n209.  See id.





n210.  Barr Eng'g Co., Red River Basin Long Term Flood Solutions app. B, at 61
(2011). In North Dakota, the language most often used to describe the increased
frequency and magnitude of flooding is "wet cycle."





n211.  Council Directive 2007/60/EC, supra note 146, P 14.





n212.  Red River Basin Comm'n, supra note 207, at 90.





n213.  See generally Cowin, et al., supra note 176.





n214.  See id. at 3-22.





n215.  Id. at 3-21 (quoting Cal. Water Code § 9614(j)). An interesting example
of diverging approaches at the local and federal level has occurred regarding
levee vegetation. In the aftermath of Katrina, the Corps determined that
vegetation could pose a threat to levee integrity and developed a woody
vegetation-free zone on all levees and within fifteen feet of levees on both
sides. In contrast, DWR independently assessed the vegetation's impacts and
concluded that any risk posed by the vegetation to levee integrity is small and
that the vegetation has position ecosystem impacts. DWR has met with the Corps
to try to resolve the difference and ultimately has taken the position that
while it will adhere to the Army Corps's standard for vegetation for new levees,
it will allow for flexibility with regard to legacy levee vegetation to manage
regional differences. Id. at 3-25 to 3-28.





n216.  Id.





n217.  Sasaki Assocs., City of Cedar Rapids Neighborhood Planning Process:
Executive Summary (2009), available at
http://www.corridorrecovery.org/city/neighborhoods/Summary.pdf.





n218.  See Interview with Jennifer Pratt, Planner, Cmty. Dev. Dep't, Cedar
Rapids, Iowa (April 19, 2013) (on file with author).





n219.  Rebuild Iowa Advisory Comm'n, 120-Day Report to Governor Chet Culver 15,
42 (2008), available at
http://publications.iowa.gov/7250/1/RIO_120_DAY_REPORT.pdf.





n220.  EPA, supra note 200, at 15.





n221.  Id.





n222.  2009 Iowa Acts, ch. 184, § 15.





n223.  $ 1.5M Grants to Benefit Residents of Three Iowa Watersheds, Iowa Flood
Center (Mar. 22, 2013),
http://iowafloodcenter.org/1-5m-grants-to-benefit-residents-of-three-iowa-waters
heds.





n224.  Council Directive 2007/60/EC, supra note 146, P 14.





n225.  Ruimte Voor de Rivier, Room for the River: Safety for Four Million People
in the Dutch Delta 4, available at
http://www.ruimtevoorderivier.nl/media/88721/rvdr_corp_brochure_eng__def._.pdf;
see also Michael Kimmelman, Going with the Flow, N.Y. Times, Feb. 13, 2013,
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/17/arts/design/flood-control-in-the-netherlands-n
ow-allows-sea-water-in.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0 (comparing the Dutch
government's approach to buying out farmers to create spillways with the
incentive programs that characterize Governor Cuomo's vision for creating buffer
zones in New York).





n226.  Ruimte Voor de Rivier, supra note 225, at 5.





n227.  See Dan Gunderson, Moorhead Buys Houses; Moves Them Out of Flood Zone,
Minn. Pub. Radio (Mar. 1, 2010),
http://minnesota.publicradio.org/display/web/2010/02/28/flood-housing; see also
Flood Mitigation Projects, Moorhead Minn.,
http://www.ci.moorhead.mn.us/the_city/floodplain/mitigation.asp (last visited
Oct. 14, 2013).





n228.  The City of Moorhead purchased forty-nine properties in low-lying
riverfront neighborhoods after the 2009 flood using $ 9.3 million of combined
federal, state and local funding for flood mitigation projects. The purchase of
flood prone homes continued through a 2010 state appropriation, allowing for the
acquisition of another fifty-one homes in 2010 and the first quarter of 2011. In
total, 101 properties have been acquired (one property transferred from the
State). These additional homes were acquired specifically for flood mitigation
projects. City of Moorhead, 2010 Housing Report, available at
http://www.ci.moorhead.mn.us/housing/pdf/2010_Housing_Report.pdf.





n229.  U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, Draft Integrated Feasibility Study and
Environmental Impact Statement, Flood Risk Management Project for Fargo-Moorhead
186 (2010).





n230.  U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, supra note 166, at 114.





n231.  Anxious Cedar Rapids Takes Steps to Fight Flood, THOnline.com (May 31,
2013, 11:18 AM),
http://www.thonline.com/news/iowa-illinois-wisconsin/article_bcac9360-ca0d-11e2-
a6a1-0019bb30f31a.html.





n232.  Brad Branan, Many in Sacramento County Will Save on Flood Insurance for
Several Years, Sacramento Bee, Mar. 19, 2013,
http://www.sacbee.com/2013/03/19/5273725/many-in-sacramento-county-will.html#sto
rylink=cpy.





n233.  See Gunderson, supra note 227.





n234.  Cedar Rapids, Iowa, Municipal Code § 32B.05 (2010).





n235.  See generally Flood Mitigation Projects, Moorhead, Minn.,
http://www.ci.moorhead.mn.us/the_city/floodplain/mitigation.asp (last visited
Oct. 14, 2013).





n236.  See generally City of Fargo, Building Inspection Div., Flood Proof
Construction Requirements, available at
http://www.cityoffargo.com/attachments/d1c0c7b9-ec9f-4e11-a0c7-4dfe9985a0dd/floo
dhandout.pdf.





n237.  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Final Feasibility Report and Environmental
Impact Statement, Fargo-Moorhead Metropolitan Area Flood Risk Management 22
(2011).





n238.  Cal. Water Code §§65865.5, 65962, and 66474.5 (West 2004); Cowin et al.,
supra note 176, at 2-16.





n239.  Cowin et al., supra note 176, at 1-27.





n240.  Central Valley Flood Protection Act of 2008, 2007 Cal. Legis. Serv. Ch.
364 (S.B.5).





n241.  Cedar Rapids, Iowa, Municipal Code § 32.B.04 (2012), available at
http://library.municode.com/index.aspx?clientId=16256&stateId=15&stateName=Iowa.
Note that the floodplain refers to the areas designated by FEMA as 100-year
flood areas, while flood-prone areas also meet the one-percent change of flood
as determined by state and local flood managers. Id. The floodway is defined in
the ordinance as "the channel of a river or other watercourses and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot." Id. §
32.B.02.





n242.  About ROOTs, Cedar Rapids,
http://www.cedar-rapids.org/government/departments/community-development/housing
/ROOTs/Pages/AboutROOTs.aspx (last visited Oct. 14, 2013).





n243.  Cedar Falls (City), Iowa, U.S. Census Bureau,
http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/19/1911755.html, (last visited Aug. 30,
2013).





n244.  Cedar Falls, Iowa, Code of Ordinances § 29-156(c) (2011).





n245.  Id.





n246.  Id. § 29-156(d).





n247.  Case Study: Cedar Falls, Iowa, Am. Planning Ass'n,
https://www.planning.org/research/postdisaster/casestudies/cedarfalls.htm (last
visited Oct. 14, 2013).





n248.  S.F. 2316, 2012 Gen. Assemb. (Iowa 2012), available at
http://coolice.legis.iowa.gov/Cool-ICE/default.asp?Category=billinfo&Service=Bil
lbook&ga=84&hbill=SF2316.





n249.  Brian McDonough et al., Advice Ignored: Climate Change and Iowa Water
Quality Policy, Iowa Pol'y Project (May 21, 2012),
http://www.iowapolicyproject.org/2012Research/120521-climate-water.html.





n250.  S. Kahn Ribeiro et al., Transport and Its Infrastructure, in Climate
Change 2007: Mitigation, Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (B. Metz et
al. eds., 2007); see Margaret E. Byerly, A Report to the IPCC on Research
Connecting Human Settlements, Infrastructure, and Climate Change, 28 Pace Envtl.
L. Rev. 935, 955-56, 968-69 (2011).





n251.  Council Directive 2007/60/EC, supra note 146, at 30.





n252.  See generally Flesher & Burdeau, supra note 30.





n253.  U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, Draft Feasibility Report and Environmental
Impact Statement: Fargo-Moorhead Metropolitan Area Flood Risk Management Program
276 (2010), available at
http://fmdam.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/2010-05-28-Draft-Feasibility-Report-
Public-FINAL.pdf.





n254.  Paul Quinlan, Flood Fears Downstream Hinder Plans to Divert Red River of
the North, N.Y. Times, Aug. 27, 2010,
http://www.nytimes.com/gwire/2010/08/27/27greenwire-flood-fears-downstream-hinde
r-plans-to-divert-58522.html?pagewanted=1.





n255.  Id.





n256.  Jonathan P. Scoll, Flood Control on the Red River as a Complex
Environmental Decision System, Nat. Resources & Env't, Winter 2012, at 4.





n257.  Id. at 3.





n258.  U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement:
Flood Risk Management Project for Fargo-Moorhead (2011).





n259.  Diversion Opposition Builds Momentum, Lays Out Plans for Legal Protest,
Diversion Discussion (Aug. 13, 2012),
http://diversiondiscussion.areavoices.com/?p=947.





n260.  Id.





n261.  Id.





n262. " We're Going to Smoke Them': Diversion Opponents Lay Out Plans for Legal
Protest, Bakken Today (Aug. 13, 2012),
http://www.bakkentoday.com/event/article/id/370855/publisher_ID/1/. North Dakota
and many other states changed their constitutions in the wake of the decision by
the Supreme Court of the United States in Kelo v. New London, 545 U.S. 469
(2005), which affirmed the Connecticut Supreme Court's decision that New
London's exercise of eminent domain to take properties to further its economic
development plan was a valid public use. North Dakota's Constitution now reads,



   For purposes of this section, a public use or a public purpose does not
include public benefits of economic development, including an increase in tax
base, tax revenues, employment or general economic health. Private property
shall not be taken for the use of, or ownership by, any private individual or
entity, unless that property is necessary for conducting a common carrier or
utility business.

 N.D. Const. art. I, § 16 (2012). For further background, see Richard A. Posner,
Foreword: A Political Court, 119 Harv. L. Rev. 31, 42 (2005) ("Congress and the
states can deprive the interpretation of its significance by placing limits on
the use of the eminent domain power; the fact that a statutory power is upheld
against constitutional challenge does not prevent the legislature from
voluntarily curtailing the power.").





n263.  Diversion Authority and Oxbow Reach Agreement for Levee Construction, F-M
Area Diversion (June 13, 2013),
http://www.fmdiversion.com/newsdetails.asp?ID=102. The towns of Hickson and
Bakke will also receive a ring levee under the Army Corps's new plan. See
Oxbow/Hickson/Bakke Ring Levee Option: Frequently Asked Questions, F-M Area
Diversion, http://www.fmdiversion.com/faqsringleveeoption.asp (last visited Oct.
14, 2013).





n264.  See U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Draft Supplemental Environmental
Assessment: Design Modifications to the Fargo-Moorhead Metropolitan Area Flood
Risk Management, available at
www.fmdiversion.com/PDF/CorpsEA/FMM_Supplemental_Draft%20Environmental_Assessmen
t_12June2013.pdf.





n265.  See, e.g., MnDNR Concludes Public Review of EIS, F-M Area Diversion (June
18, 2013), http://www.fmdiversion.com/newsdetails.asp?ID=105.





n266.  U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, supra note 166, at 283.





n267.  Id.





n268.  Id. at ES-IV.





n269.  Id. Amazingly, 1.3 feet higher is considered safe and effective in
responding to the 500-year flood, yet climate change and increased rainfall
projections make quite unpredictable the crest of the next big storm.





n270.  Id. at 195.





n271.  Id. Flood mitigation is a subset of the problem of pre-and post-disaster
mitigation, and there is an important environmental justice component. Flood
damage prevention strategies often raise serious environmental justice problems
because vulnerable social groups are often forced to live in at-risk areas. See
Daniel A. Farber and Jim Chen, Disasters and the Law: Katrina and Beyond, ch. 4
(2006).





n272.  U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, supra note 166, at 261.





n273.  Id. at 202-03.





n274.  Battelle Mem'l Inst., supra note 167, at 17, A-4 cmt. 4.





n275.  Steve Gravelle & Patrick Hogan, Another Loss for LOST, The Gazette (Mar.
6, 2012, 11:10 PM), http://thegazette.com/2012/03/06/another-loss-for-lost/
(describing the second failure of Cedar Rapids' requested tax hike to cover the
plan to protect the west side of the Cedar River).





n276.  Cowin et al., supra note 176, at iii.





n277.  Id. at 1-16.





n278.  Id.





n279.  Id. at 3-7.





n280.  See generally U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, Record of Decision:?Folsom Dam
Safety and Flood Damage Reduction Joint Federal Project (2007), available at
http://www.spk.usace.army.mil/Portals/12/documents/civil_works/JFP/Folsom%20JFP%
20ROD%2003May07.pdf.





n281.  Id.





n282.  Id. at 2.





n283.  See U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, Construction Continues on the Control
Structure of Folsom Dam's New Auxiliary Spillway, Flickr.com (June 19, 2013),
http://www.flickr.com/photos/sacramentodistrict/9094757441/ (providing
photographs of the Corps's progress).





n284.  See, e.g., Michelle Corless, Eastern Iowa Projects Not Included in
President Obama's Fiscal Year 2014 Budget, KWWL.com (Apr. 10, 2013),
http://www.kwwl.com/story/21936829/2013/04/10/eastern-iow.





n285.  Jim Abrams, Senate Votes to Extend Federal Water Projects Law,
TheBigStory.AP.org (May 15, 2013),
http://bigstory.ap.org/article/senate-votes-extend-federal-water-projects-law;
see Rick Smith, U.S. Senate Passes Flood-Protection Bill Vital to Cedar Rapids,
KCRG.com (May 15, 2013, 6:25 PM),
http://www.kcrg.com/news/local/US-Senate-Passes-Flood-protection-Bill-Vital-to-C
edar-Rapids-207627761.html (noting that the Iowa senators voted in favor of the
WRDA 2013 and acknowledging the long wait that remains).





n286.  Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency, Legislative Framework for Flood
Control and Flood Risk Management in the Sacramento Valley 1 (2006), available
at
http://www.safca.org/documents/Policy%20Framework%20-%20SACOGWhitePaper_1.pdf.





n287.  Id.





n288.  Paterno v. State, 113 Cal. App. 4th 998, 1021 (2003).





n289.  Id. at 1021.





n290.  Cal. Water Code § 8307(a) (West 2009); see Daniel Farber, Tort Law in the
Era of Climate Change, Katrina, and 9/11: Exploring Liability for Extraordinary
Risks, 43 Val. U. L. Rev. 1075, 1085-86 (2009) (using the concepts laid out in
Paterno to consider potential federal liability for flood damages).


                           FOCUS - 6 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Globe (Worthington, Minnesota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           September 24, 2010 Friday

Update: Flood warning for the area extended

BYLINE: The Daily Globe, Worthington, Minn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 984 words


Sept. 24--12:40 a.m. Friday

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- The National Weather Service has increased the flood
warning for the Rock River at Luverne from minor to moderate severity. At 10
p.m. Thursday the stage was 11.8 feet, and flood stage is considered to be 10.0
feet. The river is forecast to crest near 13.0 feet and then fall below flood
stage Friday. At stages near 14.0 feet, water reaches the edge of the brick
building 150 feet southeast of the water gauge. The warning is set to expire
Saturday evening.

10:40 p.m. Thursday

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- The National Weather Service issued a flood warning for the
Rock River at Luverne, set to expire Saturday afternoon. At 9 p.m. Thursday the
stage was 10.7 feet. The flood stage is 10.0 feet and minor flooding is
occurring. The river will be near 10.8 feet by Friday and fall below flood stage
late Friday.

4:40 p.m.

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- The National Weather Service has extended the flood warning
for Cottonwood, Jackson, Murray, Nobles and Pipestone counties in Minnesota, as
well as northern Dickinson and northern Osceola counties in Iowa. It will now
expire at 7:30 a.m. Friday.

At 4:15 p.m., local law enforcement officials reported flooding across the
warned area, with numerous roads being flooded. Some houses and businesses are
also affected by flood water. Less than one quarter inch of additional rainfall
is expected through this evening, but water levels will continue to remain high
throughout the night.

Excessive runoff from heavy rainfall will cause flooding of small creeks and
streams, highways and underpasses, farmland and low-lying areas.

Most flood-related deaths occur in automobiles. People should not attempt to
cross water-covered bridges, dips or low water crossings. People should not try
to cross a flowing stream, even a small one, on foot or in a vehicle. The
National Weather Service cautioned people not to underestimate the power of
flood waters. Just a few inches of rapidly-flowing water can carry away a
vehicle.

3 p.m.

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- The area's flash flood watches have been canceled, but
flood warnings below remain in effect. Please continue to stay aware of weather
conditions.

11:45 a.m.

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- Additional flood warnings have been issued.

The flood warning continues for the Des Moines River near Windom. At 10 a.m.
Thursday, the stage was 19.4 feet. Flood stage is considered to be 19.0 feet.
The river rose above flood stage today, and is expected to crest near 23.0 feet
today, falling below flood stage Friday. At stages near 23.0 feet, the higher
west bank overflows, flooding agricultural land.

A flood warning continues for the Big Sioux River at Sioux Falls North Cliff
from this afternoon until further notice. At 10 a.m. Thursday, the stage was at
13.6 feet. Flood stage is 16.0 feet. The river is expected to rise above flood
stage by 5 p.m. today and crest near 21.1 feet by Saturday.

A flood warning has been extended for the Rock River at Rock Rapids, set to
expire at 12 p.m. Sunday. At 10 a.m. today the stage was 12.5 feet. Flood stage
is 13.0 feet. The river is forecast to rise above the flood stage by 2 p.m.
today and crest near 14.8 feet Friday. The river will fall below flood stage by
Saturday. At stages near 16.0 feet, the higher banks on the left side of the
river and the lower banks on the right side will begin to flood.

11:19 a.m. Original Post

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- Osceola, O'Brien, Dickinson and Lyon counties are under a
flash flood watch until 7 p.m. tonight. Rock County is under a flood warning
until 4:30 p.m. today, and the Des Moines River at Jackson and the Rock River at
Rock Rapids are expected to flood.

In Rock County, local law enforcement officials reported flooding on Rock County
7 north of Hardwick. Radar continued to show an area of heavy rainfall across
the warned area. Additional rainfall through this evening is expected to average
between 1 and 2 inches. Runoff from this rainfall will cause flooding to occur
in Luverne, Blue Mounds State Park and Hardwick.

In addition, a flood warning has been issued for the Des Moines River at
Jackson, until further notice. At 7 a.m. this morning, the river was at 10.6
feet, and flood stage is 12.0 feet. The river rose above flood stage this
morning and will crest near 15.6 feet by Friday. At stages near 17.0 feet, the
lower levees in Jackson are overtopped, and parks and ballfields would be
flooded.

A flood warning has been issued for the Rock River at Rock Rapids, from this
afternoon to late Saturday night. At 7 a.m. Thursday the stage was 11.2 feet.
The flood stage is 13.0 feet. Minor flooding is forecast. The river is projected
to rise above flood stage by 4 p.m. today and crest near 15.2 feet by Friday.
The river will fall below flood stage by Saturday. At stages near 16.0 feet, the
higher banks on the left side of the river, and the lower banks on the right
side will begin flooding.

A strong low pressure system will move east across the area today. Additional
moderate to heavy rain can be expected until this system passes. The rain will
decrease from the southwest this afternoon and evening. Widespread additional
rainfall of 1 to 2 inches are expected in southwest Minnesota and northwest
Iowa.

Heavier additional rainfall amounts of 2 to 4 inches are possible. Combined with
saturated and already flooding conditions from rainfall Wednesday and Wednesday
night, these rainfall amounts will create a continued threat of flash flooding
in the area.

To see more of The Daily Globe, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.dglobe.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Daily Globe, Worthington, Minn.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or
call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100924-QG-Update-Flood-warning-for-the-area-extended-0924-20100924

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QG


                         Copyright 2010 The Daily Globe


                           FOCUS - 7 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                          September 8, 2004 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

AFTER FRANCES Storm-Swollen Rivers Well Past Flood Stage

BYLINE: NEIL JOHNSON, njohnson@tampatrib.com

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 525 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


WATERS CONTINUE TO RISE, CREST THROUGHOUT WEEK

By NEIL JOHNSON

njohnson@tampatrib.com

TAMPA -- All of the region's rivers are above flood stage and will remain at
those levels for several days.

Some rivers were at flood stage before Hurricane Frances because of heavy summer
rains.

Listed are the forecasts for flood-stage levels and information on potential
flooding from the National Weather Service:

The Hillsborough River at Zephyrhills reached flood stage Tuesday morning. The
river crested at 13.9 feet Tuesday evening, 3.9 feet above flood stage, and will
remain above flood stage through Saturday.

The Hillsborough River at Morris Bridge reached flood stage Tuesday morning and
is forecast to crest at 33 feet this morning, 1 foot above flood stage. The
river is forecast to remain above flood stage through Saturday.

The Alafia River at Lithia was at flood stage Saturday and is forecast to crest
at 23.7 feet this morning, 10.7 feet above flood stage. It is expected to remain
above flood stage through Saturday.

The Anclote River at Elfers reached flood stage Monday morning and is forecast
to crest at 25.1 feet this morning, 5.1 feet above flood stage. The river is
expected to fall below flood stage Friday morning.

Cypress Creek at Worthington Gardens reached flood stage Tuesday morning and is
forecast to crest at 10.2 feet Thursday morning, 4.4 feet above flood stage. The
river is expected to fall below flood stage Saturday night.

The Little Manatee River at Wimauma reached flood stage Monday morning. The
river crested at 17.2 feet Tuesday evening, 6.2 feet above flood stage, and is
forecast to fall below flood stage Friday morning.

The Peace River at Bartow was above flood stage before Saturday, crested Tuesday
evening at 9.4 feet, 1.4 feet above flood stage, and is forecast to fall below
flood stage Friday evening.

The Peace River at Zolfo Springs reached flood stage Monday morning, crested at
21.4 feet Tuesday evening, 5.4 feet above flood stage, and is forecast to fall
below flood stage Thursday night.

The Peace River at Arcadia reached flood stage Tuesday night and is forecast to
crest at 15.4 feet Friday afternoon, 4.4 feet above flood stage. It is expected
to remain above flood stage through Saturday.

The Withlacoochee River at Trilby reached flood stage Monday evening. It is
forecast to crest at 15.2 feet this evening, 3.3 feet above flood stage. The
river is forecast to remain above flood stage through Saturday.

The Withlacoochee River at Croom reached flood stage Tuesday morning and is
forecast to crest at 10.7 feet Saturday morning, 1.7 feet above flood stage. It
is expected to remain above flood stage through Saturday.

The Manatee River at Myakka Head reached flood stage Sunday, crested Monday
afternoon at 15.9 feet, 4.7 feet above flood stage, and is forecast to fall
below flood stage tonight.

The Myakka River at Myakka River State Park reached flood stage last week. It is
forecast to crest tonight at 8.5 feet, 1.5 feet above flood stage. It is
forecast to remain above flood stage through Saturday.

Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: AFTER FRANCES

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
Tribune photo by JIM REED On River Drive on the Alafia River near Lithia, people
use transportation suited to the road's name -- courtesy of the 2004 hurricane
season.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


                           FOCUS - 8 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             March 20, 2016 Sunday

Preparation is key to flood safety

BYLINE: Elizabeth Skrapits, The Citizens' Voice, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 406 words


March 20--This week is Flood Safety Awareness Week in Pennsylvania, designated
by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Weather
Service.

Warning Coordination Meteorologist David J. Nicosia of the National Weather
Service at Binghamton, N.Y. says it's important to be prepared for floods,
whether flash flooding due to heavy rain or river, creek or stream flooding
caused by snow melt, ice jams, dam breaks or a tropical storm or hurricane.

"People are pretty savvy about the floods around here. People take it seriously,
which is good," he said.

Residents of the Wyoming Valley, especially in areas not protected by the levee,
know all too well what the Susquehanna River can do, particularly after the
destructive Sept. 8-9 2011 Tropical Storm Lee flood.

Nicosia said 10 percent of all flood-related losses in the United States come
from the Susquehanna River.

"That's pretty scary when you think about it," he said. "It's just a very, very
flood-prone river."

In the Susquehanna River basin, which includes upstate New York, if there is
more than 6 to 8 inches of rain, the river floods, and if there is double-digit
rainfall it's a disaster, Nicosia said. And floods can happen at any time of
year.

And when it floods, the water comes up really fast, Nicosia said. Unlike another
flood-prone river, the Mississippi, where the water comes up slowly and takes a
long time to recede, water in the Susquehanna during a flood goes up and down
rapidly, "and that makes it dangerous," Nicosia said.

If you hear warnings about flooding, get ready to take action quickly, he said.

Another reminder Nicosia wants to get out is for people to avoid driving on
flooded roads, whether from a flash flood or a river flood. No matter what kind
of vehicle you have, even four-wheel drive, once the frame of that vehicle is
lifted off the ground, you have no control.

"A foot of water is all it takes, and you can be floating," he said.

eskrapits@citizensvoice.com

570-821-2072

Warning Coordination Meteorologist David J. Nicosia of the National Weather
Service recommends these websites for tips on flood preparedness:

www.weather.gov/bgm/preparednessFSAWPA2016

www.floodsafety.noaa.gov/

www.ready.gov/floods

www.redcross.org/get-help/prepare-for-emergencies/types-of-emergencies/flood

___ (c)2016 The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Citizens' Voice
(Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at citizensvoice.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency,
LLC.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160320-YC-Preparation-is-key-to-flood-safety-0320-20160320

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: YC


                       Copyright 2016 The Citizens' Voice


                           FOCUS - 9 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                              June 2, 2002 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Water, water everywhere and that can mean floods

SECTION: DISASTER & EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS GUIDE; Pg. 22H

LENGTH: 1427  words


Floods can be slow- or fast-rising, but generally develop over a period of hours
or days. Learn about flooding and flash flooding in your area by contacting the
local emergency management office, National Weather Service (NWS) office, your
American Red Cross chapter, or your planning and zoning department.

WATCHES AND WARNINGS

* Watch: A National Weather Service "Watch" indicates that conditions favor the
occurrence of a certain type of hazardous weather.

* Warning: An NWS "Warning" indicates that a hazardous event is occurring or is
imminent in about 30 minutes to an hour. Local NWS forecast offices issue
warnings on a county-by-county basis. Many more "watches" and issued than
"warnings."

PLAN FOR A FLOOD

* Discuss floods with your family. Everyone should know what to do in case all
family members are not together.

* Develop a flood-specific family disaster plan.

* Learn about your area's flood risk and elevation above flood stage.

* Contact your local Red Cross chapter, emergency management office, local
National Weather Service office, or planning and zoning department about your
area's flood risk. Knowing the elevation of your property in relation to nearby
streams and dams will let you know if forecasted flood levels will affect your
home.

* If you are at risk from floods: Talk to your insurance agent. Homeowners'
policies do not cover flooding. Ask about the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).

* Develop an evacuation plan. Everyone in your family should know where to go if
they have to leave. Trying to make plans at the last minute can be upsetting and
create confusion.

PROTECTING YOUR PROPERTY

* Keep insurance policies, documents, and other valuables in a location less
likely to be damaged during a flood.

* Avoid building in a floodplain unless you elevate and reinforce your home.

* Raise your furnace, water heater, and electric panel to higher floors or the
attic if they are in areas of your home that may be flooded.

* Install check valves in building sewer traps to prevent flood water from
backing up into the drains of your home.

* Construct barriers such as levees, berms, and flood walls to stop flood water
from entering the building.

* If you live in a frequently flooded area, stockpile emergency building
materials. These include plywood, plastic sheeting, lumber, nails, hammer and
saw, pry bar, sand, shovels, and sandbags.

DURING A WATCH Everyone in a Watch area should be ready to respond and act
quickly. Floods and flash floods can happen quickly and without warning. Be
ready to act immediately.

* Be alert to signs of flooding, and if you live in a flood-prone area, be ready
to evacuate at a moment's notice.

* If your residence is in a flood-prone area: Fill bathtubs, sinks, and plastic
bottles with clean water. Water may become contaminated or service may be
interrupted.

* Bring outdoor belongings, such as patio furniture, indoors. Unsecured items
may be swept away and damaged by flood waters.

* Move your furniture and valuables to higher floors of your home. If flood
waters affect your home, higher floors are less likely to receive damage.

* Get your preassembled disaster supplies ready. You may need to act quickly.
Having your supplies ready will save time.

* Fill your car's gas tank, in case an evacuation notice is issued. If electric
power is cut off, gas stations may not be able to operate pumps for several
days.

* Be prepared to evacuate. Local officials may ask you to leave if they truly
feel your home is at risk from flood waters.

DURING A WARNING

* Monitor television or radio for updated emergency information. Local stations
provide you with the best advice for your particular situation.

* Be alert to signs of flooding. A "Warning" means a flood is imminent or is
happening in the area.

* If you live in a flood-prone area or think you are at risk, evacuate
immediately. Move quickly to higher ground. Save yourself, not your belongings.

* If advised to evacuate, do so immediately. Move to a safe area before access
is cut off by flood water. Evacuation is much simpler and safer before flood
waters become too deep for vehicles to drive through.

* Follow recommended evacuation routes. Shortcuts or alternate, nonrecommended
routes may be blocked or damaged by flood waters.

* Leave early enough to avoid being marooned by flooded roads. Delaying too long
may allow all escape routes to become blocked.

* Stay out of areas subject to flooding. Dips, low spots, canyons, washes, etc.,
can become filled with water.

* If outdoors, climb to high ground and stay there. Move away from dangerous
flood waters.

* Never try to walk, swim, or drive through such swift water. Most flood
fatalities are caused by people attempting to drive through water, or people
playing in high water. If it is moving swiftly, even water six inches deep can
sweep you off your feet.

GETTING OUT

* If you are in a vehicle and become surrounded by water, if you can get out
safely, do so immediately and move to higher ground. Vehicles can be swept away
in two feet of water.

* Watch out for snakes in areas that were flooded. Flood waters flush snakes
from their homes.

* Stay away from creek and stream banks in flooded and recently flooded areas.
The soaked banks often become unstable due to heavy rainfall and can suddenly
give way.

* Throw away all food that has come into contact with flood waters. Contaminated
flood water contains bacteria and germs.

AFTER THE DANGER IS PAST

* Seek necessary medical care at the nearest hospital or clinic. Contaminated
flood waters lead to a greater possibility of infection. Severe injuries will
require medical attention.

* Help neighbors who may require special assistance -- infants, elderly people,
and people with disabilities.

* Avoid disaster areas. Your presence might hamper rescue and other emergency
operations.

* Monitor radio and television. Flood dangers do notwhen the water begins to
recede; there may be flood-related hazards within your community.

* Stay out of any building if flood waters remain around the building. Flood
waters often undermine foundations, causing sinking, floors can crack or break
and buildings can collapse.

* Avoid entering any building (home, business, or other) before local officials
have said it is safe to do so.

* Report broken utility lines to the appropriate authorities.

* Avoid smoking inside buildings. Smoking in confined areas can cause fires.

* Wear sturdy shoes. The most common injury following a disaster is cut feet.

* Examine walls, floors, doors, staircases, and windows to make sure that the
building is not in danger of collapsing.

* Look for fire hazards. There may be broken or leaking gas lines, flooded
electrical circuits, or submerged furnaces or electrical appliances. Flammable
or explosive materials may travel from upstream. Fire is the most frequent
hazard following floods.

* Check for gas leaks. If you smell gas or hear a blowing or hissing noise, open
a window and quickly leave the building. Turn off the gas at the outside main
valve if you can and call the gas company from a neighbor's home. If you turn
off the gas for any reason, it must be turned back on by a professional.

* Look for electrical system damage. If you see sparks or broken or frayed
wires, or if you smell burning insulation, turn off the electricity at the main
fuse box or circuit breaker. If you have to step in water to get to the fuse box
or circuit breaker, call an electrician first for advice. Electrical equipment
should be checked and dried before being returned to service.

* Check for sewage and waterline damage. If you suspect sewage lines are
damaged, avoid using the toilets and call a plumber. If water pipes are damaged,
contact the water company and avoid using water from the tap. You can obtain
safe water from undamaged water heaters or by melting ice cubes.

* Watch out for animals, especially poisonous snakes, that may have come into
buildings with the flood waters.

* Take pictures of the damage, both of the building and its contents, for
insurance claims.

AFTER RETURNING HOME

* Throw away food that has come in contact with flood waters. Some canned foods
may be salvageable. If the cans are dented or damaged, throw them away. Food
contaminated by flood waters can cause severe infections.

* If water is of questionable purity, boil or add bleach, and distill drinking
water before using. Wells inundated by flood waters should be pumped out and the
water tested for purity before drinking.

* Service damaged septic tanks, cesspools, pits, and leaching systems as soon as
possible. Damaged sewage systems are health hazards.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2002 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2002 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 10 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Globe (Worthington, Minnesota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 10, 2010 Tuesday

Update: Rock River flood warning canceled; Floyd River flood warning on

BYLINE: The Daily Globe, Worthington, Minn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 521 words


Aug. 10--11:05 p.m.

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- The flood warning is canceled for the Rock River at Rock
Rapids. The flood warning continues for the Floyd River at Sheldon.

At 8 p.m. Tuesday the Floyd was estimated at 14.0 feet. Flood stage is 12.0
feet. The river is forecast to fall below flood stage Wednesday, Aug. 11. At
stages near 14.0 feet, flooding affects large areas of farm land within 1,000
feet of the river.

3:40 p.m.

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- The flash flood watch for Dickinson, O'Brien, Cottonwood
and Jackson counties has been canceled.

2:50 p.m.

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- The flash flood watch for Lyon and Osceola counties in Iowa
and Murray, Nobles, Pipestone and Rock counties in Minnesota, has been canceled.

1:35 p.m.

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- The National Weather Service has issued a flood warning
for:

The Rock River at Rock Rapids from late tonight until Friday morning. At 8 a.m.
Tuesday the stage was 9.1 feet and the flood stage is 13.0 feet. Minor flooding
is forecast. The river is forecast to rise above flood stage by 2 a.m. Wednesday
and crest near 14.4 feet by Wednesday. The river will fall below flood stage by
Thursday. At stages near 13.0 feet, the lower banks on the left side of the
river will begin flooding.

The Floyd River at Sheldon until late Thursday night. At 7 a.m. Tuesday the
stage was estimated at 14.2 feet. Moderate flooding is occurring and moderate
flooding is forecast. The flood stage is 12.0 feet. The river will crest near
14.9 feet by Tuesday and fall below flood stage Thursday. At stages near 14.0
feet, flooding affects large areas of farm land within 1,000 feet of the river.

Additionally, the flash flood warning that was in effect for Clay, O'Brien,
eastern Osceola and Dickinson counties is canceled. Thunderstorms have exited
the area and excess runoff from the earlier heavy rain has ended over the warned
area. Small streams and creeks in the warned area were beginning to recede,
ending the flood threat. The National Weather Service encouraged people to relay
any reports of flooding in those areas to local law enforcement or to the
National Weather Service in Sioux Falls.

However, a flash flood watch will be in effect until 7 p.m. tonight for
Dickinson, O'Brien and Osceola counties in Iowa and Cottonwood, Jackson, Murray
and Nobles counties in Minnesota.

7>04 a.m. Tuesday

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- The National Weather Service has issued a flash flood
warning for Osceola, O'Brien and Dickinson counties in Iowa from 6:47 a.m. to 11
a.m. today, and Nobles and Rock counties in Minnesota until 8:30 a.m. today.

In addition, a flash flood watch is on until 7 p.m. tonight for Lyon County in
Iowa and Pipestone and Rock counties in Minnesota.

To see more of The Daily Globe, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.dglobe.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Daily Globe, Worthington, Minn.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or
call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20100810-QG-Update-Rock-River-flood-warning-canceled-Floyd-River-flood-warning-o
n-20100810

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QG


                         Copyright 2010 The Daily Globe


                          FOCUS - 11 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                     The Chronicle (Centralia, Washington)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 16, 2012 Friday

Chehalis River Near Grand Mound Under Flood Warning; Flood Watch for Lewis
County to Drop by Friday Afternoon

BYLINE: Kyle Spurr, The Chronicle, Centralia, Wash.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 261 words


March 16--The National Weather Service has issued a flood warning for the
Chehalis River near Grand Mound, after heavy rain fell through Wednesday and
Thursday in the region.

Hydrology data shows the Chehalis River flowing at 14 feet, which is minor flood
stage, by Grand Mound Friday morning.

However, the Chehalis River is expected to crest late Friday night, data showed.
At 14 feet, the river will flood several roads and nearby farm land.

Major flood stage is 17 feet in the Grand Mound section of the river.

Various roads around Lewis County have been closed from flood water Friday
morning, including Airport Road in Centralia. A full list is online at:
http://roads.lewiscountywa.gov/

While the Chehalis River is under flood warning, the Newaukum River has already
crested below minor flood stage Thursday evening.

The greater Lewis County area remains under flood watch through the weekend.

Meterologist Dennis D'Amico said the weather service will drop the flood watch
in Lewis County by Friday afternoon, but the flood watch is still in place
through Saturday afternoon for parts of Grays Harbor and Thurston counties.

A flood watch does not mean that flooding is imminent. Any flooding that might
occur would likely be minor, according to the National Weather Service.

D'Amico said the weather service does not expect any major flooding in the next
few weeks.

"We are getting towards the end of flood season," D'Amico said.

___ (c)2012 The Chronicle (Centralia, Wash.) Visit The Chronicle (Centralia,
Wash.) at www.chronline.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20120316-1CE-Chehalis-River-Near-Grand-Mound-Under-Flood-Warning-Flood-Watch-for
-Lewis-County-to-Drop-by-Friday-Afternoon-0316-20120316

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CE


                          Copyright 2012 The Chronicle


                          FOCUS - 12 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                               walesonline.co.uk

                     December 9, 2015 Wednesday 6:17 PM GMT

Storm Desmond-style storms and floods are not so rare in Welsh weather history,
warns scientist;
An expert at Aberystwyth University says there are many historic examples of
such flooding

BYLINE: By Robin Turner

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 751 words


The devastating flooding which has hit much of north west England in the wake of
Storm Desmond might be more common for Britain than currently believed, a Welsh
scientist is warning.

Professor Mark Macklin, an expert in river flooding and climate change impacts
at Aberystwyth University , says analysis shows 21st century floods are not
unprecedented in terms of either their frequency or magnitude.

Working with other experts from the universities of Cambridge and Glasgow he has
drawn on historic records to build a clearer picture of the flooding.

They conclude that 21st century flood events such as Storm Desmond are not
exceptional or unprecedented in terms of their frequency or magnitude and that
flood frequency and flood risk forecasts would be improved by including data
from flood deposits dating back hundreds of years, not just a few decades.

Prof Macklin said: "Sometimes we are talking about a 'one in 100 year flood'
based on records going back just 30 years."

Related story: More rain and flooding on the way as Met Office issues weather
warning for parts of Wales

He added: "UK documentary records and old flood deposits dating back hundreds of
years indicate that these floods are not unprecedented, which means we are
grossly underestimating flood risk and endangering peoples' lives.

"The truth is flood plains are made by floods and after the industrial
revolution and because of need for land we are building on them.

"For flooding to occur in flood plains and for it to be termed unprecedented
therefore does not make much sense."

Prof Macklin points out the floods in Talybont in 2012 followed on from a long
series of floods in the area, some going back to the 1600s.

Related: How Aberystwyth recovered from the devastating damage of January 2014

He has studied flood deposits from flood plain area across the UK including a
number in Wales using "lichen clocks".

He explained that by examining the rate at which lichen grows on boulders
disturbed by floods, the date of the floods can be determined and he has found
severe flooding going back hundreds of years.

He warned: "It is of concern that historical data suggests there is far more
capacity in the North Atlantic climate system to produce wetter and more
prolonged flood-rich periods than hitherto experienced in the 21st century.

More: Pictures show devastating trail of Storm Desmond's destruction

"Looking forward, an increased likelihood of weather extremes due to climate
change means that extending our flood record using geomorphology science must be
placed at the centre of flood risk assessment in the UK."

Professor John Lewin, also from the University of Aberystwyth, said: "What is
needed is far more resilience for already-developed floodplains , and much more
serious insistence that future floodplain development should be virtually
curtailed.

"Somewhere along the line floodplain development has been allowed by local
authorities and the UK government to continue regardless."

Related: Storm Desmond flooding chaos brings Welsh RNLI volunteers out to join
rescue effort

Lewin, Macklin and their colleagues are members of the British Society for
Geomorphology's Working Group on Stormy Geomorphology, who are currently
finalising a global analysis of the role geomorphology science can play in an
age of extremes.

Flooding events from Welsh history:

Floods around the Bristol Channel coasts extended in South Wales from Laugharne,
Carmarthenshire, to above Chepstow in Monmouthshire. Cardiff was the worst hit
town with the foundations of St Mary's Church destroyed. Overall 2,000 or more
people drowned with houses and villages swept away by what might have been a
tsunami.

One witness said: "A noise was heard resembling distant thunder...a tremendous
body of water rolled several feet above the waters of the River Rhydol,
stripping the fields of hay, wheat, oats and barley."

Ceredigion and Powys, Dyfi and Teifi; "'Due to the rapid thaw and heavy
rainfall, hundreds of acres of farmland have been inundated. In Cardiganshire,
considerable flooding resulted.'

The River Ogmore bursts its banks in the centre of Bridgend hitting shops,
businesses and many homes in the town centre, the abattoir, Bridgend rugby field
and club house and Newbridge Fields became a lake.

Around 500 homes flooded when River Afan bursts banks in centre of Port Talbot.

2,800 houses evacuated in Kinmel Bay and Towyn as the sea flooded the area.

Widespread flooding hit areas including Talybont. The Leri, Rheidol and Clarach
areas were worst affected.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBWM


                         Copyright 2015 Trinity Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 13 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                               walesonline.co.uk

                     December 9, 2015 Wednesday 6:21 PM GMT

Storm Desmond-style storms and floods are not so rare in Welsh weather history,
warns scientist;
An expert at Aberystwyth University says there are many historic examples of
such flooding

BYLINE: By Robin Turner

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 751 words


The devastating flooding which has hit much of north west England in the wake of
Storm Desmond might be more common for Britain than currently believed, a Welsh
scientist is warning.

Professor Mark Macklin, an expert in river flooding and climate change impacts
at Aberystwyth University , says analysis shows 21st century floods are not
unprecedented in terms of either their frequency or magnitude.

Working with other experts from the universities of Cambridge and Glasgow he has
drawn on historic records to build a clearer picture of the flooding.

They conclude that 21st century flood events such as Storm Desmond are not
exceptional or unprecedented in terms of their frequency or magnitude and that
flood frequency and flood risk forecasts would be improved by including data
from flood deposits dating back hundreds of years, not just a few decades.

Prof Macklin said: "Sometimes we are talking about a 'one in 100 year flood'
based on records going back just 30 years."

Related story: More rain and flooding on the way as Met Office issues weather
warning for parts of Wales

He added: "UK documentary records and old flood deposits dating back hundreds of
years indicate that these floods are not unprecedented, which means we are
grossly underestimating flood risk and endangering peoples' lives.

"The truth is flood plains are made by floods and after the industrial
revolution and because of need for land we are building on them.

"For flooding to occur in flood plains and for it to be termed unprecedented
therefore does not make much sense."

Prof Macklin points out the floods in Talybont in 2012 followed on from a long
series of floods in the area, some going back to the 1600s.

Related: How Aberystwyth recovered from the devastating damage of January 2014

He has studied flood deposits from flood plain area across the UK including a
number in Wales using "lichen clocks".

He explained that by examining the rate at which lichen grows on boulders
disturbed by floods, the date of the floods can be determined and he has found
severe flooding going back hundreds of years.

He warned: "It is of concern that historical data suggests there is far more
capacity in the North Atlantic climate system to produce wetter and more
prolonged flood-rich periods than hitherto experienced in the 21st century.

More: Pictures show devastating trail of Storm Desmond's destruction

"Looking forward, an increased likelihood of weather extremes due to climate
change means that extending our flood record using geomorphology science must be
placed at the centre of flood risk assessment in the UK."

Professor John Lewin, also from the University of Aberystwyth, said: "What is
needed is far more resilience for already-developed floodplains , and much more
serious insistence that future floodplain development should be virtually
curtailed.

"Somewhere along the line floodplain development has been allowed by local
authorities and the UK government to continue regardless."

Related: Storm Desmond flooding chaos brings Welsh RNLI volunteers out to join
rescue effort

Lewin, Macklin and their colleagues are members of the British Society for
Geomorphology's Working Group on Stormy Geomorphology, who are currently
finalising a global analysis of the role geomorphology science can play in an
age of extremes.

Flooding events from Welsh history:

Floods around the Bristol Channel coasts extended in South Wales from Laugharne,
Carmarthenshire, to above Chepstow in Monmouthshire. Cardiff was the worst hit
town with the foundations of St Mary's Church destroyed. Overall 2,000 or more
people drowned with houses and villages swept away by what might have been a
tsunami.

One witness said: "A noise was heard resembling distant thunder...a tremendous
body of water rolled several feet above the waters of the River Rhydol,
stripping the fields of hay, wheat, oats and barley."

Ceredigion and Powys, Dyfi and Teifi; "'Due to the rapid thaw and heavy
rainfall, hundreds of acres of farmland have been inundated. In Cardiganshire,
considerable flooding resulted.'

The River Ogmore bursts its banks in the centre of Bridgend hitting shops,
businesses and many homes in the town centre, the abattoir, Bridgend rugby field
and club house and Newbridge Fields became a lake.

Around 500 homes flooded when River Afan bursts banks in centre of Port Talbot.

2,800 houses evacuated in Kinmel Bay and Towyn as the sea flooded the area.

Widespread flooding hit areas including Talybont. The Leri, Rheidol and Clarach
areas were worst affected.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBWM


                         Copyright 2015 Trinity Mirror
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 14 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           February 15, 2014 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Floods: we could all have to pay more to insure;
New plans to prevent flood-prone homes being denied cover could see every
household in the country paying higher premiums, says Jessica Winch

BYLINE: Jessica Winch

SECTION: YOUR MONEY;FEATURES; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 999 words


Every British household may face higher insurance bills in future as a result of
the current floods, regardless of whether they have suffered or their properties
are at risk, Your Money understands.

A senior insurance executive warned that the cost of a vital new
government-backed agreement to protect flood-risk homes may have to rise
following last week's deluges.

The scheme, called Flood Re, is due to come into force in 2015 and will
guarantee affordable insurance for households in flood-prone areas.

It will be funded by a levy of around £10.50 on all household premiums across
the country. The extra £180m levy will cover flood claims from high-risk
households and reduce the premiums the owners have to pay.

Many face annual insurance premiums of thousands of pounds - if they were to buy
cover under "normal" market terms. Under Flood Re this will be capped at no more
than £540 a year, varying by council tax band.

However, if flooding becomes more frequent, the number of claims and the number
of properties considered at high risk of flooding are likely to rise. This means
the levy and premiums may not be enough to cover the risk.

David Williams, managing director of underwriting at Axa Insurance, said: "I'm
concerned that the levy and premiums are fixed for the first few years of Flood
Re. If you see an increase in the level of claims you have to increase the
premiums.

"Certainly if the weather we've seen in recent months continues I think that is
likely to happen."

Mr Williams said the annual levy and premiums reflected figures submitted by
insurers in 2012.

But the past few months have seen a series of storms and the country's wettest
January in nearly 250 years.

Insurance premiums may rise in the short term if the total value of claims from
the extreme weather tops £1bn, according to AA Insurance. The summer floods of
2007 resulted in payouts of more than £3bn.

The final details of Flood Re are still being worked out between the Government
and insurers.

A spokesman for the Association of British Insurers (ABI) said concerns about
the funding for Flood Re were "premature".

"If there are serious concerns we will have this conversation further down the
line," he said. "Our members are concentrating on helping their customers
through this difficult patch."

Flood Re is intended to protect some 500,000 properties where owners would
struggle to access affordable insurance due to flood risk.

The deal leaves out 3,800 homes in England and Wales that are more expensive and
in council tax band H, as well as an estimated 5,000 homes built on flood plains
after 2009. Small businesses are excluded and many leasehold properties could
also be excluded if the freeholder is a business.

The British Insurance Brokers' Association (Biba) has called for the scheme to
be extended.

"Our members feel that you might live in a large home but be cash poor and you
still need to be able to afford insurance," said Biba's Graeme Trudgill.

"Small businesses are covered in the current agreement but excluded in Flood Re
and we think that is a step backwards."

What is Flood Re?

Flood Re is a government-backed insurance scheme designed to cover the cost of
flood claims from high-risk homes. It will link the cost of premiums for
high-risk households to their council tax band, effectively capping their
insurance costs.

Why do we need it?

Because the previous agreement covering flood-risk homes expired last summer.
Insurers have agreed to honour the deal, known as the Statement of Principles,
until Flood Re comes into effect in 2015. The agreement guarantees that insurers
will renew existing customers' home insurance and continue cover for new owners
of a previously flooded or at-risk property if the original owner decides to
sell. However, the Statement of Principles does not set a cap on insurance
premiums, meaning flood-risk homes have seen their insurance costs climb year on
year.

When does it start?

The detailed proposals are still being discussed between the Government and the
insurance industry and are not expected to reach the statute books under the
Water Bill until summer 2015.

How does it work?

Every household in the UK will pay £10.50 towards a not-for-profit fund to cover
the cost of flood claims for high-risk properties. The insurance industry claims
home owners already pay this, as some cross-subsidy has always existed between
lower and higher flood risks. Those in flood-prone areas will pay an insurance
premium that is pegged to their council tax band - premiums will be capped at
£210 a year for households in council tax bands A and B, rising to £540 a year
for homes in band G. Flood claims for homes covered in the scheme will be
handled and funded by insurers, who will then recoup the cost from the Flood Re
fund.

Are all properties included in Flood Re?

Some at-risk homes and businesses are excluded under current proposals.

The scheme excludes more expensive properties in council tax band H (and I in
Wales) because they are deemed able to pay for the insurance themselves. Houses
built after January 2009 are also excluded to discourage the development of
properties on flood plains.

Small businesses are also excluded and there is uncertainty surrounding
buy-to-let properties and leasehold properties.

What happens if there is not enough pooled money to cover flood claims?

The official impact assessment on the scheme, published last year by the
Department for the Environment, said there was a 58pc chance that the fund will
go into deficit and require extra funds within a 20-year period.

The intention is to manage losses through reinsurance and insurers will have to
step in to shoulder further deficits.

The ABI said Flood Re will cover losses up to those expected in a 1 in 200 year
- if that is exceeded, then the Government will not formally step in but will
take "primary responsibility" for allocating available resources.

"Every household could pay £10.50 towards a fund to cover flood claims for
high-risk properties

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The cost of a new government-backed agreement to protect flood-risk
homes may have to rise following the current deluges
MATT CARDY/CARL COURT/AFP/GETTY IMAGES

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2014 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 15 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                       Pasadena Star-News (Pasadena, CA)

                             April 18, 2003 Friday

Floods and Flash Floods, what to do

SECTION: DISASTER PREPAREDNESS

LENGTH: 463 words


If you live in a flood-prone area, it is important to be prepared in case
flooding does occur. Determine your nearest safe area above flood waters.
Develop an evacuation plan. Remember that many roads, bridges, and existing
drainages may be swept away by flood waters.

A flood WARNING means flooding is occurring or will occur soon. If the National
Weather Service, [ www.nws.noaa.gov/], issues a flood WARNING for your areas,
you should: Turn off your utilities if your home is likely to be flooded. Fill
your car s gas tank. Evacuate if you are told to do so. [See the following
section on evacuation procedures.]

Flash floods are rapidly developing floods that can happen with little or no
warning. Flash floods are most often caused by intense rainfall, severe
thunderstorms, or breaks in a dam, levee, or dike. A flash flood WARNING means
you may have only a very short time to escape. A flash flood can happen so
rapidly that you may not even get a warning. If the National Weather Service
issues a flash flood WARNING for your area, or if you suspect a flash flood is
occurring, you should:

Leave low-lying areas immediately. If you are driving, stay away from creeks and
open ditches. If your car stalls in rapidly rising waters, abandon it
IMMEDIATELY and climb to higher ground. The rushing waters from floods and flash
floods are extremely dangerous. Remember: Police barricades are there for your
protection. DO NOT DRIVE AROUND THEM. Flood waters covering roads and bridges
have more force and power than you think. Walking or driving through flood
waters is the most dangerous thing you can do.

EVACUATION PROCEDURES You will receive instructions to evacuate the area in one
of the following ways: The Emergency Alerts Station [EAS]. A uniformed agent of
law enforcement or the fire service will contact you. Mobile sirens, police,
fire or other PA systems will be used to alert you. Shelters will be available
for residents who cannot stay with friends or relatives in other areas. The Red
Cross has prearranged shelter sites throughout the community. If shelters need
to be opened for emergency housing, listen to the EAS for the exact locations.
If there is time, take a moment to gather a few important items you may need. Do
this as quickly as possible and leave as soon as you can.

IF YOU CAN, BRING THESE ITEMS WITH YOU: Prescription drugs. Food - if needed for
a special diet. Eyeglasses or contact lenses. Change of clothing. Personal items
- toilet articles, documents, photo albums. Bedding - sleeping bag, pillow,
blankets. Baby or child supplies - diapers, food, toys. Money, credit cards,
checks. Proper identification. Pets - provisions will be made for pets. They
will stay in separate housing, but bring food if possible.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

   Copyright 2003 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 16 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                            March 21, 2001 Wednesday
                                  Late Edition

Rising waters, tempers;
INSURANCE

BYLINE: Amanda Vaughan.

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 831 words


As the clean-up continues on the North Coast, insurers face a deluge of claims,
writes Amanda Vaughan.

After the Wollongong floods of 1998 insurance companies buckled under community
anger and promised to review their household policies in order to give consumers
better protection against flood damage. But change has been slow.

Floods on NSW's North Coast have again put the issue under the spotlight and the
success or failure of people's claims will come down to the wording in their
policies, rather than wishful thinking.

With the damage bill likely to exceed $200 million, the distinction insurers
make between "flash flooding" and "mainstream flooding" will likely result in
many claims being knocked back.

While some insurers have changed their policies to provide flood cover in
exchange for an additional premium, others, such as NRMA, the country's largest
insurer, continue to exclude it.

The NRMA's policy says it will not cover flood damage except for damage "caused
by the sudden, excessive run-off of water during and as a direct result of a
storm in your local area".

Insurance companies in NSW have traditionally excluded flood cover from their
household policies because they say there is not enough information on flood
mapping to adequately assess risk.

After the Wollongong flash flood, NRMA's chief executive, Eric Dodd, was quoted
in the Herald as saying: "The financial future of families whose homes have been
wrecked by freak weather should not hinge on fine definitions of flood and
storm."

Three years on, and more freak weather later, it's not clear what the future of
this month's flood victims is. A spokeswoman for the NRMA confirmed the company
"does not, and has never offered, insurance for flooding".

When asked if the NRMA was planning to offer flood cover in the future, she
said: "If there was a way to get the proper information, we would."

The NRMA has supported an information campaign being carried out by the
Insurance Council of Australia which defines the difference between storm
damage, flood damage and flash and mainstream flooding.

That campaign came after a report by the Australian Securities and Investments
Commission (ASIC) in June last year found many consumers were still confused
about the differences. ASIC recommended the industry improve its information so
policyholders were under no illusion as to what they were covered for.

Interestingly, GIO, the State's second-largest insurer (now owned by AMP), did
change its policies to cover "flash-flood and rainwater run-off" or flood damage
occurring within 24 hours of the rain that caused it.

It defines flood as water that has overflowed from rivers, lakes, creeks or
artificially constructed watercourses caused by rain, rainwater overflowing from
a drainage system, rain deluge or rainwater that has run-off from land, roads,
streets or gutters.

This is a wider definition which gives the consumer additional cover and can be
included in household insurance, for a higher premium.

Insurers blame the Government and local authorities for poor flood mapping and
for permitting development in flood-prone areas.

Examples of poor planning decisions came to the fore after Wollongong was
struck, says Rod Frail, director of corporate affairs for the ICA.

Frail says that, in one case, insurance assessors discovered an affected housing
estate had been built over a filled-in creek and the pipes laid to carry water
away from the site were sorely inadequate.

Insurance companies are loathe to cover people who live near "obvious" risks,
such as rivers, creeks or an area which floods frequently.

Suncorp-Metway, one of Queensland's major insurers, provides flood cover subject
to assessment. Joe Dowling, a spokesman for the company, says it does not
"anticipate turning anyone down" who has claimed for damage caused by recent
storm-induced flash flooding in Brisbane, but he wouldn't comment on the
situation on the NSW North Coast.

Frail maintains companies would be more willing to offer cover if they could
access detailed estimates on the frequency of floods for at least the past 100
years and the likely maximum water level of those floods.

"Some local areas have very detailed flood mapping, others none. It varies a lot
and is that way mainly because of the cost involved in gathering the
information," Frail says.

The best way for property owners to avoid disappointment is to know exactly what
their policy covers by paying special attention to policy wording.

WHEN A FLOOD IS A FLOOD

In its report Consumer Understanding of Flood Insurance, ASIC attempted to
clarify flood insurance policy terms: "In general, flood damage refers to the
inundation of a property by water which overflows from a natural watercourse,
while storm damage

... refers to the inundation of a property by water as the result of storm."

ASIC found most companies will not cover property damaged by inundation of water
flowing from a natural watercourse or inundation by mingled waters from a storm
and a watercourse.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2001 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 17 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             June 16, 2007 Saturday
                                  City Edition

Watching the rivers

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 667 words


Arkansas River - The Arkansas River near Muskogee was nearly a foot over flood
stage at 28.8 feet Friday afternoon. The river is expected to remain above flood
stage or higher through the weekend, according to the National Weather Service.

East Cache Creek - The National Weather service predicted East Cache Creek near
Walters will rise over flood stage early this morning. It's expected to crest at
23 feet, about 2 feet over flood stage. The creek is expected to fall below
flood stage Monday morning.

Croplands, pastures and low-level roads will be under 2 feet of water.

North Canadian River - The weather service reported minor flooding occurring
along the North Canadian river on the east side of Oklahoma City. The river was
expected to rise above flood stage Friday evening near Harrah and crest around
14.1 feet Friday evening. The river was expected to fall below flood stage
around 1 a.m. Saturday.

Croplands and pastures in eastern Oklahoma County, southeast corner of Lincoln
County and the northeastern corner of Pottawatomie County.

Canadian River - The river near Bridgeport was at 14.1 feet Friday afternoon.
The flood stage is 14 feet. The river has crested and will continue falling and
is expected to drop below flood stage this evening.

Cimarron River - The river is expected to crest at 14.5 feet, half a foot over
flood stage, near Okeene Saturday afternoon.

Areas that could be affected extend from near Orienta to extreme northeastern
Blaine County and near State Highway 51 in Kingfisher County.

The river was more than a foot above flood stage near Dover this morning. The
river is expected to crest nearly 2 feet above flood stage Saturday morning and
fall below flood stage early Monday morning. Homes along U.S. 81 could see
shallow flooding or difficult access. Rural roads and croplands may be 2 feet
underwater.

The river near Perkins was less than a foot below flood stage Friday afternoon.
The flood stage is 17 feet. At 18 feet, places along the Cimarron River Valley
in Payne County will be flooded, and oil wells near the river will be cut off by
water. The river is expected to fall below flood stage around 11 a.m. Sunday.

The Cimarron River near Buffalo in northwestern Oklahoma was just below flood
stage at 6 feet. Flood stage is 7.2 feet. The river is expected to fall below
flood stage early Sunday.

Minor flooding is occurring near Waynoka in northwestern Oklahoma. The river was
at 9.8 feet Friday afternoon, nearly 2 feet above flood stage.

The river is expected to crest near 10 feet this evening and fall below flood
stage Sunday afternoon.

Areas affected are from near Freedom to U.S. 281 south of Little Sahara State
Park near Waynoka to near Orienta in Major County.

Deep Fork River - The National Weather Service in Tulsa issued a flood warning
for the Deep Fork River near Beggs that ends early this morning. Friday
afternoon, the river was at 14.2 feet. The flood stage is 18 feet. When the
river hits flood stage, minor and lowland flooding is expected.

Neosho River - The Neosho River near Commerce was expected to fall below flood
stage Friday. The river was at 16.1 feet. The flood stage is 15 feet.

North Fork Red River - The North Fork Red River was expected to crest near 17
feet Friday evening. The river is expected to fall below flood stage early this
morning. At flood stage, rural roads in Kiowa, Jackson and Tillman counties
could see agricultural flooding and flooding on rural roads. Flood depths could
reach 3 feet over some areas along the river. Upstream points in Kiowa County
may see flooding before it crests in the Hendrick area.

Polecat Creek - Minor flooding was occurring in Sapulpa around the Polecat
Creek. Friday afternoon, the creek was at 24.7 feet, 3.7 feet above flood stage.
The creek is expected to crest at 27 feet and fall before flood stage this
afternoon. Severe flooding will affect pasture lands, oil fields and county
roads between Sapulpa and Jenks. Suburban homes can expect to have water in
their yards.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A manhole overflows on E Taft Avenue in Sapulpa. - BY MATT STRASEN, THE
OKLAHOMAN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2007 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 18 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             June 16, 2007 Saturday
                                  City Edition

Watching the rivers

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 667 words


Arkansas River - The Arkansas River near Muskogee was nearly a foot over flood
stage at 28.8 feet Friday afternoon. The river is expected to remain above flood
stage or higher through the weekend, according to the National Weather Service.

East Cache Creek - The National Weather service predicted East Cache Creek near
Walters will rise over flood stage early this morning. It's expected to crest at
23 feet, about 2 feet over flood stage. The creek is expected to fall below
flood stage Monday morning.

Croplands, pastures and low-level roads will be under 2 feet of water.

North Canadian River - The weather service reported minor flooding occurring
along the North Canadian river on the east side of Oklahoma City. The river was
expected to rise above flood stage Friday evening near Harrah and crest around
14.1 feet Friday evening. The river was expected to fall below flood stage
around 1 a.m. Saturday.

Croplands and pastures in eastern Oklahoma County, southeast corner of Lincoln
County and the northeastern corner of Pottawatomie County.

Canadian River - The river near Bridgeport was at 14.1 feet Friday afternoon.
The flood stage is 14 feet. The river has crested and will continue falling and
is expected to drop below flood stage this evening.

Cimarron River - The river is expected to crest at 14.5 feet, half a foot over
flood stage, near Okeene Saturday afternoon.

Areas that could be affected extend from near Orienta to extreme northeastern
Blaine County and near State Highway 51 in Kingfisher County.

The river was more than a foot above flood stage near Dover this morning. The
river is expected to crest nearly 2 feet above flood stage Saturday morning and
fall below flood stage early Monday morning. Homes along U.S. 81 could see
shallow flooding or difficult access. Rural roads and croplands may be 2 feet
underwater.

The river near Perkins was less than a foot below flood stage Friday afternoon.
The flood stage is 17 feet. At 18 feet, places along the Cimarron River Valley
in Payne County will be flooded, and oil wells near the river will be cut off by
water. The river is expected to fall below flood stage around 11 a.m. Sunday.

The Cimarron River near Buffalo in northwestern Oklahoma was just below flood
stage at 6 feet. Flood stage is 7.2 feet. The river is expected to fall below
flood stage early Sunday.

Minor flooding is occurring near Waynoka in northwestern Oklahoma. The river was
at 9.8 feet Friday afternoon, nearly 2 feet above flood stage.

The river is expected to crest near 10 feet this evening and fall below flood
stage Sunday afternoon.

Areas affected are from near Freedom to U.S. 281 south of Little Sahara State
Park near Waynoka to near Orienta in Major County.

Deep Fork River - The National Weather Service in Tulsa issued a flood warning
for the Deep Fork River near Beggs that ends early this morning. Friday
afternoon, the river was at 14.2 feet. The flood stage is 18 feet. When the
river hits flood stage, minor and lowland flooding is expected.

Neosho River - The Neosho River near Commerce was expected to fall below flood
stage Friday. The river was at 16.1 feet. The flood stage is 15 feet.

North Fork Red River - The North Fork Red River was expected to crest near 17
feet Friday evening. The river is expected to fall below flood stage early this
morning. At flood stage, rural roads in Kiowa, Jackson and Tillman counties
could see agricultural flooding and flooding on rural roads. Flood depths could
reach 3 feet over some areas along the river. Upstream points in Kiowa County
may see flooding before it crests in the Hendrick area.

Polecat Creek - Minor flooding was occurring in Sapulpa around the Polecat
Creek. Friday afternoon, the creek was at 24.7 feet, 3.7 feet above flood stage.
The creek is expected to crest at 27 feet and fall before flood stage this
afternoon. Severe flooding will affect pasture lands, oil fields and county
roads between Sapulpa and Jenks. Suburban homes can expect to have water in
their yards.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A manhole overflows on E Taft Avenue in Sapulpa. - BY MATT STRASEN, THE
OKLAHOMAN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2007 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 19 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                                 Yorkshire Post

                                 June 19, 2006

Vital that planners heed flood threats

SOURCE: Yorkshire Post

LENGTH: 1060 words


Elliot Morley

Elliot Morley is Labour MP for Scunthorpe and the former Environment Minister.

AS Minister responsible for flood and coastal defence, I witnessed many dramatic
floods between 1997 and 2006. The North Yorkshire flash floods of June 19, 2005,
certainly rank in that list of extreme weather events.

In just three hours, 70mm (2?in) of rain fell on Hawnby. That is the equivalent
of a normal month's rain. In the Helmsley area alone, 50mm (nearly 2in) of rain
was recorded in just 30 minutes, a record for Yorkshire.

Not surprisingly, the result of this was dramatic and devastating. Homes
flooded, livestock drowned, roads cut, bridges damaged, fencing swept away. The
costs ran into millions, with all the implications that has for individuals,
insurance companies and local and national government expenditure.

The number of extreme weather events has doubled in the last decade. Since 1997,
we have had the Northampton floods, the dramatic floods of 2000 that affected
thousands of homes across Britain, not least in York, the Boscastle flash flood
and homes left underwater in Carlisle.

There have been many other smaller, but no less devastating events. On the day
we had Britain's highest ever-recorded temperature of 38.5C (101.3F),
Carlton-in-Cleveland recorded a record downpour of 49.1mm in 15 minutes.

Don't ever let anyone tell you that climate change is just theoretical. While we
have always had extreme events in history, these patterns coincide with the
recorded change in climate and greenhouse gas concentration and are mirrored
internationally.

Given the two-year drought in the South-East of England, and the continued
possibility of extreme rainfall, it's not impossible that a future minister for
water could experience the nightmare of announcing water and hosepipe bans while
up to their knees in a flood.

The question that people not unreasonably ask is what can be done to protect
them from flooding? More is being done. The Government is spending record sums
of money, about £600m this year alone. Weather forecasting is more accurate. The
extreme rainfall on the North Yorks Moors was predicted by the Met Office,
although the exact consequences could not be. Flood warnings have been upgraded.
Emergency response has been improved and strengthened following the Bye Report
after the Northampton disaster. Planning guidance for flood plain development
has been strengthened, and the whole structure of flood planning and delivery
has been strengthened and streamlined with more flexibility for the Environment
Agency and local flood defence committees, with block grant allocations.

Will all this stop floods? Realistically, it is not possible to prevent all
floods in this country, particularly flash floods that overwhelm defences, or
areas that have not experienced such extremes before.

What can be done is to reduce risk of flooding, but that means calculating risk
and introducing priority scoring so that those properties in the most risk, and
the highest numbers at risk, are protected first. It is also the case that in
some circumstances there are just no technical solutions and other options have
to be explored.

Funding is certainly an issue, but it is not the only one. The commitment to
extensive funding up to 2008 has helped secure what is known as the "Statement
of Principles" between the insurance industry and this Government.

This agreement means that basically the insurance industry undertakes to
maintain insurance in flood hit areas, subject to the conditions in the
agreement. It ensures a competitive market where, all but a minority of
frequently flooded properties, or those considered an uninsurable risk, can shop
around and obtain the cover that they need.

Local councils, flood defence committees and the Environment Agency identify and
plan future flood defences. Defra provides most of the funding. The EA also
provides risk mapping, flood asset management and warning systems and has a
strategic role in overseeing the risk from all watercourses.

However, there is much householders and business can do themselves to reduce
risk and provide flood resilience.

Firstly, make sure you are insured. The Government does provide special help to
councils to cope with the unexpected additional costs of floods under a formula
known as the Bellwin Scheme. All councils are expected to hold some funds for
emergencies, but over a modest threshold the Government will pay the bulk of
extra costs associated with flood response, clean up and repair. It is really
not possible to extend this to private individuals.

Secondly, look at the Environment Agency's flood risk maps. You just have to go
on the internet and key in your postcode. It will tell you if your home is at
risk from flooding.

Thirdly, if you are at risk, get your name added to the EA's flood warning
scheme. It's free and you will receive an automated flood warning if floods are
predicted. It can even phone you on your mobile if you are out.

Fourthly, follow the advice from the EA from their leaflets and their website
and think through how you could cope with a flood. Have a plan to move valuables
upstairs, for example.

Fifthly, if you are one of the unlucky minority who cannot get insurance,
consider what you can do to flood-proof your home or business.

This can be a solid floor, raised electrics, waterproof plaster and new devices
that can shut off doors and airbricks and even protect a whole house.

Finally, we all need to recognise these extremes may be a permanent fixtures.
More care should be taken about planning applications on flood plains.
Developers should contribute to defences for both new and existing homes.

There are simple measures that could be taken in house design. We should be
reducing run off from development by green spaces and sustainable urban
drainage, which uses ponds and wetlands to absorb water and release it slowly
rather than overwhelm drains and watercourses. We should go further and be
reinstating flood plains, water meadows and the natural meanders.

We do have an opportunity here for reinstating lost habitats

and reducing flood risk. These ideas are embraced in the policy paper "Making
Space for Water" produced by Defra. Yet I have

so far seen little application of this in development or planning policy.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2006

                       Copyright 2006 Johnston Press Plc


                          FOCUS - 20 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            The Statesman (AsiaNet)

                            August 13, 2015 Thursday

Flood: Remedial measures

BYLINE: Khan Faraz - Peshawar.

SECTION: Vol. 17 No. 222

LENGTH: 422  words


The current flash floods caused by heavy monsoon rains, glaciers melting due to
hot weather and lack of flood control mechanism have hit the country right from
Chitral and Gilgit Baltistan up to Lower Sindh. These floods played havoc with
human lives, agricultural crops, livestocks and infrastructure casing losses of
billions of rupees to the country's economy.

It merits a mention that the country is experiencing such devastating floods on
yearly basis especially since 2010 historic flood. The 2010 flood, submerging
one-fifth of the country's land, alone caused loss of about 2000 human lives.
Loss to the economy was US $10 billion estimated at 5.8% of the GDP. Besides,
4.5 million people lost their jobs and 20 million people were exposed to
diseases/malnutrition. More or less the losses continued every year since then
due to floods.

With every flood, there is a lot of talk of flood control measures both in print
and electronic media, in which experts emphasize the construction of water
storage reservoirs as the best remedy to control floods. Besides, these
dams/reservoirs can be source of bringing thousands of barren land under
cultivation and generation of the cheapest hydel electricity. Construction of
such mega dams is further necessitated by the fact that the per capita water
availability in the country has already dwindled to the threshold level of 1000
cubic meter.

In view of the above, there is a dire need to exploit the ideal sites available
on all major rivers for construction of dams and protective dykes to check flood
havoc. The following measures are suggested for adaptation to control floods:

* Construction of undisputed mega Storage Dams like Diamer Basha Dam, Shyok Dam
and Skardu Dams on River Indus.

* Construction of Small/Medium dams like Munda Dam on River Swat, Kurram Tangi
on River Kurram, Chiniot Dam on River Chenab etc.

* Construction of off-Channel Storages like Akori Dam, Rohtas Dam etc.

* Provision of Flood release/escape channels to desert areas that would reduce
peak flood discharges.

* Remodelling  and  review of design discharge capacity of barrages to enhance
their discharge capacities.

* Periodic maintenance of flood embankments (5 Ft free board mandatory from
highest flood mark).

* Construction of Flood Dispersal Structures for Hill Torrents flood mitigation.

* Improving and extension of Flood Forecasting System  and  Installation of
additional Weather Radars.

* Flood Plain Mapping/Zoning along the Indus and its tributaries for restricting
settlements in high risk areas.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Mashriq Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 21 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          Newcastle Herald (Australia)

                             June 23, 2009 Tuesday
                                  Late Edition

High-risk flood areas have choice of cover;
OPINION & ANALYSIS

BYLINE: David Brown

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 650 words


JUST over a week ago NRMA Insurance launched flood cover and this has attracted
some interest from the Hunter, so I'm pleased to be able to explain our new
product.

Since Sunday, June 14, 98 per cent of NRMA Insurance customers from the Hunter
and across NSW have had improved home insurance coverage, with the automatic
addition of flood insurance, at very little cost.

This is new cover and it is great news for customers who will have the comfort
of knowing they are now covered for both storm and flood.

The remaining 2 per cent of our customers live in areas identified as being high
flood risk and they will be charged a premium that reflects how likely, and how
seriously, they could be impacted by flooding.

What's important to note is that customers in high-risk flood zones have choice
they will be offered an upgraded policy to include the additional flood
protection, or they can remove flood cover to reduce their premium and keep
exactly the same cover they have today.

We are contacting all of these customers in the higher risk areas to explain
their options and the details of the new flood cover.

It's important that the community and our customers have all the information
they need about our new product.

How has high flood risk been identified?

Up until now there has been a limited view of where the flood risk is across
NSW, which has hampered insurers' ability to introduce flood cover.

The Insurance Council of Australia has now developed a database of NSW local
government flood mapping that we have used, along with State Government terrain
data and independent hydrologist reports, to understand where the greatest flood
risk is.

What if a Newcastle customer disagrees that they have a flood risk?

We know that some of our customers will question that they are in a flood zone,
or may simply not be aware of their flood risk. Customers in high-risk areas are
free to challenge us on their flood classification and we will work with them on
reviewing it.

We will make this process as easy for customers as possible and what they need
to do will vary depending on their circumstances.

Some of the things we will look at are section 149(2) or 149(5) certificates
from local councils, which will indicate the flood risk for a particular
property.

If the council's information is different to ours we will err on the side of the
customer and review their premium.

Other things we would look at may include engineers' reports and building
reports, but customers should speak to us first.

Newcastle is no stranger to severe weather the striking image of the Pasha Bulka
washed up on Nobbys Beach is still vivid two years later.

Since the launch of our flood cover, I've been asked what does that mean for
Newcastle and, in particular, would customers need the new cover to have their
claim paid should a similar event to the June 2007 storms hit the region.

I want to be very clear the severe weather of June 2007 in Newcastle was covered
under our policy's storm provisions.

This is a standard cover and all customers are protected for storm damage.

You cannot compare one weather event to the next, but all of our customers
retain their protection for storm damage regardless of what they decide to do
with flood cover.

The issue of flood has long evaded the insurance industry.

Flood is the most expensive natural peril, costing the Australian community more
than $300 million per year, yet research shows almost 70 per cent of NSW home
owners do not know their level of flood risk.

Unlike storms, fires and burglaries ,which can happen anywhere, flood damage to
buildings in flood zones is inevitable when a certain amount of rain falls
meaning providing insurance cover has been difficult.

The introduction of flood cover has been particularly challenging but we are
confident that our new cover offers the best protection for our customers.

David Brown is head of sales and

service at NRMA Insurance.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: SINKING FEELING: Customers will still be protected for storm damage,
regardless of their flood cover.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2009 Newcastle Newspapers Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 22 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        The Hawk Eye (Burlington, Iowa)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              July 8, 2011 Friday

Loebsack calls for flood hearing

BYLINE: Christinia Crippes, The Hawk Eye, Burlington, Iowa

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 506 words


July 08--With high water once again impacting Iowa communities, two of the
state's Democratic congressmen are calling for a hearing to discuss the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers flood management plans.

U.S. Reps. Dave Loebsack, 2nd District, and Leonard Boswell, 3rd District, sent
a letter Thursday to the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee
urging them to look into issues regarding the regulatory and statutory
environment guiding the Corps' plans, flood control infrastructure, and the
flexibility and resources provided to them to perform their duties.

"Iowans are still struggling to recover from the devastating Floods of 2008, and
given the urgency of addressing the current flooding in the Midwest, it is
important that we examine our flood management plans and the operation of our
flood control infrastructure to ensure that flood prevention and disaster
response is as quick and effective as possible," Loebsack said in a news
release.

Loebsack said having up-to-date management plans and well-maintained flood
control infrastructure is critical to flood prevention and awareness efforts now
and in the future.

"A strong flood management plan should allow for the Corps to work closely with
local, state and federal officials to make sure current environmental conditions
are taken into account," Boswell said in the release. "As a member of the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee from a state whose residents must
deal with flood conditions every year, I look forward to the opportunity to
tackle this issue for Iowans and the communities impacted by flood waters."

Loebsack is not a member of the committee.

In the letter, the congressmen suggest the committee could hear testimony from
flooding and weather experts, local or state officials and Corps representatives
to discuss the issues. They also recommend questions, such as whether the Corps
policies should be examined regularly, given the increase in flooding and severe
weather, whether local governments have enough input into those plans and
whether the Corps has adequate resources to maintain their structures.

The two congressmen previously sent a letter to President Barack Obama to
include a request in his 2012 budget for the Corps to perform scientific studies
of the management plans for the Corps' flood-control reservoirs in Iowa.

Loebsack previously introduced two bills that would address flood concerns. One
measure would require more transparency and accountability when the Federal
Emergency Management Agency redraws its flood insurance rate maps in
communities. The other piece of legislation would establish a flood center, with
the aim of finding better policies to prevent and manage flooding.

To see more of The Hawk Eye or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.thehawkeye.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The Hawk Eye, Burlington, Iowa
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110708-QW-Loebsack-calls-for-flood-hearing-0708-20110708

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QW


                          Copyright 2011 The Hawk Eye


                          FOCUS - 23 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 18, 2017 Saturday

Flood Warning Issued by NWS Elko (Northern and Northeastern Nevada)

LENGTH: 380  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: National Weather Service has issued the following news release:



 Flood Warning

 Alert:



 For the Lower Humboldt, including from Battle Mountain to Comus, and

 downstream to Winnemucca...moderate flooding is occurring and is expected

 to continue.



 Water diversions have successfully removed some water from the main channel

 and lowered the flood wave along the Humboldt River.

 The flood wave is also moving into flat terrain and slowing down. Forecasts

 of crests are an estimate. Be prepared for flooding.

 For Battle Mountain...the river is still in moderate flood stage but is

 dropping slowly.

 For Comus...the river is expected to reach flood stage Friday evening...reach

 moderate flood stage and crest early Monday...then drop slowly through mid
week.

 For Golconda...the river is expected to flood around Sunday morning...reach

 moderate flood and crest late Tuesday...and continue in flood until at least

 mid week.

 For Winnemucca...the river is expected to reach flood stage late Monday...reach


 moderate flood stage and crest around Thursday...and remain flood until at
least

 late week.

 The flood wave will remain in Humboldt County for several days after that.

 The Flood Warning continues for

 The Humboldt River At Comus.



 * until further notice.



 * At  9:15 AM Friday the stage was 8.8 feet.



 * Flood stage is 9.5 feet.



 * Near moderate flooding is forecast.



 * Forecast...rise above flood stage by after midnight tomorrow and

 continue to rise to near 10.3 feet by Sunday evening.



 * Impact...at 10.5 feet...Moderate lowland flooding throughout reach,

 with some rural roads flooded. Minor flooding in lower parts of

 Winnemucca with sewer backups, Main area impacted is between railroad

 tracks and Second Street beneath Interstate 80. Property damage in

 Winnemucca is minimal. 3200 cfs, about a 10 year flood, 10 percent chance any

 year. Similar to floods of February 1986, June 1995, and May 1998.

 &&



 Instructions:    Do not drive cars through flooded areas. Listen to NOAA
weather radio or check weather.gov/elko for official information. For ample but
unofficial information go to our Facebook and Twitter pages.

 Target Area:

 Humboldt



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 24 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            Charleston Gazette-Mail

                           September 17, 2017, Sunday

Harvey shows how floods don;
t pay attention to flood zone maps

BYLINE: Sarah Pralle

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P7A

LENGTH: 1089 words


One of the most heartbreaking photographs from Hurricane Harvey shows a handful
of nursing home residents sitting in wheelchairs in waist-deep water. Their
assisted living facility, like countless other properties affected by the
flooding in Texas, was located outside the 100-year flood hazard zone.

Here's what this means: These areas were not considered at high risk for
flooding, according to the National Flood Insurance Program's flood-mapping
program, or at least not high enough to carry mandatory flood insurance. The
100-year flood zone designates areas that have a 1 percent chance of flooding
each year, a term that can be misunderstood to mean it occurs only once every
100 years. The 100-year flood standard (and 500-year standard) is based on
probability, not history.

And here's the big lesson from Hurricane Harvey: The U.S. government's flood
zone designation, and the maps based on it, may not predict future flood risks
accurately, particularly as climate change alters sea levels and weather
patterns.

My research focuses on flood mapping under the National Flood Insurance Program.
While the NFIP has protected lives and saved billions of dollars in damage since
Congress enacted it close to 50 years ago, it has suffered from policy neglect
and political interference. Moreover, the flood insurance mapping program is ill
equipped to help us adapt to climate change.

"""

The Federal Emergency Management Agency administers the NFIP and uses the flood
hazard maps to set flood insurance rates and flood mitigation regulations. After
an initial investment in mapping the nation's flood zones in the 1970s, FEMA's
efforts to extend and update flood maps stalled when funding for the program
stagnated between 1980 and the early 2000s. During this time, individuals were
making decisions about where to live, and communities expanded with new
development - and these plans relied on increasingly outdated maps. Not
surprisingly, development in flood-prone areas continued, including communities
that would later be designated part of the NFIP program.In the early 2000s,
Congress finally funded a map modernization program to update the nation's flood
maps. This program has been only partially successful. One problem is that FEMA
used a significant amount of funding to digitize existing paper maps, rather
than fund new engineering studies to improve their accuracy. A second issue is
that FEMA prioritizes remapping projects based on population, meaning that rural
areas that are likely to see new development are often unmapped.

"""

And there's a third problem: Politics can shape the remapping process in ways
that leave communities vulnerable. Local elected leaders are sensitive to their
constituents' concerns. So a good outcome for local politicians and their
constituents would be to see a reduction in the size of the flood zone and the
severity of the hazard designation - this means fewer homeowners must purchase
mandatory National Flood Insurance, and there are fewer hurdles for local
development projects.FEMA remapping can work the other way, leaving homeowners
who suddenly find themselves living in the 100-year flood zone understandably
worried about the costs of flood insurance and the impact on property values.
The larger remapping conversation then centers on the costs of revising the
flood hazard zones rather than the risks associated with flooding.

FEMA lets local communities challenge the flood zone maps through an appeals
process. For example, New Orleans negotiated for seven years with FEMA to
convince the agency in 2016 that recent infrastructure projects reduced the
city's flood risk.

The result? The latest flood maps show that more than half of the population of
New Orleans is no longer in the high-risk flood zone even though many residents
live at or below sea level.

At times, local elected officials ask congressional delegations to contact FEMA
officials on their behalf. FEMA may bow to this political pressure and
reconsider the community's flood maps and flood hazard zones in ways that leave
vulnerable populations unnecessarily at risk.

It is important to note that many towns and cities across the United States have
worked hard to mitigate their flood risk and plan for future flood scenarios.
FEMA officials and flood experts acknowledge the efforts of these communities,
especially those subject to frequent flooding - and also praise engineers and
planners who try to steer local conversations toward risk reduction. But local
bureaucrats are subject to political pressures from above and may not prevail
over elected officials.

Individual property owners can also appeal if their homes are included in a
flood hazard zone, saving themselves hundreds or thousands of dollars in flood
insurance premiums if they can afford to hire a land surveyor. Lower-income
residents are at a disadvantage in this process, being unable to afford an
appeal or flood insurance premiums.

In my research in Syracuse, New York, the expanded flood zone finalized in the
2016 FEMA maps included some of the city's poorest neighborhoods. Many of the
African-American residents are the first in their families to achieve
homeownership and fear that inclusion in a flood zone means that their homes
will be worthless and neighborhoods will be deserted. However, the solution is
not to exclude such properties from the flood hazard zone, but to mitigate flood
hazard risks, offer low-cost loans so homeowners can flood-proof their homes and
subsidize their flood insurance to make it affordable.

"""

Climate change is rendering many flood maps unreliable - even those recently
updated with the latest technology. Flood insurance rate maps are static
products, illustrating flood hazards based on historical data. History, however,
may prove a poor predictor of the frequency and intensity of flooding because of
sea-level rise, stronger storms and heavier rain events associated with climate
change.Without accurate maps that reflect future risk as well as current
hazards, we cannot keep individuals, communities and the nation safe. And we
will find it increasingly difficult to minimize property damage and protect
critical infrastructure.

FEMA has embarked on a new mapping program called "Risk MAP, designed to better
communicate flood risk based on evolving factors such as real estate development
and changing weather patterns. This is a welcome addition to FEMA's mapping
program, but the new program will be effective only if local communities and
their leaders take these maps seriously.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 Charleston Newspapers


                          FOCUS - 25 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                   York Press

                             July 10, 2012 Tuesday

New product and business will help householders defy the floods

BYLINE: Julie Hayes

SECTION: BUSINESS NEWS

LENGTH: 338 words


A YORK businessman has launched a new product and business to prevent floods
from ruining people's homes.

Steve Barnard, who owns gates and fencing business Sandalwood Gates, based on
Elvington Industrial Estate, developed the new product after being contacted
about making a bespoke flood-proof gate for a customer.

He said that given the increasingly poor weather, they saw the need to develop a
product for everybody.

Steve said: "We were initially asked to design a timber flood gate but soon
realised that not all proerties have a wall surrounding their property.

"We discovered that what was actually required was a timber flood-proof door
that would not require an external flood barrier attached to the property."

Working with the Environment Agency and fire brigade, and another business based
in Penrith, Steve developed the double-sealed timber door, the Flood Divert
Door, and is applying for a patent.

The door has been tested to withstand 2ft of water and is a stable door style to
enable emergency access or exit without opening the whole door.

He has now set up Flood Divert as a new business to sell the product.

Flood Divert will initially use the expertise of Sandalwood Gates' three
employees, but Steve said he hoped to employ more people to fit the doors as
more orders came in.

The family-run business has already installed 11 of the doors as part of a flood
protection scheme in Ribchester carried out by Ribble Valley Council in
Lancashire.

It will also sell other flood protection products including bespoke hardwood
flood doors, proprietary flood barriers and other flood mitigation services for
commercial and private clients.

He said the insurance industry was responding to the increase in flash floods
and reassessing its involvement, and he said he hoped that if people showed they
were trying to prevent damage, they may be viewed more favourably.

"People do fit these sort of products all the time and as the weather gets worse
and more unpredictable, flash floods are going to happen more often," he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 NewsQuest Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 26 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 19, 2016 Monday

Washington: Army Corps of Engineers participates in first-time flood summit in
high-risk DC

LENGTH: 1019  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Army has issued the following news release:



 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers representatives joined more than 150 experts to
discuss flooding in our nation's capital at Gallaudet University, Sept. 8, 2016,
marking the first flood summit of its kind in Washington.





 "We live in a flood-prone area, and we better face it," said Rep. Eleanor
Holmes Norton during opening remarks. "You wouldn't know it because there's been
too little discussion."



 The congresswoman set the tone for the summit, impressing upon attendees that
the capital should be considered front and center nationally for issues on
climate change and flood risk.



 According to Jason Elliott, National Weather Service (NWS),
Baltimore/Washington, senior service hydrologist and summit panelist, Washington
is a three-way street for flooding. Not only is it located next to two major
rivers that can flood, the Potomac and Anacostia, it is susceptible to coastal
storm surge and interior flooding when storm drains are overwhelmed.



 The summit occurred the week of the 20th anniversary of Hurricane Fran that
engulfed Washington in 1996. While Washington has experienced several large
floods since, the Potomac River is due for a major one, said Elliott.



 And since that time, Washington has only grown, putting more people and
businesses at risk when the next flood comes.



 "We have more people and development to accommodate for in the future when
thinking about flood-risk-management measures," said Tanya Stern, District of
Columbia, Office of Planning, Planning, Engagement and Design deputy director.
Stern stated that between 2000 and 2015, Washington added 100,000 people.



 "Flood protection for D.C. equals protecting our economy, which is one of the
strongest in the nation," said Brian Kenner, District of Columbia, Planning and
Economic Development deputy mayor. "We have to guard the economy we've worked so
hard to generate."



 "We must educate, mitigate and remember the past to prepare for the future,"
said Elliott.



 The 2016 Flood Summit was organized by the DC Silver Jackets, an interagency
team that leverages resources to identify and implement comprehensive,
resilient, and sustainable solutions to reduce flood risks around Washington.
The Department of Energy and Environment (DOEE) is the lead agency for
Washington, while the Corps, Baltimore District, and National Park Service (NPS)
jointly lead the federal agencies.



 Panel discussions during the summit included an overview of
flood-risk-management programs, policies and initiatives across all levels of
governance; resilience and climate-adaptation challenges and opportunities;
structural and non-structural solutions agencies are currently taking to manage
flood risks; and the path forward.



 The summit brought together an array of regional, federal, state, local, and
District agencies, and public and private partners. The event was moderated by
Jason Samenow, Washington Post weather editor. Bart de Jong, The Royal
Netherlands Embassy Infrastructure and Environment counselor, acted as the
keynote speaker and discussed how the Dutch are turning flood-risk challenges
into opportunities. Teri Janine Quinn, Bloomingdale Civic Association president
and an Advisory Neighborhood Commission 5E chair, recounted personal tales of
flooding and resiliency, as part of the Flood Stories session. Participating
agencies included DOEE, NPS, Government of the District of Columbia, the Corps,
University of Maryland, Federal Emergency Management Agency, National Capital
Planning Commission, C40 Cities, New Orleans and New York City representatives,
and the Washington Metropolitan Transit Authority.



 "Floods know no jurisdictional boundaries," said Kenner. "That's why these
partnerships are so important."



 Joe Reed, Corps, Baltimore District, Levee Safety program manager, discussed
the ways the Corps is reducing flood risks in Washington, including
flood-fighting training for municipalities; updating a flood emergency manual
that acts as a guidebook for who's responsible and for what during a disaster;
and the Anacostia and Potomac Park flood-risk-management systems.



 "The risks of the Potomac Park Levee System far outweigh all other dam and
levee risks in all of the National Parks," said Mark Baker, NPS, Dam and Levee
Safety officer, who manages 400 flood-risk-management systems across NPS.



 Major improvements were made by the Corps to the flood-risk-management system
in fall 2014, after a sophisticated, removable post and panel closure structure
replaced the previous sandbagging procedure to close off 17th Street in case of
a flood.



 Stacey Underwood, Corps, Baltimore District, Silver Jackets Program
coordinator, discussed flood-risk-management studies the Corps and Silver
Jackets are conducting, as well as a new online, interactive maps that show
storm-based flood potential along the Potomac and Anacostia rivers.



 "The main priorities for the DC Silver Jackets in the coming years are making
more improvements to the Potomac Park Flood Risk Management System, increasing
community engagement, expanding international partnerships and addressing
interior-flooding issues," said Phetmano Phannavong, DOEE District of Columbia
floodplain manager and DC Silver Jackets co-leader.



 The summit ended with a summary of the key takeaways, as well as a call to
action, led by Sandra Knight, University of Maryland Center of Disaster
Resilience coordinator. Knight reiterated the importance of partnerships;
balancing structural and nature-based solutions for flood-risk management;
incorporating social justice and vulnerable populations when making flood-risk
decisions; educating the public and sharing in the responsibility of flood risk;
and rethinking basic assumptions when it comes to flooding.



 "It's great seeing District and federal partners working so closely together,
especially with the Silver Jackets," said Judy Feldman, National Mall Coalition
chair and president. "The future looks really good for D.C."



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:  editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 27 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 19, 2016 Monday

Washington: Army Corps of Engineers participates in first-time flood summit in
high-risk DC

LENGTH: 1019  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Army has issued the following news release:



 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers representatives joined more than 150 experts to
discuss flooding in our nation's capital at Gallaudet University, Sept. 8, 2016,
marking the first flood summit of its kind in Washington.





 "We live in a flood-prone area, and we better face it," said Rep. Eleanor
Holmes Norton during opening remarks. "You wouldn't know it because there's been
too little discussion."



 The congresswoman set the tone for the summit, impressing upon attendees that
the capital should be considered front and center nationally for issues on
climate change and flood risk.



 According to Jason Elliott, National Weather Service (NWS),
Baltimore/Washington, senior service hydrologist and summit panelist, Washington
is a three-way street for flooding. Not only is it located next to two major
rivers that can flood, the Potomac and Anacostia, it is susceptible to coastal
storm surge and interior flooding when storm drains are overwhelmed.



 The summit occurred the week of the 20th anniversary of Hurricane Fran that
engulfed Washington in 1996. While Washington has experienced several large
floods since, the Potomac River is due for a major one, said Elliott.



 And since that time, Washington has only grown, putting more people and
businesses at risk when the next flood comes.



 "We have more people and development to accommodate for in the future when
thinking about flood-risk-management measures," said Tanya Stern, District of
Columbia, Office of Planning, Planning, Engagement and Design deputy director.
Stern stated that between 2000 and 2015, Washington added 100,000 people.



 "Flood protection for D.C. equals protecting our economy, which is one of the
strongest in the nation," said Brian Kenner, District of Columbia, Planning and
Economic Development deputy mayor. "We have to guard the economy we've worked so
hard to generate."



 "We must educate, mitigate and remember the past to prepare for the future,"
said Elliott.



 The 2016 Flood Summit was organized by the DC Silver Jackets, an interagency
team that leverages resources to identify and implement comprehensive,
resilient, and sustainable solutions to reduce flood risks around Washington.
The Department of Energy and Environment (DOEE) is the lead agency for
Washington, while the Corps, Baltimore District, and National Park Service (NPS)
jointly lead the federal agencies.



 Panel discussions during the summit included an overview of
flood-risk-management programs, policies and initiatives across all levels of
governance; resilience and climate-adaptation challenges and opportunities;
structural and non-structural solutions agencies are currently taking to manage
flood risks; and the path forward.



 The summit brought together an array of regional, federal, state, local, and
District agencies, and public and private partners. The event was moderated by
Jason Samenow, Washington Post weather editor. Bart de Jong, The Royal
Netherlands Embassy Infrastructure and Environment counselor, acted as the
keynote speaker and discussed how the Dutch are turning flood-risk challenges
into opportunities. Teri Janine Quinn, Bloomingdale Civic Association president
and an Advisory Neighborhood Commission 5E chair, recounted personal tales of
flooding and resiliency, as part of the Flood Stories session. Participating
agencies included DOEE, NPS, Government of the District of Columbia, the Corps,
University of Maryland, Federal Emergency Management Agency, National Capital
Planning Commission, C40 Cities, New Orleans and New York City representatives,
and the Washington Metropolitan Transit Authority.



 "Floods know no jurisdictional boundaries," said Kenner. "That's why these
partnerships are so important."



 Joe Reed, Corps, Baltimore District, Levee Safety program manager, discussed
the ways the Corps is reducing flood risks in Washington, including
flood-fighting training for municipalities; updating a flood emergency manual
that acts as a guidebook for who's responsible and for what during a disaster;
and the Anacostia and Potomac Park flood-risk-management systems.



 "The risks of the Potomac Park Levee System far outweigh all other dam and
levee risks in all of the National Parks," said Mark Baker, NPS, Dam and Levee
Safety officer, who manages 400 flood-risk-management systems across NPS.



 Major improvements were made by the Corps to the flood-risk-management system
in fall 2014, after a sophisticated, removable post and panel closure structure
replaced the previous sandbagging procedure to close off 17th Street in case of
a flood.



 Stacey Underwood, Corps, Baltimore District, Silver Jackets Program
coordinator, discussed flood-risk-management studies the Corps and Silver
Jackets are conducting, as well as a new online, interactive maps that show
storm-based flood potential along the Potomac and Anacostia rivers.



 "The main priorities for the DC Silver Jackets in the coming years are making
more improvements to the Potomac Park Flood Risk Management System, increasing
community engagement, expanding international partnerships and addressing
interior-flooding issues," said Phetmano Phannavong, DOEE District of Columbia
floodplain manager and DC Silver Jackets co-leader.



 The summit ended with a summary of the key takeaways, as well as a call to
action, led by Sandra Knight, University of Maryland Center of Disaster
Resilience coordinator. Knight reiterated the importance of partnerships;
balancing structural and nature-based solutions for flood-risk management;
incorporating social justice and vulnerable populations when making flood-risk
decisions; educating the public and sharing in the responsibility of flood risk;
and rethinking basic assumptions when it comes to flooding.



 "It's great seeing District and federal partners working so closely together,
especially with the Silver Jackets," said Judy Feldman, National Mall Coalition
chair and president. "The future looks really good for D.C."



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:  editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 28 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           February 22, 2003 Saturday

Play it safe with flood insurance

BYLINE: LEN BONIFIELD

SECTION: HOMES; Pg. 4F

LENGTH: 822 words


The National Weather Service tells us we are in an El Nino period. This weather
pattern, which occurs periodically starting in December, happens when parts of
the Pacific Ocean remain warmer than normal, changing wind patterns and
subsequently weather patterns in many parts of the world. In the southern United
States, El Nino brings heavier rainfall than normal from through spring.

We have seen the effect of El Nino in Florida this winter. December rainfall was
the third highest since 1948.

The last El Nino period, in 1997, brought flooding in many manufactured home
communities. That's because many of them have been built in low-lying, swampy or
flood-prone areas.

The National Flood Insurance Program was created by Congress to offset the
rising cost of disaster relief. The program, managed by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, works through partnership with communities and the insurance
and lending industries in 19,000 communities to adopt and enforce flood-plain
management ordinances to reduce damage.

Many people believe their homeowners insurance will cover flood damage. Wrong.

Floods are the No. 1 natural hazard in the United States. Many homeowners
believe that because they do not live near a stream, river, lake, pond or the
coast, they don't need flood insurance. But, as FEMA states in one of its
brochures, "Floods happen in high-, medium- and low-risk flood zones. One never
knows where or when a flood will strike. They often accompany other natural
disasters, such as storms, hurricanes and rising lakes, ponds and rivers. About
25 percent of all flood insurance claims come from outside high-risk areas."

It is a mistake to hope that if a

flood occurs, the government will declare your area eligible for assistance.
Most floods are too small or too local to be declared federal disasters.

A flood is defined by the flood insurance program as a general or temporary
condition of partial or complete inundation of 2 or more acres of normally dry
land area or of two or more properties (one of which is yours) from:

Overflow of inland or tidal waters.

Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

Mud flows.

Collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake, pond or other body of
water, as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of
water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels.

It pays to protect your property through the National Flood Insurance Program,
which costs an average of $1 per day, depending on where you live and the
coverage you choose.

Flood insurance covers a house or dwelling; attached and detached sheds and
garages; and certain permanent fixtures, such as built-in dishwashers, permanent
shelving and cabinets, furnaces, air conditioners, water heaters, plumbing
fixtures, stoves, ovens and refrigerators.

Flood insurance also provides contents coverage on most of your personal
belongings and property, including clothing, furniture,

housewares and bedding, decorative items, lamps and lighting fixtures, books and
home electronics, area rugs and draperies, clothes washers and dryers, food
freezers and the food in them, and microwave ovens.

A homeowner can purchase up to $250,000 of building coverage and $100,000 of
contents. The cost of this insurance will be based on where you live; how much
coverage you choose; the age, elevation and structure of your home; and the
amount of deductible. It can be less than 50 cents a day. The average flood
insurance premium is about $370 a year, according to the flood insurance
program.

If your community participates in the National Flood Insurance Program, you are
eligible to buy flood insurance regardless of the amount of risk. You can
determine if you are in a flood zone by asking your insurance agent to determine
your risk, or you can call your county's emergency response department. It has
flood plain maps designating the amount of risk for your home.

If you are financing your home, your mortgage lender may require the insurance,
depending on your risk area.

When you purchase flood insurance, there is a 30-day waiting period before the
policy becomes effective. Don't expect to purchase a policy and have immediate
coverage.

Contact the National Flood Insurance Program by calling toll-free 1-888-724-6924
or visiting its Web site at  http://www.floodalert.fema.gov. Don't become a
victim. Check it out today.

Send comments or questions to Len Bonifield at elb@gate.net or fax to (863)
853-8023 or phone (863) 858-1557. Please include your e-mail and mailing
address. Because of the volume of mail and phone calls, he can't respond
personally to every query. Bonifield is a manufactured-home resident and a past
HOA president and former officer of the FMO District 1 board of directors.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: MOBILE HOMES

TYPE: COLUMN

                    Copyright 2003 Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 29 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 10, 2017 Tuesday

Flood Warning Issued by NWS Monterey (The San Francisco area)

LENGTH: 582  words

DATELINE: New York



  Washington: National Weather Service has issued the following news release:



     Flood Warning

 Alert:



 Forecast flood severity for the following rivers in California has changed...

 Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville

 Rejuvenated storm activity overnight Monday and continued rainfall

 through Tuesday night will continue to increase storm runoff into

 the Russian River. The Russian River near Guerneville is expected to

 remain above flood stage and rise through today`s storm, creating

 moderate flood severity impacts.





 ...Forecast flooding increased from Minor to Moderate severity...The

 Flood Warning continues for

 The Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 * Until FURTHER NOTICE



 * At 09AM Tuesday the stage was...33.3 feet



 * Minor flooding is occurring and moderate flooding is forecast



 * Flood stage is 32.0 feet



 * The river will continue rising to near 36.5 feet by late tomorrow

 morning. Additional rises may be possible thereafter.



 * At 38.0 feet...In Duncan Mills Freezeout Road at Moscow Road

 floods. In Guerneville Park Cazadero Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 37.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Road at River Road floods. In

 Guerneville River Road east of Guerneville floods. Mill Street and

 5th Street flood. In Monte Rio River Blvd east of Monte Rio floods.



 * At 36.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Park Resort and Mirabel

 trailer park flood. In Guerneville Fern Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 35.0 feet...Moderate flooding is forecast along the lower

 Russian River. Numerous businesses and residences in the lowest

 sections of towns within the reach are expected to flood. In

 Guerneville Brookside Resort begins to flood. More extensive

 flooding occurs at Parkers Resort. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive

 floods.



 * At 34.0 feet...In Guerneville flooding begins at Johnsons Resort,

 Parkers Resort, Creekside Resort and Riverside Park. In Northwood

 lower Redwood Drive begins to flood.



 * At 33.0 feet...In Guerneville the intersection of HWY 116 and Drake

 Rd is closed. In Monte Rio Willow and Alder Streets flood. In

 Forestville Mirabel trailer park begins to flood.



 * At 32.5 feet...In Guerneville the intersecton of HWY 116 and Neeley

 Rd is closed. Mays Canyon Rd by the old rodeo grounds is closed.



 * At 32.0 feet...Flood stage. Minor flooding. Lower Mill Street in

 Guerneville and Old Bohemian Highway in Monte Rio are expected to

 flood.



 * At 29.0 feet...Monitor stage.

 &&



 Instructions:    People with interests along the river should prepare for flood
conditions and be ready to move to higher ground. Follow emergency official
instructions. River flooding can cause additional hazards like bank collapse and
shifting channels. Avoid areas adjacent to a flooding river since the earth
underneath may be eroded. Do not let children play near floodwaters...especially
around culverts and storm drains. Do not drive through flood prone areas...low
water crossings...or go around barricades. The road ahead may be undermined or
washed out and the water depth too great to allow your car to cross safely. For
the latest developments listen to NOAA Weather Radio or tune to your local tv or
radio station. Information can also be obtained from the NWS website at
www.wrh.noaa.gov/mtr The next statement will be issued by (...enter date and
time...) or sooner as conditions warrant.

 Target Area:

 Sonoma





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 30 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                              July 9, 2010 Friday

Pervez Ashraf stresses full preparations for flood fighting

LENGTH: 476  words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD


ISLAMABAD, July 09 -- Minister for Water and Power Raja Pervez Ashraf Thursday
while stressing the need for close coordination among all the concerned
organizations for flood fighting said that extra vigilance, round the clock
monitoring and patrolling are important to prevent any untoward incident in the
forthcoming flood season.

He made these directions while presiding over the 45th annual pre-flood meeting
of Federal Flood Commission held here to review the flood preparedness and flood
fighting plans made by concerned departments of the Provinces/Federal Agencies
for the coming flood season.

Ashraf appreciated the preparedness of Provincial Governments and

Federal Line Agencies to face any eventuality during the coming flood season.

He said that the government would provide all resources for

implementation of flood management measures on long term and permanent basis.

The Minister advised Pakistan Meteorological Department for assisting

all the Irrigation Departments and federal departments through effective flood
forecasts this year.

Pervez Ashraf also directed that there should be complete preparedness

to pass flood from Lai Nullah safely without any loss of live and property.

Earlier, representatives of Provincial Irrigation Departments and Federal Line
Agencies informed the meeting about the progress on all emergent flood
protection works, as well as the flood preparedness and flood fighting plans
made for the coming flood season.

Representative of Pakistan Meteorological Department informed that

through up-gradation of weather radars at Lahore and Sialkot, besides

installation of a new state of art weather radar system at Mangla to monitor

the catchments of River Jhelum.

These radars will be in operation during the coming flood season and will
provide improved flood forecasting.

He also informed that the forecast for this year was expected to be

"Normal".

Representative of WAPDA informed that they had also further improved

flood telemetry system.

Pakistan commissioner for Indus Waters informed the meeting that all

necessary arrangements have been made for receipt of advance flood flow data

from India for the eastern rivers.

Representative of NDMA, Engineers Directorate of Pak Army also briefed

the meeting about flood protection arrangements.

The meeting was attended by Secretary, Adviser, Additional Secretary of Ministry
of Water and Power and representatives of the Provincial Irrigation & Power
Departments and Federal Lines Agencies, Provincial Relief Commissioners,
Planning & Development Division, WAPDA, Pakistan Meteorological Department,
Pakistan Commissioner for Indus Waters, Engineers Directorate Pak Army, Pakistan
Railways, NDMA, and WASA Rawalpindi Published by HT Syndication with permission
from Right Vision News. For more information on news feed please contact
Sarabjit Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 31 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                             July 10, 2010 Saturday

Coordination among deptts stressed for fighting floods

LENGTH: 480  words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD


ISLAMABAD, July 10 -- Minister for Water and Power Raja Pervez Ashraf here on
Thursday, while stressing the need for close coordination among all the
concerned organizations for flood fighting, said that extra vigilance, round the
clock monitoring and patrolling are important to prevent any untoward incident
in the forthcoming flood season.

He made these directions while presiding over the 45th annual pre-flood meeting
of Federal Flood Commission held here to review the flood preparedness and flood
fighting plans made by concerned departments of the Provinces/Federal Agencies
for the coming flood season.

Ashraf appreciated the preparedness of Provincial Governments and Federal Line
Agencies to face any eventuality during the coming flood season. He said that
the government would provide all resources for implementation of flood
management measures on long term and permanent basis.

The Minister advised Pakistan Meteorological Department for assisting all the
Irrigation Departments and federal departments through effective flood forecasts
this year. Pervez Ashraf also directed that there should be complete
preparedness to pass flood from Lai Nullah safely without any loss of live and
property.

Earlier, representatives of Provincial Irrigation Departments and Federal Line
Agencies informed the meeting about the progress on all emergent flood
protection works, as well as the flood preparedness and flood fighting plans
made for the coming flood season.

Representative of Pakistan Meteorological Department informed that through
up-gradation of weather radars at Lahore and Sialkot, besides installation of a
new state of art weather radar system at Mangla to monitor the catchments of
River Jhelum.

These radars will be in operation during the coming flood season and will
provide improved flood forecasting. He also informed that the forecast for this
year was expected to be "Normal". Representative of WAPDA informed that they had
also further improved flood telemetry system.

Pakistan commissioner for Indus Waters informed the meeting that all necessary
arrangements have been made for receipt of advance flood flow data from India
for the eastern rivers. Representative of NDMA, Engineers Directorate of Pak
Army also briefed the meeting about flood protection arrangements.

The meeting was attended by Secretary, Adviser, Additional Secretary of Ministry
of Water and Power and representatives of the Provincial Irrigation & Power
Departments and Federal Lines Agencies, Provincial Relief Commissioners,
Planning & Development Division, WAPDA, Pakistan Meteorological Department,
Pakistan Commissioner for Indus Waters, Engineers Directorate Pak Army, Pakistan
Railways, NDMA, and WASA Rawalpind Published by HT Syndication with permission
from Right Vision News. For more information on news feed please contact
Sarabjit Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 32 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                             The Gloucester Citizen

                                 July 18, 1998

Floods and droughts
 The River Severn

SECTION: Pg.26

LENGTH: 627 words


The risk of flooding from rivers and the sea is with us all the time. It can
happen very quickly, often with little warning. A major flood has a flow several
times greater than the bankfull capacity of the normal channel of the
watercourse.

After heavy rainfall many rivers naturally flow out of their banks and into
their flood plains.

Severe weather can affect sea conditions, causing tidal surges and flooding in
estuaries or along the coast.

Flood plains serve one or both of two purposes during a flood:-

1. They provide additional capacity to carry the excess flows downstream; and/or

2. They provide temporary storage for water which the river channel is unable to
contain. In this role flood plains act like a storage or "balancing" reservoir,
i.e. they retain a large quantity of water in storage and release it over a long
period of time as the flood goes down.

The flooding of flood plain areas is both natural and desirable, where it can
occur without risk to human life. These areas are generally fertile soils and
have traditionally been used for agricultural purposes. River levels were
controlled to aid field drainage and to reduce the frequency of flooding of
water meadows, thus boosting crop yields.

Nowadays, there is a need to consider the control of water levels through water
level management plans to cater for the needs of a wide range of flood plain
uses in a way that is both balanced and sustainable.

At many locations, the increasing recognition of the ecological value of the
flood plains together with changing agricultural policies are providing
opportunities to re-establish the natural functions of flood plains. Much flood
plain land is already recognised to be of high ecological value and many river
valleys have statutory wildlife and conservation status.

The effectiveness of rivers and flood plains to convey and store flood water,
and to minimise flood risks, can be adversely affected by human activity,
especially by development i.e. the building of houses, factories, roads etc
which physically change flood plain areas.

Throughout England and Wales, a considerable amount of development has already
taken place on low lying coastal areas and river flood plains.

Consequently, people and property in these areas are at risk from flooding.

This leads to pressure for new or improved coastal and river flood defence, with
consequent long-term maintenance cost implications.

The floods of 1947 - exacerbated by a rapid thaw following severe snows - were
the worst to hit Britain for many, many years. The catchment area of the River
Severn began to feel the impact from March 11.

The town of Shrewsbury was almost entirely cut off. At Worcester, the Severn
rose 10 feet in 24 hours. At Diglis, Worcester, the 1947 flood was the highest
ever recorded in a lock-keeper's record dating back to 1856.

By the time the floods were over, they had affected many English counties and
large parts of Wales.

Of the 690,000 acres of land flooded nationally, nearly half was arable land
urgently needed to grow the nation's food after the Second World War. An
estimated two million sheep died.

The total cost of damage was estimated to be GBP 12 million, which was a great
deal of money in 1947!

Floods occur frequently on the river, April 1998 being no exception. It held up
aerial photography for this publication among other things.

More tragically, two people are known to have perished through the flooding.

Heavy rainfall over the saturated catchment led to most of the lower Severn
arewa being put on red alert (see opposite page).

There were unprecedented rises in the levels of the Avon, Leam, Stour and Arrow
rivers.

Hundreds of properties flooded and several caravan sites were inundated.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1998

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: This pub at Sandhurst found the flood an inconvenience - but such
events can also cause misery by ruining property, and in extreme cases lives are
lost. nFlooding on the lower river at Over, just outside Gloucester, caused by a
combination of high tides and a river swollen with storm water. Citizen
photographer nCoal delivery by boat, Gloucester 1947. Citizen archives nPCs to
the rescue in Dean's Walk, Gloucester, 1947. Citizen archives

                     Copyright 1998 The Gloucester Citizen


                          FOCUS - 33 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            July 14, 1994, Thursday

THE FLOOD OF '94: AN ONGOING CRISIS Better land-use planning efforts urged Don't
rely on dams, panel says

BYLINE: By Scott Bronstein STAFF WRITER

SECTION: STATE NEWS; Section D; Page 8

LENGTH: 424 words


As President Clinton toured flood-ravaged Georgia on Wednesday, a White House
committee urged officials to take steps to permanently relocate residents of
some river lowlands rather than rely on dams or levees to protect them from
floods.

The unusually strong recommendations come a day after new revelations that the
simultaneous rupture of up to six small unregulated earthen dams - overwhelmed
by heavy rain - near Americus last Wednesday may have caused nearly half the 28
deaths logged during the state's tragic floods.

The report, issued by the Interagency Flood Plain Management Review Committee,
urged better land-use planning efforts - including new controls on river and
watershed development - in regions prone to flooding.

Consequently, the report by the committee, formed in the wake of the 1993
Mississippi floods, could have ramifications for Georgia.

"Floods will continue to occur," wrote Army Brig. Gen. Gerald E. Galloway, the
task force executive director. "It is now time to organize a national effort to
conduct effective and efficient flood plain management."

The new recommendations come in the midst of the worst flooding in Georgia's
history.

Americus officials Tuesday said up to 12 of 15 deaths reported there last
Wednesday resulted from a series of breaks in unregulated, earthen dams at the
height of the disaster.

The report - titled "Sharing the Challenge - Flood Plain Management Into the
21st Century" - called for:

Permanently evacuating some areas vulnerable to flooding to higher ground;

Managing flood plains as components of larger watersheds - possibly barring
development in some flood-prone areas;

Limiting human activities throughout river basins which have caused habitat or
wetlands destruction and increased runoff; and

Linking future disaster relief - including federal aid and assistance - to good
flood plain management.

The report also called for an overhaul of the Army Corps of Engineers' planning
regulations and the enactment of a National Flood Plain Management Act to help
coordinate federal agencies.

American Rivers, a Washington-based environmental group, applauded the report.

"For two centuries, we have straight-jacketed our rivers to get water out as
quickly as possible," said Scott Faber, a spokesman for the group.

"Our nation's top flood control experts are telling us that these policies are
fundamentally wrong," he added, "that we should not be building so many levees,
that we should not be constructing our homes and businesses in the floodplain."

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH942000180

GRAPHIC: Color Photo: President Clinton listens as Jack Davis of Albany, who
lost his home, tells his story in Albany. / RICK MCKAY / Washington Bureau Color
Photo: Flood victims wait for aid in Highland Middle School in Albany on
Wednesday. / Associated Press

                    Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution


                          FOCUS - 34 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            August 14, 1994, Sunday

FLOOD INSURANCE City officials rethink disaster protection

BYLINE: By Lauren Caswell STAFF WRITER

SECTION: EXTRA; Section J; Page 7

LENGTH: 602 words


Until recently, cities in Gwinnett haven't felt a pressing need to think about
flood insurance. But the destruction in South Georgia caused by flooding has
changed that.

Publicity about South Georgia, as well as tornado damage and heavy rains
locally, has caused some Gwinnett officials to rethink disaster protection.

The Grayson City Council recently voted to apply to the National Flood Insurance
Program offered through the Georgia Department of Natural Resources.

Grayson, Snellville and Lawrenceville have signed up to join the Gwinnett County
Emergency Management Organization, which gathers resources, directs victims and
establishes plans for relief centers when a need arises. Other cities are
considering joining.

The moves are designed to make better protection and monetary support available
to residents in their community in the event of a natural disaster.

Grayson City Administrator Laurie Anderson said if the city is accepted by the
flood insurance program and is ever hit by a flood, the city can apply for
federal funding. If Grayson does not participate in the program, homeowners
can't buy flood hazard insurance through the federal program.

In 1968, Congress created the National Flood Insurance Program because
homeowners weren't able to get flood insurance. This made federally subsidized
flood insurance available to homeowners and commercial property owners.

In 1973, the Flood Disaster Protection Act was passed, strengthening the program
begun in 1968. The act requires that flood insurance be purchased for federally
supported projects in participating communities, and a lender must notify a
borrower that federal disaster relief is unavailable in non-participating areas.

The act prohibits federal loans in known flood-prone land in non- participating
areas. It has prompted related legislation to require lenders to notify
borrowers of properties in flood hazard areas.

"Signing the program's application is a pro-active role that a community takes,"
said Collis Brown, senior research associate at the Georgia Department of
Natural Resources. But there are other benefits besides individual flood
insurance that attracts communities to the program, he said.

"A community that participates in the program is eligible to get federal grants
and loans to build in flood hazard areas," Brown said. "If a community wanted to
apply for a federal loan in a flood-prone area, it couldn't get it if it wasn't
a participant."

Brown also said that federal mortgage insurance is provided in identified flood
hazard areas for communities participating in the program.

Under the National Flood Insurance Program, any citizen living in the limits of
a participating city can purchase flood insurance. Because Gwinnett County also
is a participant in the program, homeowners living in unincorporated areas can
purchase flood insurance as well.

Perhaps the most well-known type of assistance is the help and grants given for
the restoration of structures damaged in flood hazard areas.

"If someone in a participating community that lives in a flood hazard area has a
structure damaged in flooding and it has to be restored, FEMA [Federal Emergency
Management Agency] will assist, even to the extent of relocating the structure
to a non-flood-hazard area if necessary," Brown said.

According to Brown, before a community becomes a part of the program it must
adopt a flood damage prevention ordinance that outlines specific hazard measures
and land-use practices for the community.

There is no cost for a community to join the flood insurance program, according
to Brown.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH942290234

GRAPHIC: Photo: Destruction in South Georgia caused by floods has prompted
Gwinnett officials to look at insurance programs. / WILLIAM BERRY / Staff

                    Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution


                          FOCUS - 35 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Telegram & Gazette (Massachusetts)

                           September 17, 2013 Tuesday

How to buy critical protection from floods

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. B,6,999

LENGTH: 670 words


Meteorologists predict that the Atlantic hurricane season, which officially
started June 1 and lasts until Nov. 30, will be more active than usual. Consumer
Reports Money Adviser notes that that forecast, plus the extreme weather in
other parts of the country, might prompt you to buy flood insurance for the
first time.

Or you might be forced to buy it. In recent years, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has been rolling out new flood maps of the entire country,
reclassifying some moderate-risk flood zones as high-risk. Homeowners who live
in these new "special flood hazard" areas and have federally secured home loans
will have to buy coverage. In addition, some mortgage lenders are requiring
flood coverage for houses outside high-risk zones. And a 2012 law reduces
federal subsidies on mandated coverage for mortgage holders living in high-risk
areas, which could mean that they'll face significant increases in premiums.

Fill your homeowners gaps

Though you might be able to buy a homeowners insurance rider to cover, say, a
sewer backup that floods your home, your best -- and often only -- option to
protect yourself from naturally occurring floods is a government-sponsored flood
policy. Even if you don't live near a body of water, flood insurance can be a
wise purchase because it includes more than the overflow from rivers, streams
and ocean tides. Also covered are mudflows and pooled water from oversaturated
or still-frozen soil, and paved driveways and parking lots that divert rainwater
into basements and crawl spaces. In fact, those events account for many claims.
The National Flood Insurance Program, the FEMA division that administers most
residential flood insurance policies, says that more than 20 percent of claims
are filed by homeowners in medium- and low-risk areas. A survey this spring by
the Consumer Reports National Research Center found that almost 30 percent of
homeowners affected by Superstorm Sandy last October could have benefited from
flood insurance, but they didn't have it.

Policies can be as little as $129 a year; the average flood policy costs $625
annually but can cost thousands for the maximum coverage in high-risk zones. But
you could lose much more from just a few inches of water. The average
residential flood claim between 2007 and 2011 was almost $30,000, the NFIP says.

How to buy a policy

According to Consumer Reports Money Adviser, property owners and renters can buy
flood insurance if their town participates in a federal program that requires it
to implement certain "floodplain management" measures; more than 21,000
communities do. Communities that go further -- requiring new homes in
flood-prone areas to be raised, for instance -- can earn their residents flood
insurance discounts.

The agent or company representative who sold you your homeowners policy can sell
you a national flood-insurance policy. Or go to the Agent Locator at
floodsmart.gov, the FEMA website for national flood insurance. Before you buy,
you can get an estimate of your premium on the site. (Fill out the red "One-Step
Flood Risk Profile" on the home page.) And you can see where your home sits on
the FEMA flood map for your neighborhood, which contributes to your premium
(type "flood maps" in the search box).

Flood insurance usually has to be in effect for 30 days before you can use it.
Coverage is capped at $250,000 per dwelling and $100,000 for your home's
contents. Most installed items, including major appliances, some carpeting,
paneling, bookcases, cabinets and window blinds, are covered; detached garages
and debris removal also are included. Clothing, furniture, electronics and
valuables such as artwork and furs worth up to $2,500 are insured under personal
property coverage.

A few private insurers offer excess insurance above the $250,000 federal limit.
Depending on your location and level of coverage, it could cost several thousand
dollars more. You might still be liable for out-of-pocket costs that aren't
covered by either homeowners or flood coverage.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Some mortgage lenders are requiring flood coverage for houses outside
high-risk zones.CONSUMER REPORTS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WTG


               Copyright 2013 Worcester Telegram & Gazette, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 36 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                            June 26, 2013, Wednesday

WVU Extension Service provides flood advice

SECTION: METRO WEST PUTNAM; Pg. P11

LENGTH: 600 words


With recent storms and excessive rainfall this year and last, the West Virginia
University Extension Service has posted the following information for residents'
safety:

Floods are the most common and widespread of all natural disasters, except fire.
Most communities in the United States can experience some kind of flooding after
spring rains, heavy thunderstorms or winter snow thaws.

Several factors contribute to flooding. Two key elements are rainfall intensity
and duration. Intensity is the rate of rainfall, and duration is how long the
rain lasts. Topography, soil conditions and ground cover also play important
roles.

Floods can be slow- or fast-rising but generally develop over a period of days.
Flooding occurs in known floodplains when prolonged rainfall takes place over
several days, intense rainfall takes place over a short time, or when an ice or
debris jam causes a river or stream to overflow and flood the surrounding area.
Melting snow can combine with rain in the winter and early spring; or severe
thunderstorms can bring heavy rain in the spring and summer.

Flash Floods

Flash floods usually result from intense storms dropping large amounts of rain
within a brief period depending on local terrain, ground cover, degree of
urbanization, degree of man-made changes to riverbanks and initial ground or
river conditions. Flash floods occur with little or no warning and can reach
full peak in only a few minutes. Flash floods occur within six hours of a rain
event, or after a dam or levee failure, or following a sudden release of water
held by an ice or debris jam.

Flood Facts

* Floods are among the most frequent and costly natural disasters. Floods cause
as much as 90 percent of the damage related to all natural disasters (excluding
droughts).

* The force of 6 inches of swiftly moving water can knock people off their feet.
Flash flood waters move at very fast speeds and can roll boulders, tear out
trees, destroy buildings, and obliterate bridges. Walls of water can reach
heights of 10 to 20 feet.

* Cars can be easily swept away in just 2 feet of moving water. If floodwaters
rise around a car, it should be abandoned and passengers should climb to higher
ground.

* As land is converted from fields or woodlands to roads and parking lots, it
loses its ability to absorb rainfall. Urbanization increases runoff two to six
times over what would occur on natural terrain. During periods of urban
flooding, streets can become swift-moving rivers, while basements and viaducts
can become death traps as they fill with water.

Flood Watches and Warnings

* Flood Watch is the first sign a flood may occur, and when a watch is issued,
you should be aware of potential flood hazards.

* Flood Warning indicates that a flood event is occurring or is imminent in
about 30 minutes to an hour. Local National Weather Service forecast offices
issue warnings on a county-by-county basis.

* Flash Flood Watch signifies a dangerous situation where rapid flooding of
small rivers, streams, creeks or urban areas are imminent or already occurring.

* Flash Flood Warning indicates that flash flooding is possible in and close to
the watch area. Those in the affected area are urged to be ready to take quick
action if a flash flood warning is issued or flooding is observed.

* Urban and Small Stream Flood Advisory alerts the public to flooding due to
heavy rain that will cause flooding of streets and low-lying places in urban
areas and along small streams.

* Flash Flood Statement is used as a follow-up to Flash Flood Warnings and
Watches. The statement will contain the latest information on the event.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 Charleston Newspapers


                          FOCUS - 37 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                           August 14, 2013, Wednesday

WVU Extension Service provides flood advice

SECTION: METRO WEST KANAWHA; Pg. P8

LENGTH: 502 words


With recent storms and excessive rainfall this year and last, the West Virginia
University Extension Service has posted the following information for residents'
safety:

Floods are the most common and widespread of all natural disasters, except fire.

Several factors contribute to flooding. Two key elements are rainfall intensity
and duration. Intensity is the rate of rainfall, and duration is how long the
rain lasts. Topography, soil conditions and ground cover also play important
roles.

Flash Floods

Flash floods usually result from intense storms dropping large amounts of rain
within a brief period depending on local terrain, ground cover, degree of
urbanization, degree of man-made changes to riverbanks and initial ground or
river conditions. Flash floods occur with little or no warning and can reach
full peak in only a few minutes. Flash floods occur within six hours of a rain
event, or after a dam or levee failure, or following a sudden release of water
held by an ice or debris jam.

Flood Facts

o Floods are among the most frequent and costly natural disasters. Floods cause
as much as 90 percent of the damage related to all natural disasters (excluding
droughts).

o The force of 6 inches of swiftly moving water can knock people off their feet.
Flash flood waters move at very fast speeds and can roll boulders, tear out
trees, destroy buildings, and obliterate bridges. Walls of water can reach
heights of 10 to 20 feet.

o Cars can be easily swept away in just 2 feet of moving water. If floodwaters
rise around a car, it should be abandoned and passengers should climb to higher
ground.

o As land is converted from fields or woodlands to roads and parking lots, it
loses its ability to absorb rainfall. Urbanization increases runoff two to six
times over what would occur on natural terrain. During periods of urban
flooding, streets can become swift-moving rivers, while basements and viaducts
can become death traps as they fill with water.

Flood Watches and Warnings

o Flood Watch is the first sign a flood may occur, and when a watch is issued,
you should be aware of potential flood hazards.

o Flood Warning indicates that a flood event is occurring or is imminent in
about 30 minutes to an hour. Local National Weather Service forecast offices
issue warnings on a county-by-county basis.

o Flash Flood Watch signifies a dangerous situation where rapid flooding of
small rivers, streams, creeks or urban areas are imminent or already occurring.

o Flash Flood Warning indicates that flash flooding is possible in and close to
the watch area. Those in the affected area are urged to be ready to take quick
action if a flash flood warning is issued or flooding is observed.

o Urban and Small Stream Flood Advisory alerts the public to flooding due to
heavy rain that will cause flooding of streets and low-lying places in urban
areas and along small streams.

o Flash Flood Statement is used as a follow-up to Flash Flood Warnings and
Watches. The statement will contain the latest information on the event.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 Charleston Newspapers


                          FOCUS - 38 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                     Lyon County News, Inc. (George, Iowa)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                 March 29, 2012

Many lowans unprepared for possible flooding

BYLINE: Lyon County News, Inc. staff

LENGTH: 528  words


April showers bring May flowers. But spring rains may also bring spring flooding
and many lowans lack flood protection.

Although the National Weather Service is forecasting a generally low risk of
widespread flooding this year, eight of the 14 Presidential Disaster Declaration
since 2007 were for flooding. lowans have experienced major floods during late
summer, and heavy rains and flash floods can occur at any time.

Governor Terry Branstad declared March Flood Awareness Month to help inform
people about flood insurance and precautions they can take to prepare for
floods, particularly in high risk areas like floodplains, the relatively flat
areas near rivers and streams.

There are more than 53,000 homes, businesses and other structures in Iowa's
high-risk floodplain areas. However, only 9,636 structures (18 percent) in those
areas are covered by flood insurance. Of the 18,923 flood insurance policies in
Iowa, about half are for structures located outside mapped flood-plains.

The time to buy flood insurance is now, because there is a 30-day waiting period
before policies are effective. Flood insurance is especially important because
most home insurance policies do not cover flood damage. With flooding potential
throughout spring and again in the fall, flood insurance is a necessary
precaution.

"We can't always predict where it will happen, but flooding occurs somewhere
every year, making flood insurance a priority for lowans," said Bill Ehm, DNR's
administrator for environmental services. "Recent floods have shown us we need
to be prepared. Acting sooner is better than later." lowans can purchase
federally backed flood insurance for homes or businesses as long as the
community participates in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). More than
600 Iowa communities currently participate. Visit the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's Community Status Book at http://www.fema.gov/cis/IA.html to
see if your community is enrolled in the program.

To calculate estimated premiums and flood insurance rate, visit
www.floodsmart.gov. Then check how much flood damage could cost without flood
insurance. The yearly premium for a flood insurance policy through the NFIP can
be as little as $129. The average flood insurance policy in Iowa currently costs
around $775 annually.

While flood insurance is important, there are other ways to minimize the effects
of flooding. As part of Flood Awareness Month the Iowa Insurance Division, the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources, the Iowa Homeland Security and Emergency
Management Division, and the National Weather Service will share safety tips and
other important information about floods with the public and media.

To prepare for flooding, it's best to take pictures of your home and belongings
and record model and serial numbers to make filing claims easier. Also, be aware
of small streams, drainage channels and other areas known to flood suddenly in
your area, and have a plan to quickly and effectively vacate your home in an
emergency. For more flood precaution tips, visit www.bereadv. iowa. gov or the
Iowa Insurance Division's flood awareness website at
http://www.donttestthewatersiowa.gov/.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Disaster and Accident

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: LYY

                      Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                     Copyright 2012 Lyon County News, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 39 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                           September 20, 1999, Monday

Insurers: Buy coverage as part of total package

BYLINE: BY RON LENT

SECTION: INSURANCE; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 850 words


When arranging the property insurance coverage for your business, it's a sound
idea to also include flood insurance in the package. Arranging for flood
insurance later, may be too late.

Commercial insurers usually impose a 30-day waiting period before issuing a
one-year flood insurance policy. This delay is to prevent owners from ""
obtaining coverage while their property is floating down the river,'' said
Andrejs Krutainis, senior vice president of Reliance National Insurance Co., New
York.

Floods account for more than $2 billion in annual property damage, said Ronald
Paice, vice president, property claims, at the Hartford Financial Services
Group, Hartford, Conn.

NO ONE IMMUNE

He said 25 percent to 30 percent of flood insurance claims come from "" areas
designated as low risk so no one is immune to its danger.''

Almost all flood insurance for homeowners and small businesses is underwritten
by the federal flood program, which provides up to $500,000 in limits for
structures and $500,000 for contents. As of April 30, the national flood program
had 182,899 nonresidential policies in force.

Private-sector commercial lines underwriters frequently offer flood protection
as part of a fire policy or difference-in-conditions protection tacked on to
all-risk property insurance policies.

If risk managers need coverage beyond that provided by the flood-insurance
program administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, they should
seek private insurance as part of their all-hazard property policies, said Mark
Stevens, spokesman for the federal program.''

Loretta Worters of the Insurance Information Institute, New York, said her
organization keeps no statistics on commercial flood insurance premiums. But she
said she expected that annual premiums probably ""would be in the tens of
millions of dollars and growing in the aftermath of El Nino hitting California
last winter and the floods in the Midwest and elsewhere in recent years.''

Flood insurance premiums are based on a number of factors, such as the location
of the structure in relationship to the river or ocean, type of construction,
whether the building has a basement or is elevated. A rough estimate for the
premium rate is 15 cents per $100 of insured value Norfolk Southern Railroad
purchases flood insurance as part of its all-risk property program covering more
than $100 million in damage. The coverage is arranged through various markets
such as Lloyd's of London and U.S. insurance companies.

""We have complete flood coverage for our buildings and to a lesser extent for
our tracks and roadbeds,'' said David Fries, risk manager for Norfolk Southern
Railway's parent, Norfolk Southern Corp., Norfolk, Va.

Fries said his company has maintained coverage over the years ""as sort of a
security blanket even though we haven't had a flood insurance claim since
1985.''

That year, he said, there were heavy rains and flash floods in Virginia, "" so
the coverage came in handy for us. That experience taught us the value of the
coverage.''

BUY TOTAL PROGRAM

Rufus Jones, underwriting director of Travelers Property Casualty's Commercial
Lines Division in Hartford, Conn., said, ""We always advise businesses that
might want flood insurance to make their purchase when they are arranging their
overall commercial property insurance programs.''

Reliance National's Krutainis advises risk managers to buy flood insurance
because it eliminates any ""question as to whether the all-risk property
policies would cover surface water or backups in sewers or drains that could
develop for any number of reasons such as heavy rains or flooding.

""Some policies might cover that even if flood is excluded, but others might
not,'' he said. ""Why take a chance, particularly if the coverage wouldn't cost
much for a company whose property is not in a flood-prone area?''

Clair Thompson, vice president of the Vaaler Agency, Grand Forks, N.D., said
only 10 percent of the 15,000 flood-prone properties in the city had insurance
before that city's April 1997 flood.

After the flood, building owners who had not carried flood insurance, but had
put in a claim under the federal disaster relief program, were required to
purchase flood insurance before receiving their checks, Thompson said.

Many properties now carry the insurance, he said. Most buy coverage from the
federal program, but a few, such as the city government and several school
districts, have bought excess flood insurance.

FEMA, PRIVATE COVER URGED

A ""smart'' risk manager combines the federal flood program's protection with a
private-sector insurance company policy ""to gain more customized commercial
flood coverage,'' said Mark Harmon, commercial property underwriting director
for Fireman's Fund Insurance Co., Novato, Calif.

Harmon said private insurers provide broader protection than the federal
program. ""FEMA only offers current market value coverage,'' he said. ""In
contrast, private-sector insurers provide replacement cost coverage, business
interruption protection, and higher limits.''

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo - Downtown Grand Forks, N.D., was flooded in April 1997 by the
Red River. Few buildings had flood insurance. Insurance experts recommend that
businesses consider flood insurance as part of their overall risk management
strategy.

                    Copyright 1999 Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 40 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                         The Mercury News (California)

                          February 22, 2017 Wednesday

San Jose flood: What's a 100-year flood zone?

BYLINE: Patrick May

LENGTH: 588 words



HIGHLIGHT: Meterologist explains flood zones and the definition of a 100-year
flood.


As Coyote Creek crested at 13.6 feet on Tuesday night, all that water not only
put the river four feet above flood level - it also broke a 95-year old record.

It was back in 1922 when the creek rose to 12.8 feet, breaking the previous
record of 12.2 feet set exactly 100 years ago.

Evacuees tell stories of escape from San Jose flood

Earthquakes pledge up to $10,000 to help flood victims

A look at San Jose's flood zone

Contact with flood waters could be hazardous, health officials warn

Bay Area weather: Chilly break from the rain arrives

The rising Coyote Creek has also raised a lot of questions about flooding. Here
are a few answers:

Q: What's a 100-year flood zone?

A: The Federal Emergency Management Agency, or FEMA, uses the term "flood zones"
to to describe a land area in terms of its risk of flooding. And the agency
points out that everyone lives in a flood zone - and it's just a question of
whether you happen to live in a low, moderate, or high risk area.

More specifically, meteorologist Jan Null with Golden Gate Weather Service
defines a flood zone as "a statistical calculation of the area that would be
inundated in a 100-year flood.'

Q: OK. So what's a 100-year flood?

A: Null starts by saying what it is not. "There's so much misconception about
what a 100-year flood or 100-year storm is. It doesn't mean that you have one
now and then you won't have another until 2117. It means that in any given year
there is a 1-in-100 chance of that event occurring.

Q: So the two terms, 100-year flood and 100-year flood zone, are inextricably
linked?

A: Yes, says Null, because the zone essentially defines the flood by describing
the size of the area that that flood would threaten. And to confuse matters even
more, Null points out that a 100-year event, whether it's a flood or a rain
storm, changes over time. "So just because you have a 100-year storm doesn't
necessarily mean you'll also have a 100-year flood," he says, because recent
rains and even physical changes to the body of water that's flooding must also
be factored in.

"If we had had Monday's rain back in November, the impacts on downtown San Jose
would have been nothing," says Null. "But the fact that Anderson Reservoir,
which feeds Coyote Creek, is full and they've been releasing all of this water
for weeks now, along with all the water coming from tributaries flowing into the
Coyote, changes the equation."

Reading this on your iPhone or iPad? Check out our new Apple News app channel
here and click the + at the top of the page to save to your Apple News
favorites.

Q: Are there other ways to measure a flood zone besides 100-year?

A: Null says that while a 50-year flood might inundate, say, a 40-square-block
area, "a 100-year has a bigger footprint and would put a larger area under
water."

Q: What other factors should be taken into consideration when we talk about
these flood events?

A: Null says that things like built-up silt, vegetation and even debris lodged
in a river channel can influence a flood pattern. "So what a given channel can
carry in one year may differ from what that same channel can carry in the next
year," he says. "If the channel becomes smaller for some reason, then an
11-foot-high" event could actually "give you the equivalent of a 12-foot" event.

To find out if your home is in a flood zone, click here.

And, finally, here's a map of the area in San Jose under mandatory evacuation
orders:



LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 41 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     July 22, 1993, Thursday, City Edition

Flood insurance premiums may rise

BYLINE: ROBERT TRIGAUX

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 859 words



The waters may be cresting in the Midwest, but the financial damage has yet  to
be felt in Florida.

That may happen soon enough.

More than 1-million Floridians who have purchased flood insurance from the
federal government are likely to see increases in their premiums, some experts
predict.

And many uninsured property owners along Florida's coasts and waterways  will
face growing pressures to buy expensive federal flood insurance,which  averages
$ 320 a year for about $ 85,000 of coverage.

Why? Because the government's National Flood Insurance Program, which  covers
flood damage for homeowners and other property owners, is effectively  broke.
And part of the problem is that many people who are supposed to have  flood
insurance aren't buying it.

More than 12-million people live in flood-prone areas of the country, but  less
than 1 in 4 carry federal flood insurance.

By Sept. 30, the end of the federal fiscal year, the flood insurance  program is
expected to be in the red by about $ 70-million, said Bill Zellars,  spokesman
for the insurance program, an arm of the Federal Emergency  Management Agency.

If the flood program runs out of money, as expected, it has automatic  authority
to borrow $ 1-billion from the U.S. Treasury to meet its obligations,  Zellars
said.

So far, claims from the Midwest floods against the National Flood Insurance
Program have been modest, about $ 50-million in 1,800 claims as of Tuesday.

This disaster is not expected to hit the flood insurance program extremely  hard
because a relatively small number of people along the Missouri and  Mississippi
rivers have opted to buy federal flood insurance. But the disaster  has focused
national attention on the troubled state of the federal flood  program.

The program's health is of special importance to Floridians. They make up  more
than a third of 2.6-million policyholders nationwide.

Experts say the two most obvious ways for the flood insurance program to  get
back on its feet is to charge its current customers more and to increase  the
number of policyholders.

Current law requires banks, when providing mortgage money to a home buyer,  to
make sure that such flood insurance is purchased if the property is in a  flood
zone. But that often doesn't happen, or the homeowner later lets the  policy
lapse, said David Meehan, chief executive at St. Petersburg-based  Bankers
Insurance Co., the nation's fourth-largest insurance carrier in the  federal
flood program.

Federal legislation now under consideration would do more to prod people in
flood-prone areas to buy federal insurance but also would stop the  government's
offering of flood insurance on barrier islands and other  sensitive coastal
areas. The legislation is not expected to pass soon.

What is expected to happen soon is a rise in premiums for policyholders,
experts say.

"There's no question there will be a wake-up call for flood insurance  after the
Midwest floods," said John Welch, chief executive officer of the  Wallace, Welch
& Willingham insurance agency in St. Petersburg.

"I don't see the market for flood insurance drying up, but I do see it  becoming
more expensive to people who buy property in low areas and expose  themselves to
floods."

This year won't be the first time the National Flood Insurance Program has  paid
out more in claims than it received in premiums. When the program fell  into the
red in the mid-1980s, Congress simply appropriated $ 1.2-billion in  additional
funds to make up the shortfall.

This time, it isn't clear how the flood program will pay back what it  borrows
from the U.S. Treasury. The federal government is less likely to throw  more
funds at the program, given the current deficit, so premiums probably  will go
up.

"Is flood insurance adequately priced? Obviously not," said Robert  Hunter, a
former top-ranking FEMA official and current president of the  National
Insurance Consumer Organization in Alexandria, Va. "But it is a  subsidized
program and will never be adequately priced."

The National Flood Insurance Program was started by the federal government  in
1968 when it became clear the private insurance industry was not willing to
offer high-risk flood coverage.

The federal program that charged people premiums for flood protection was
intended to pay for itself, and it was considered a healthy alternative to
direct federal disaster aid paid for by U.S. taxpayers.

Now 25 years old, the program basically operates as a federal monopoly. Its
policies are sold, typically through insurance agents, in more than 18,000
communities nationwide that agree to manage and reduce the risks of floods.

According to Hunter, the program's pricing for flood insurance was supposed  to
be "neutral," neither encouraging nor discouraging development of  flood-prone
areas of the country.

But coverage under the program is underpriced, Hunter claims, and that has
helped fuel building along coasts and rivers. With flood protection relatively
cheap, homeowners can afford insurance even if they suffer frequent damage  from
floods.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Mike Pease; Tom Green, in overalls, Rick
Groeneman Jr. and David Foote shore up a sandbag levee in Lemay, Mo.

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 42 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                     Oroville Mercury Register (California)

                              April 8, 2012 Sunday

Butte County bypass just a small piece of multi-billion-dollar state flood plan

BYLINE: By HEATHER HACKING - Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS; Local

LENGTH: 977 words


A major overhaul of the way the state water flood management system is
maintained and operated is under way. The projects, which would take place over
the next 25 years, are estimated to cost $14 billion-$17 billion.

The Central Valley Flood Management Planning Program, created through Senate
Bill 5, passed in 2007, was part of the large package of water bills passed
before the end of Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger's administration.

This was soon after Hurricane Katrina, when the wounds were fresh from what
could happen when flood control systems did not hold back the water.

The price tag for California's overhaul is enormous, but can be justified when
potential damage is factored in, explained Mike Mierzwa, civil engineer and
flood policy adviser for the Department of Water Resources.

He said billion-dollar damage in isolated years could easily average out to $330
million a year if predicted floods occur.

The price tag makes more sense when you factor in loss of business when
communities and farms slow down due to flood damage, he said.

The bottom line is that the current system is not sustainable, he said.

This price tag also does not factor in loss of human life, he continued.

Historical flood system

California's flood control system began being built 150 years ago. Mining in
California through the 1870s did a lot of damage to rivers and tributaries.
Massive amounts of sediment from hydraulic mining needed to be quickly cleared
through the waterways.

In the early 1900s, federal investment in the state water system began.

In 1909, a massive flood occurred, and about this time the nickname for the
Central Valley was "vast inland sea," Mierzwa said.

Floods literally lasted for months.

To fix problems, levees were built that were close together and tall, to speed
water to move sediment and allow the water to flow.

Then came major reservoirs during the mid part of the century, which added
additional flood control.

Floods are different in California than other states. When the Mississippi River
floods, it takes weeks for high water to work its way from the upper basin to
the lower banks, Mierzwa explained.

But in California, weather comes quickly and forecasters might have three or
four days to watch the weather via satellite images.

Today the Central Valley is precarious.

Combined damage for the 1986 and 1997 floods was $3 billion   the majority in
the Sacramento Valley.

Land values have increased since then, and areas like Yuba County that flooded
in 1997 have experienced a housing boom.

Now, the task is to come up with a plan that will take California through more
wet times without the type of disasters flood managers foresee.

The idea of "high scour" water channels is a thing of the past, Mierzwa
explained. The sediment from the Gold Rush era has come and gone.

Now, the idea is to have levees that are farther apart, to reduce chronic
erosion. This also will provide additional flood plain habitat in the river
channels.

Slower moving water also contributes, to a small degree, to groundwater
recharge.

This is all enormously complicated, "because sometimes the solutions for a
problem are located somewhere else in the river system," Mierzwa said.

The plans are also political.

Estimates are that up to an additional 40,000 acres of land would be needed
along the waterways. Of this, 10,000 would be new habitat and 25,000 acres of
habitat-compatible crops.

A holistic approach is needed first, with specific fixes to be worked out as the
plan evolves, he continued.

"We need to assess if we are talking millions or billions" of dollars.

The cost of the project is justified by the reduction in flood damages, he said.

What flood planning means in the North Valley

At a recent meeting with mostly farmers in the Richvale area, landowners had
many questions for representatives from the Department of Water Resources, who
are working on the statewide flood plan.

One proposal, which is vague in the most recent report, calls for improvements
to the Cherokee Canal to create a flood bypass for the Feather River. The
proposal, which is nowhere near fully designed, calls for widening the levees,
and allowing the land to flood during times of extremely high water.

The floods would be funneled toward the Butte Sink and eventually to the
Sacramento River.

These plans were put into the current documents so they could be part of the
discussion, but would need to be refined over the next five or 10 years.

Habitat within the flood bypass is proposed, which makes landowners uneasy, as
was seen at the recent meeting in Richvale.

Mierzwa said there would be money paid to landowners through easements.

The habitat, necessary by design, also makes it a better sell for state and
federal financial support.

The intention of the plan would be to provide flood protection to ag land in the
area, as well as communities that are now small but growing.

Bypasses, including the Sutter and Yolo, are already used within the state water
system, and provide flood protection as well as habitat in areas that are still
in farming.

A new south delta bypass is also part of the current flood control planning, and
would pull flood water from the San Joaquin River.

The Hamilton City J Levee is not included in the current flood plan, but it's a
good example of the type of project the state is considering, Mierzwa said.

The proposal sets the levees back to allow more room for the river, as well as
increases the height of the new setback levees.

About the plan

Key features of the Central Valley Flood Management Plan:

Relief for river flows at the Feather River, including an improved bypass
channel.

Sutter Bypass expansion.

Sacramento Bypass expansion.

Yolo Bypass expansion.

New bypass at the San Joaquin River.

For the full plan, go to: www.water.ca.gov/cvfmp

Staff writer Heather Hacking can be reached at 896-7758, hhacking@chicoer.com
and followed on Twitter @HeatherHacking.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2012 Oroville Mercury Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 43 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                      Chico Enterprise-Record (California)

                              April 9, 2012 Monday

Butte County bypass just a small piece of multi-billion-dollar state flood plan

BYLINE: By HEATHER HACKING - Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS; Local

LENGTH: 977 words


A major overhaul of the way the state water flood management system is
maintained and operated is under way. The projects, which would take place over
the next 25 years, are estimated to cost $14 billion-$17 billion.

The Central Valley Flood Management Planning Program, created through Senate
Bill 5, passed in 2007, was part of the large package of water bills passed
before the end of Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger's administration.

This was soon after Hurricane Katrina, when the wounds were fresh from what
could happen when flood control systems did not hold back the water.

The price tag for California's overhaul is enormous, but can be justified when
potential damage is factored in, explained Mike Mierzwa, civil engineer and
flood policy adviser for the Department of Water Resources.

He said billion-dollar damage in isolated years could easily average out to $330
million a year if predicted floods occur.

The price tag makes more sense when you factor in loss of business when
communities and farms slow down due to flood damage, he said.

The bottom line is that the current system is not sustainable, he said.

This price tag also does not factor in loss of human life, he continued.

Historical flood system

California's flood control system began being built 150 years ago. Mining in
California through the 1870s did a lot of damage to rivers and tributaries.
Massive amounts of sediment from hydraulic mining needed to be quickly cleared
through the waterways.

In the early 1900s, federal investment in the state water system began.

In 1909, a massive flood occurred, and about this time the nickname for the
Central Valley was "vast inland sea," Mierzwa said.

Floods literally lasted for months.

To fix problems, levees were built that were close together and tall, to speed
water to move sediment and allow the water to flow.

Then came major reservoirs during the mid part of the century, which added
additional flood control.

Floods are different in California than other states. When the Mississippi River
floods, it takes weeks for high water to work its way from the upper basin to
the lower banks, Mierzwa explained.

But in California, weather comes quickly and forecasters might have three or
four days to watch the weather via satellite images.

Today the Central Valley is precarious.

Combined damage for the 1986 and 1997 floods was $3 billion   the majority in
the Sacramento Valley.

Land values have increased since then, and areas like Yuba County that flooded
in 1997 have experienced a housing boom.

Now, the task is to come up with a plan that will take California through more
wet times without the type of disasters flood managers foresee.

The idea of "high scour" water channels is a thing of the past, Mierzwa
explained. The sediment from the Gold Rush era has come and gone.

Now, the idea is to have levees that are farther apart, to reduce chronic
erosion. This also will provide additional flood plain habitat in the river
channels.

Slower moving water also contributes, to a small degree, to groundwater
recharge.

This is all enormously complicated, "because sometimes the solutions for a
problem are located somewhere else in the river system," Mierzwa said.

The plans are also political.

Estimates are that up to an additional 40,000 acres of land would be needed
along the waterways. Of this, 10,000 would be new habitat and 25,000 acres of
habitat-compatible crops.

A holistic approach is needed first, with specific fixes to be worked out as the
plan evolves, he continued.

"We need to assess if we are talking millions or billions" of dollars.

The cost of the project is justified by the reduction in flood damages, he said.

What flood planning means in the North Valley

At a recent meeting with mostly farmers in the Richvale area, landowners had
many questions for representatives from the Department of Water Resources, who
are working on the statewide flood plan.

One proposal, which is vague in the most recent report, calls for improvements
to the Cherokee Canal to create a flood bypass for the Feather River. The
proposal, which is nowhere near fully designed, calls for widening the levees,
and allowing the land to flood during times of extremely high water.

The floods would be funneled toward the Butte Sink and eventually to the
Sacramento River.

These plans were put into the current documents so they could be part of the
discussion, but would need to be refined over the next five or 10 years.

Habitat within the flood bypass is proposed, which makes landowners uneasy, as
was seen at the recent meeting in Richvale.

Mierzwa said there would be money paid to landowners through easements.

The habitat, necessary by design, also makes it a better sell for state and
federal financial support.

The intention of the plan would be to provide flood protection to ag land in the
area, as well as communities that are now small but growing.

Bypasses, including the Sutter and Yolo, are already used within the state water
system, and provide flood protection as well as habitat in areas that are still
in farming.

A new south delta bypass is also part of the current flood control planning, and
would pull flood water from the San Joaquin River.

The Hamilton City J Levee is not included in the current flood plan, but it's a
good example of the type of project the state is considering, Mierzwa said.

The proposal sets the levees back to allow more room for the river, as well as
increases the height of the new setback levees.

About the plan

Key features of the Central Valley Flood Management Plan:

Relief for river flows at the Feather River, including an improved bypass
channel.

Sutter Bypass expansion.

Sacramento Bypass expansion.

Yolo Bypass expansion.

New bypass at the San Joaquin River.

For the full plan, go to: www.water.ca.gov/cvfmp

Staff writer Heather Hacking can be reached at 896-7758, hhacking@chicoer.com
and followed on Twitter @HeatherHacking.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2012 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 44 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                          Sunday Independent (Ireland)

                               November 29, 2009

Flood victims may be jilted by insurers

SECTION: BUSINESS; Personal Finance

LENGTH: 1433 words


Biblical floods may have destroyed the contents of your home -- will insurers
now try to pull a fast one, asks Louise McBride

THE devastation that swept the country over the last few weeks as floods wreaked
havoc with homes and businesses could be only just beginning.

Just like August 2008, much of the flooding of the last three weeks occurred in
areas never before considered at risk of floods. If you're a flood victim whose
home has never previously been flooded, your insurer will usually cover the
five-figure bill you may be facing for damage. But if your flood is the first of
many, you may have no choice but to foot the huge bill for future flood damage
yourself -- something which many homeowners in flood-prone areas like Clonmel,
Co Tipperary, and Fermoy, Co Cork, had to accept a long time ago.

Insurers usually shun homeowners who live in areas ravaged by floods. Some
brokers say the average claim being made by victims of the recent floods in Cork
is EUR15,000 to EUR20,000 -- with the average business claim running to
EUR50,000-plus. With claims like that, losing insurance cover for flood damage
is a blow to any homeowner -- particularly if they don't qualify for
humanitarian assistance.

So if your home has been flooded for the first time, will you have to battle to
get your insurer to cover you for flood damage going forward?

HOME DAMAGED INA FLASH FLOOD

If you're among those who made a claim after your home was damaged in the flash
floods at Passage West and Crosshaven, Co Cork, earlier this month, or in last
June's flash flood in Gweedore, Co Donegal, don't write off your future
insurance cover just yet.

"Insurers may treat victims of flash floods differently to those living in pure
flood areas," says Brian McNelis, director with the Irish Brokers Association.
"Your insurer may be amenable to renewing your flood cover if for example the
flood has only occurred in the area once in the last 80 years, or if you've put
preventative measures in place to protect from future floods."

Insurance company Allianz said that it would usually continue to cover a
customer who had made a claim for flood damage if "the flood is a random or
'once in a lifetime' occurrence caused perhaps by a severe weather event or an
avoidable occurrence such as a temporary blockage in a runoff water system.
Insurance in such cases covers what is an 'unpredictable event' or a 'risk'",
said a spokesman.

Even so, if you've made a hefty claim after a flash flood, the cost of your
house insurance may go up when you renew it, particularly if you had built up a
no-claims bonus before then. Your insurer may also insist that your policy
carries a higher excess -- the first part of a claim you pay for yourself --
than previously.

"If you had a no-claims bonus, your premium could be 30 to 40 per cent higher on
renewal than it was before," says Paul Kavanagh, managing director of Cork
insurance broker McCarthy Insurance Group. "Or the excess for your flood cover
could be increased from EUR250 to EUR1,000 or EUR2,000."

Some insurers will increase your excess for flood cover by up to EUR5,000 after
a claim.

Not all insurers get rid of your no-claims discount if you make a claim. Quinn
Direct customers who lodged claims for the latest flood damage between November
19 and November 24 will not lose their no-claims discount, according to the
insurer.

LIVING IN A KNOWN FLOOD-PRONE AREA

If you live in an area of the country with a history of flood problems, and you
have been with the same insurer for a number of years, you may still be able to
claim for damage caused by the recent floods.

"There are a number of people who still have flood cover in Fermoy and other
flood-prone areas as they have never claimed over the years," says Kavanagh.

"In previous floods, these people may have only had two to three inches of water
in their home so they may have decided to hold their claim until there was more
serious damage."

If you're one of these people you may still be able to get your insurer to cover
a claim for the latest flood damage, but the chances of continuing your cover
going forward will be slim.

"The problem in the past is that some people would have made a small claim for
flood damage," adds Kavanagh.

"Or they may have switched to a new insurer who refused to cover them for flood
damage."

If you're one of these people and living in a flood-prone area, you're likely to
have to foot the bill yourself. If you own a home in a flood-risk area and
you've been with the same insurer for a number of years, be careful about
switching to a new insurer. While your existing insurer may still cover you for
flood damage, your new insurer is unlikely to do so.

If you've just bought a house in a flood-prone area and are buying house
insurance for that property for the first time, don't bet on getting flood
cover.

"Homes in pure flood areas are uninsurable for damage -- you simply won't get
cover," says McNelis.

A spokesman for FBD agrees. "As a general rule, we do not provide flood cover
for properties inareas which have been prone to flooding."

LIVING IN AN AREA THAT HAS JUST BECOME FLOOD PRONE

There is usually a blacklist of flood spots that insurers avoid -- and with the
latest spate of flooding, that list is about to get longer.

"We have over 300 individual street/location areas across all counties which
have flooded previously," says a spokesman for AXA.

"We do not have a blanket ban on towns or areas. Each risk is assessed
individually, based on our previous experience. Following the current spate of
flooding, we may have to increase this list as new areas flood which never
flooded before."

Even if you live in a flood-prone area and your house has never been flooded,
your insurance could soar when you renew it. For example, AXA quoted EUR463 to
insure a three-bedroom semi-detached house in Clara, Co Offaly. The house in
this case had a rebuilding cost of EUR170,000, contents worth EUR60,000, and was
not located in an area prone to flooding. Were the area to become prone to
flooding, that premium would rise to EUR545 -- even if the house itself was
unlikely to flood and the homeowner never made a claim.

If the area you live in has only just become flood-prone and you had flood cover
before the latest floods, you should be able to claim for the latest damage --
and your insurer may continue to cover you going forward, albeit at a price. If,
however, your claim for flood damage is a hefty one, you may have difficulty
renewing your cover.

"Existing Allianz customers with full flood cover will retain that cover, even
if it comes to light that the area in which they are living is now prone to
flooding," says a spokesman for the insurer.

He adds that Allianz has "several customers" who continued to be covered for
flood damage after making flood claims.

"However, we retain the right to continuously review their policies with us," he
says. "In some cases, we may impose increased excesses for flood damage or we
may exclude flood cover from their policies -- but only after significant
payments have been made and there is a high levelof certainty that flooding will
reoccur."

LIVING IN AN AREA THAT HAS PUT FLOOD DEFENCES IN PLACE

If you live in an area that has long been ravaged by floods, but flood
prevention measures have been put in place, you may be able to get flood cover
-- even if you've been refused cover by your insurer for the last few years.

"In places like Mallow in Cork, the flood defences seem to be working," says
Kavanagh. "So there will be a greater probability of getting flood cover for
Mallow in the future."

If you run your own company and are in a flood-prone area, it is in your
interests to put your own flood prevention measures in place. By doing so, you
could continue to get flood cover from your insurer.

"When negotiating for insurance cover, businesses should be showing that loss
prevention precautions being taken are those that would have been taken had
there been no insurance cover," says Susan Somerville, director of Richardson
Insurance Solutions. "In areas where there has been a history of flood damage,
business owners should take all practical steps to manage the risk, such as
storing stock above floor level or installing automatic pumping facilities."

HOLIDAY HOME DAMAGED BY FLOOD

Even if your holiday home is covered for flood damage, if it was unoccupied at
the time of the flood and you didn't agree this with your insurer in advance,
get ready to cough up. Insurers usually won't cover a holiday home for flood
damage if it is unoccupied for a certain period.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2009 Independent News and Media Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 45 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        Wyoming Tribune-Eagle (Cheyenne)

                            December 9, 2007 Sunday

Most local properties at risk of flooding are uninsured

BYLINE: cary snyder

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Main; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 897 words


In Cheyenne, 30 percent of structures in areas at high risk of flooding are
insured, and in the rest of the state, only 15 percent of them are.

By Cary Snyder

csnyder@wyomingnews.com

CHEYENNE - Don Beard suspects many people in Laramie County do not get flood
insurance for their properties because they are not reminded of the dangers of
flooding on a daily basis.

"When you look at all these dry basins and everything in Wyoming, it just
doesn't set in," said Beard, the county flood plain administrator and director
of public works.

Currently, 15 percent of properties in high-risk flood areas of Wyoming are
covered with flood insurance - well below the national average of 50 percent.

That's according to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which manages the
National Flood Insurance Program.

But in Cheyenne, 30 percent of structures in high-risk areas are insured. In the
rest of the county, less than 6 percent of high-risk properties have flood
insurance.

In all of Laramie County, there are 1,789 structures in high-risk areas. Of
those, 272 are covered by flood insurance. Including areas outside of flood
zones, there are 450 flood insurance policies in the county, FEMA said.

Bonnie Heddin, a National Flood Insurance Program specialist with FEMA, said a
variety factors could contribute to the low number of insured properties in
Wyoming.

She said property owners may not have a federally backed loan that requires
flood insurance, and a lot of structures could be barns, silos or sheds that
people consciously decide not to insure.

And properties in communities that do not take part in the national program may
not be eligible for flood insurance.

Locally, the only entities that do not take part are Albin and Burns, FEMA said,
though Burns has applied to join the program.

See FLOOD, page A2

FLOOD

Continued from A1

When longtime Cheyenne residents think of flooding, the first thing that comes
to mind is likely the disastrous flood of 1985 in the Sheridan Reach area north
of Dell Range Boulevard.

Twelve people died in the flood, which caused more than $60 million in property
damage.

"At this point, that is probably the most dangerous area in town," city staff
engineer Julie Powell said.

In addition to Sheridan Reach, which surrounds Sheridan Street between Converse
Avenue and Ridge Road on the city's easy side, other high-risk areas identified
by FEMA include Dry Creek, which flows from F.E. Warren Air Force Base along
Dell Range; and Crow Creek, which crosses through south Cheyenne.

Powell said flood-control projects in all of these areas are expected to be
finished in the next two years.

Among the projects are plans to create detention ponds north of Prairie View
Golf Course and on property north of Cheyenne Regional Airport to steer flood
water away from Sheridan Reach.

To measure the preventative steps a town or county has taken to reduce flood
risk, FEMA ranks communities that take part in the National Flood Insurance
Program on a level of 1 to 10, with 1 indicating a lower risk of severe
flooding.

For each level a community ranks below 10, residents there get a 5 percent
discount on flood insurance.

Cheyenne has a ranking of 7; Laramie County, 8. FEMA flood insurance specialists
say most participating communities nationwide are designated 7, 8 or 9.

When the flood-control projects in the city are completed, Powell said it is
possible Cheyenne could be reduced to Level 5.

"The county and the city deserve credit for doing what they've done," said Derek
Jensen, spokesman for FEMA Region 8 in Denver.

Although not designated official flood hazard areas by FEMA, the city has
identified several other areas it believes are at an above normal risk of
flooding.

These include portions of Bradley Avenue near Holliday Park and what is referred
to as the Henderson Basin, which includes portions of East Pershing Boulevard
and Henderson Drive.

Special flood-hazard areas are generally referred to as sitting in 100-year
flood plains. The logic behind the label is that a property is likely to
experience significant flooding once a century.

Beard encourages residents to think of the label in terms of a 1 percent chance
a property will flood each year.

"When people think of the 100-year storm, they think, 'I don't have to worry
about that.' But that could be next week," he said.

The National Weather Service is predicting above-normal temperatures and normal
precipitation levels through the spring.

Those are conditions that do not pose an above-average risk of flooding here,
said John Griffith with the National Weather Service in Cheyenne.

"I'm not getting excited that there are any drought busters coming, looking at
the data," Griffith said.

There are different levels of flood insurance property owners can buy. They can
select a policy that covers a structure, its contents or both.

The cost of flood insurance premiums is tied to a property's projected risk of
flooding. Nationwide, the average annual premium for a $190,000 home is $458,
according to FEMA.

"Depending on where you sit in that flood damage area, maybe that's not
expensive at all," Beard said.

Jensen said people often believe flood insurance is part of their homeowner's
policy, but that is not true.

"That's one of the things that people don't realize," he said. "It's not going
to be covered under their homeowner's policy; flood insurance is a separate
policy that people have to have."

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Cheyenne Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 46 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Hawkesbury Gazette

                             June 27, 2017 Tuesday
                           Internet & Print Editions

Flood history proves a hit

BYLINE: Conor Hickey

LENGTH: 419 words


WALKING tours highlighting Windsor's flood history proved so popular last week
that they were booked out, as the Hawkesbury marked the anniversary of one of
the region's most historically significant events - the Great Flood of 1867.

Dr Stephen Yeo, a flood specialist with a keen interest in the Hawkesbury,
provided the tours last week and said he was surprised how popular they were.

Dr Yeo is not from the Hawkesbury, but runs his own flood consulting business
and also works for the Hawkesbury-Nepean Flood Management Directorate.

"It seemed a nice way to spend 90 minutes sharing stories rooted in this
community and Windsor has so much heritage," he said.

"We are not just interested in 1867 as an historical oddity, but remembering
that a flood like that can and will happen again."

Dr Yeo said the marking of the 1867 flood was important, and should serve as a
reminder to the residents of the Hawkesbury that disaster can strike.

"One of the big concerns is that there has been a whole generation that has
never seen a decent flood in the Hawkesbury, the last even what I would call
moderate flood was in 1992," he said.

"The 150th anniversary of the biggest flood on record is a prime opportunity to
remind people that not only have huge floods like 1867 happened in the past but
they can and will happen again."

Dr Yeo said from doing the tours of Windsor, he said it was clear there were
many misconceptions about flooding in the area.

He said he hoped the tours helped end some of the 'myths' about how flooding
occurred in the Hawkesbury.

He said the most common 'myth' he heard was that a flood such as 1867 could not
happen again. He said a repeat of such a flood absolutely could happen again,
although added it was statistically unlikely.

Another so-called 'myth' was that Warragamba Dam would stop all floods, but
again Dr Yeo said that was not the case.

Dr Yeo said in his opinion, many Hawkesbury residents did not think flooding was
a major concern for them anymore.

"We are trying to show why Windsor can reach such great depths and be so
extensive [when it floods]. 1867 was described as a vast inland sea with no
waves to rival Sydney Harbour on a squally day," he said.

"We look at Windsor's flood history and there have been these almost decade long
periods with few floods and small floods, but also decade long periods with many
floods and big floods."

Dr Yeo said he did not want to be a doomsayer, but people living in the flood
prone areas of the Hawkesbury should be prepared for future big floods.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 47 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Hawkesbury Gazette

                            June 28, 2017 Wednesday
                           Internet & Print Editions

Flood history proves a hit

BYLINE: Conor Hickey

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 419 words


WALKING tours highlighting Windsor's flood history proved so popular last week
that they were booked out, as the Hawkesbury marked the anniversary of one of
the region's most historically significant events - the Great Flood of 1867.

Dr Stephen Yeo, a flood specialist with a keen interest in the Hawkesbury,
provided the tours last week and said he was surprised how popular they were.

Dr Yeo is not from the Hawkesbury, but runs his own flood consulting business
and also works for the Hawkesbury-Nepean Flood Management Directorate.

"It seemed a nice way to spend 90 minutes sharing stories rooted in this
community and Windsor has so much heritage," he said.

"We are not just interested in 1867 as an historical oddity, but remembering
that a flood like that can and will happen again."

Dr Yeo said the marking of the 1867 flood was important, and should serve as a
reminder to the residents of the Hawkesbury that disaster can strike.

"One of the big concerns is that there has been a whole generation that has
never seen a decent flood in the Hawkesbury, the last even what I would call
moderate flood was in 1992," he said.

"The 150th anniversary of the biggest flood on record is a prime opportunity to
remind people that not only have huge floods like 1867 happened in the past but
they can and will happen again."

Dr Yeo said from doing the tours of Windsor, he said it was clear there were
many misconceptions about flooding in the area.

He said he hoped the tours helped end some of the 'myths' about how flooding
occurred in the Hawkesbury.

He said the most common 'myth' he heard was that a flood such as 1867 could not
happen again. He said a repeat of such a flood absolutely could happen again,
although added it was statistically unlikely.

Another so-called 'myth' was that Warragamba Dam would stop all floods, but
again Dr Yeo said that was not the case.

Dr Yeo said in his opinion, many Hawkesbury residents did not think flooding was
a major concern for them anymore.

"We are trying to show why Windsor can reach such great depths and be so
extensive [when it floods]. 1867 was described as a vast inland sea with no
waves to rival Sydney Harbour on a squally day," he said.

"We look at Windsor's flood history and there have been these almost decade long
periods with few floods and small floods, but also decade long periods with many
floods and big floods."

Dr Yeo said he did not want to be a doomsayer, but people living in the flood
prone areas of the Hawkesbury should be prepared for future big floods.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 48 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              India Insurance News

                       May 26, 2016 Thursday 6:30 AM EST

A M Best Special Report: US Flood Insurance Bill's Passage would Boost
Development of Private Market

LENGTH: 540  words


May 26 -- A.M. Best believes pending legislation that would encourage more
private insurers to write flood insurance would be a positive development for
the current flood insurance marketplace and a benefit for consumers that would
have additional coverage options, according to a new A.M. Best special report.
The Flood Insurance Market Parity and Modernization Act, H.R. 2901, passed
recently in the U.S. House of Representatives and is now headed to the U.S.
Senate for approval.

The Best Special Report, titled, "The Flood Insurance Market Parity and
Modernization Act-What Does Its Potential Passage Mean for the Future of Flood
Insurance in the U.S.?," states that there are benefits to be gained from a
legitimate expansion of the current flood insurance market, allowing private
insurers to freely underwrite and price flood risks in accordance with their
underwriting standards. The report notes that a clarification that private flood
insurance is to be treated the same as federal flood insurance for homeowners of
properties located in a flood zone that have federally backed mortgages would
help clear existing hurdles and allow private insurance to be a more viable
option for property owners and renters that need or desire flood insurance.

The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is a federal program, administered
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, was designed to make flood insurance
available and help reduce costs of taxpayer-funded disaster relief efforts by
using premiums collected from flood-prone homeowners to pay out on any losses
incurred.

Over the past 25 years, the number of NFIP policies in force has more than
doubled to more than 5.3 million. This demonstrates the increasing need and
interest in protecting U.S. properties from the risk of flooding as more
information has become available about the susceptibility of certain communities
to flood from revised flood maps and other territorial reassessments. In line
with the increase in policies in force, the total dollar amount of assets
protected through the NFIP has increased by more than six times from 1990 to
2014. Demographic shifts, volatility in weather patterns, and a rising sea-level
brought about by climate change appear to have only exacerbated the flood
problem.

It has been expressed that the increasing number of flood events and resulting
damage make it clear that the current solution centered around a federally
subsidized plan to provide insurance for those in need is insufficient. The NFIP
was not designed to accommodate major catastrophes; however, federal taxpayers
are shouldering the substantial burden of the program's deficit, largely
attributable to losses from Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005, and
Superstorm Sandy in 2012.

A.M. Best also believes that opening up the flood insurance market to include
more private insurance involvement would be a big step in the right direction to
be able to track profitability results for this line of business, wMayhich would
lead to a greater understanding of exposure, losses, rate adequacy and other
meaningful comparative data.

To access a copy of this special report, please visit
http://www3.ambest.com/bestweek/purchase.asp?record_code=249607.

Source: A M Best

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2016 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 49 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2017 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

A Guide to Flood-Resistant Building Terms

BYLINE: By DAVID W. DUNLAP

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 1546 words


Everyone talks about extreme weather. (Or denies it.) But many people are also
doing something: designing and constructing flood-resistant buildings and
infrastructure. The New York Times is presenting case studies that highlight how
the built environment is being made more resilient in New York City and other
nearby coastal areas.

''You've got to think like a marine architect,'' said Richard J. DeMarco, a
principal in Montroy DeMarco Architecture, which has worked in West Chelsea, a
flood-prone area of Manhattan.

Here are terms you are likely to encounter as The Times explores ways to ensure
that homes, workplaces and communities can better withstand and recover from
storms.

100-year flood plain

Not as benign as it sounds. It means an area that has a 1 percent chance of
flooding in any given year -- not an area that will flood only once in a
century. Several 100-year floods may follow one another in rapid succession.

500-year flood plain

An area that has a 0.2 percent chance of flooding in any given year.

Appendix G

A 2014 addition to New York City's Building Code that regulates construction and
substantial building improvement in flood hazard zones.

Article 6, Chapter 4

This provision in the New York City Zoning Resolution modifies requirements like
building design and permitted obstructions to allow developers to meet resilient
design standards.

A.S.C.E. 24

Design and siting standards set by the American Society of Civil Engineers for
buildings and structures in flood hazard areas. The Federal Emergency Management
Agency deems the A.S.C.E. 24 standards to meet or exceed the requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program.

base flood elevation (B.F.E.)

The height of flooding that might be expected in a 100-year flood. It is not
measured from ground or sea level, but from a benchmark called the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988. It can be found on flood insurance rate maps.

design flood elevation (D.F.E.)

In new or substantially renovated buildings, the minimum height at which
residential units may be constructed and utilities like the boiler, the water
heater and electrical equipment may be located. It also sets the minimum height
for dry or wet flood-proofing measures for buildings generally. The margin
between this and the base flood elevation is called freeboard.

dry flood-proofing

Under this design approach, buildings are made as watertight as possible through
the use of impermeable materials and flood barriers. Its corollary is wet
flood-proofing.

evacuation zones

These differ from flood zones. New York City has six hurricane evacuation zones,
moving upland from the coast or shoreline, depending on the severity of the
storm.

Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)

Among its many responsibilities, FEMA, a unit of the Department of Homeland
Security, runs the National Flood Insurance Program and issues flood insurance
rate maps, showing where and what flood hazards exist.

flood gates, flood logs, flood panels

A growing number of buildings have installed the hardware needed for a temporary
flood dam, given enough notice. (And there usually is enough with big storms.)
Vertical posts are inserted into anchors in the pavement, then horizontal slats
are stacked up between the posts. FEMA officials in the New York region
cautioned that a large number of these kinds of protection systems failed during
Sandy.

flood insurance rate maps (FIRM)

These maps, produced by FEMA, are the go-to source for information on special
flood hazard areas and base flood elevations. The location of boundaries between
safe, moderately hazardous and hazardous zones has a huge impact on homeowners,
landlords and developers, affecting what they may build and how much flood
insurance they must carry. Preliminary maps, or Pfirm, exist for New York, but
the city has challenged their accuracy and is negotiating with FEMA over the
final boundaries.

flood vents

Openings in a building facade that allow for the entry and exit of floodwater,
allowing for the equalization of hydrostatic pressures. They are used in wet
flood-proofing.

flood zones

Flood insurance rate maps break riverine, coastal and shoreline areas into zones
of special flood hazard. The designations can get very fine-grained, but the
basic three levels are areas that are at risk of waves higher than three feet
(Zone V), areas subject to 100-year floods (Zone A) and areas subject to
500-year floods (Zone X).

floodplain

An area susceptible to inundation.

freeboard

A safety margin, generally one to three feet, between a base flood elevation and
the design flood elevation.

hydrostatic pressure

Besides the threat posed by moving water, structures built in an area with a
high water table (at or near a waterfront, for instance) may be at risk of
long-term damage from the pressure exerted by the water in the soil around them,
which can crack concrete foundations.

limwa

Not the alternate title of ''The Lion Sleeps Tonight,'' but an acronym for limit
of moderate wave action, as shown on the flood zone map above.

National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29)

An outdated measurement benchmark, but you may come across it. This refers to
what was once called the Sea Level Datum and was used until recently by the
federal government for mapping projects. Its relation to the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 varies from place to place. In New York City, the new
datum is generally 1.1 feet below the old datum.

National Flood Insurance Program (N.F.I.P.)

Congress created this program in 1968 to reduce the cost of flood insurance
premiums paid by homeowners, renters and business owners in communities that
adopt and enforce floodplain management practices that meet or exceed federal
standards. The program, run by FEMA, is more than $20 billion in debt and faces
reauthorization this year.

nor'easter

Cyclonic storms along the East Coast are so called because the winds blow from a
northeasterly direction. They can bring heavy rain, snow, wind and flooding.

North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88)

A base from which consistent height measurements can be taken throughout the
United States, Canada and Mexico. These are not points in physical space, but a
computed series of coordinates. They are far more precise than sea level, in
part because the surface of the sea is not level. At the tip of Manhattan
Island, mean sea level is about two-and-a-half inches below this datum. At the
Washington Navy Yard, it is three-quarters of an inch above the datum.

overwash

Waters carried upland, especially after surges, may be prevented by intervening
structures from flowing directly back to the sea. This mass of water is called
overwash.

riverine

Related to a river.

sea level rise

Billions of tons of land ice are melting or sliding into the ocean. The sea is
also absorbing most of the heat trapped by human emissions. Those factors are
causing the ocean to rise at what appears to be an accelerating pace. Sea level
rise increases the depth and extent of floods.

special flood hazard area (S.F.H.A.)

Where 100-year floods and damaging waves can be expected. It includes Zones V
and A. It is based on surge levels in coastal and tidally influenced areas, and
on large lakes.

stillwater elevation

The height of coastal or tidally influenced floodwater, undisturbed by waves,
from a given datum.

storm water management

Storm water runoff is not the same as a flood, though it can cause localized
flooding. Most of New York's sewers are combined, meaning they handle both storm
water and sewage on its way to treatment plants. When too much rain water or
melting snow and ice washes over impervious paving and into the sewer system, it
can lead to overflows and the discharge of sewage and pollutants into
surrounding waterways. Permeable paving, swales and dry wells can temporarily
capture runoff and reduce combined sewer overflows.

swales

Areas of soil or absorbent material, like a bed of gravel, that are designed to
trap storm water runoff and hold it until it can be safely emptied into a
municipal storm sewer or into the soil. Bioswales refer to landscaped strips of
plantings along sidewalks or buildings' edges.

surge

An abnormal rise of water generated by a storm, as a result of atmospheric
pressure changes and wind. They are especially damaging if water is already at
high astronomical tide.

wet flood-proofing

A method that allows floodwaters to pass through parts of a building without
endangering structural stability. Wet flood-proofed areas can be used only for
parking, storage or access, or as crawl spaces. The FEMA officials in the New
York region said that wet flood-proofing, if employed correctly, could
substantially reduce flood risk and lower flood insurance costs. The corollary
is dry flood-proofing.

Case Studies in Resilient Design

New apartment towers on the riverfront (''Building to the Sky, With a Plan for
Rising Waters,'' Jan. 26).

Sources for this glossary include Ready to Respond: Strategies for Multifamily
Building Resilience, by Enterprise Community Partners; Coastal Climate
Resilience: Designing for Flood Risk, by the New York City Department of City
Planning; and a glossary by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.




URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/25/nyregion/a-guide-to-flood-resistant-building-t
erms.html

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 50 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                           January 15, 2015 Thursday

IN NEW MAPS, NEW FLOOD COSTS

BYLINE: ZAC ANDERSON

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1409 words


Sarasota revisions promise to expand high-risk zones to include thousands more
properties

New flood maps will expand Sarasota County's high-risk zones to encompass
another 42,700 properties, a revision that carries major costs for property
owners who could be forced to buy flood insurance and will have to comply with
tougher construction regulations.

The maps are being redrawn as part of a nationwide push by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency to update flood zone data with modern tools.

Some local flood maps date back to the 1980s, and FEMA officials say these don't
reflect the true risk many property owners face in instances of severe weather.
New mapping techniques can more accurately measure subtle variations in
elevation and track the flow of water, giving property owners better information
about potential flood hazards.

But the updated maps could saddle many county residents with additional
financial burdens, including mandatory flood insurance and the costs associated
with elevating new construction.

"This is real personal," said Desiree Companion, the county's point person for
the map revision. "This is going to impact somebody financially. It's going to
impact their home."

More than half of the properties being shifted into high-risk zones -- 22,614 --
are in North Port, which had never been completely mapped by FEMA and had many
flood risks that were overlooked. Another 10,500 are in unincorporated parts of
the county, 5,200 are in Venice and 4,400 are in the city of Sarasota.

More properties could be designated as high flood risks in coming years because
the mapping update did not cover many parts of the county. Coastal areas along
bays and the Gulf of Mexico that are susceptible to hurricane storm surge were
not remapped, nor were certain watersheds, such as Lemon Bay and Phillippi
Creek.

None of Longboat Key was included in this round of map revisions.

"We know we have to update this map again," Companion said.

Companion is organizing public forums over the next few months so residents can
ask questions about the draft flood maps before they are adopted next year.

A top concern

Flood insurance is typically a top concern for most homeowners.

The coverage can be costly, depending on a property's elevation. Anyone with a
mortgage from a federally regulated or insured lender is required to buy flood
coverage if the property is in a high-risk zone. The riskiest properties often
cost thousands of dollars a year to insure.

Companion acknowledged that many people will not be happy when they hear they
have to buy flood coverage. But she said it's important to have accurate maps so
that "better decisions are made" about building in the floodplain, a sentiment
echoed by FEMA officials.

"Updating flood maps is an important part of making sure that residents and
property owners in their communities are fully aware of their risk for
flooding," FEMA spokesman Danon Lucas said.

Property owners who are mapped into a high risk zone have a one-year grace
period to buy coverage at the cheaper rate charged to low-risk properties, Lucas
said. The National Flood Insurance Program's rate for a low-risk property with
the maximum $250,000 in coverage for the structure and $100,000 for household
items is $414 this year, according to Jeff Nungesser, owner of Iron City
Insurance and Investments in Sarasota.

After the grace period, the price of flood coverage would be based on how far a
structure sits below the "base flood elevation," or the elevation at which a
flood is expected every 100 years. Property owners would need to purchase an
elevation certificate, which typically costs a few hundred dollars.

Some property owners may not need to purchase flood insurance at all. In North
Port, many properties affected by the map change will only have a small portion
near a drainage ditch or canal reclassified as high risk.

The neighborhoods along Myakkahatchee Creek were the only areas mapped when FEMA
first looked at North Port's flood risks in the early 1980s. Because the rest of
the city was not examined, no high-risk flood zones were assigned to much of
North Port.

But drainage ditches and canals built by the city's original developer in some
of the older, unmapped sections of North Port were poorly designed and spill
over onto streets and adjacent properties during extreme rain events.

"They were not designed to handle a 100-year flood event so the water does come
out of the main channels and overflows a little bit," said Elizabeth Wong, the
city's stormwater manager. "Depending on where you are it flows onto the actual
parcels."

That means small sections of many properties will now be classified as high
flood risks, even though such flooding is typically not a threat to homes.

Nungesser said that if a home or other structure is not touching the high risk
zone, and does not have recent flood losses, an owner can typically prevail on
the lender not to require flood insurance. But coverage might still be a good
idea, he said, especially because it would be relatively cheap for those
properties.

"I would err on the side of caution when it comes to buying flood insurance,"
Nungesser said. "If you're anywhere close to a flood zone I would certainly get
it."

Larger issues

In addition to the cost of insurance, property owners in high-risk flood zones
also face additional costs if they want to build a new structure, along with
restrictions on renovations.

Fill dirt, additional concrete and other costs associated with elevating a home
can boost the price by upwards of 10 percent, said John King, owner of Rampart
Homes in Sarasota.

But King said the larger issue may be FEMA's restrictions on home renovations in
high-risk flood zones. For homes that sit below the base flood elevation, the
value of any renovation work must be less than 50 percent of the value of the
structure or the home has to be elevated, a costly proposition.

Because older homes often are worth little -- with most of the property's value
in the land -- renovation jobs can quickly bump up against the 50 percent
threshold, especially in pricier coastal areas.

"I really think that a lot of people are going to be very surprised and a bit
blindsided," King said.

On the flip side, some county residents will find it easier to build on their
properties after the maps are revised, with 6,880 parcels being removed from
high-risk zones.

Updating flood maps is one of the requirements FEMA places on communities as a
condition of participating in the National Flood Insurance Program, which writes
nearly all of the flood insurance policies nationwide.

The agency has been working to update the maps, many of which are decades old,
since 2003. Manatee County already has adopted a revision that moved more than
9,000 properties into high-risk flood zones.

Better identifying flood risk is just one element of FEMA's strategy to limit
the damage and government costs incurred from such disasters.

The agency also proposed substantial flood insurance premium increases but a big
public outcry prompted Congress to rollback the most aggressive rate increases
last year.

WHAT'S HAPPENING?

The Federal Emergency Management Agency recently released new flood maps for
Sarasota County and local cities that expand the high-risk flood zones to
include 42,700 additional properties.

What does it mean?

Most lenders require property owners in high-risk flood zones to carry flood
insurance. There also are tougher construction regulations.

How do I know if

I'm affected?

The county and local cities, with the exception of North Port, are sending out
postcards to all affected property owners. To research the impact on an
individual property you can visit the county's flood map revision website -
https://www.scgov.net/

FloodMaps/Pages/default.

aspx - and look for the document titled "Steps to Find Your Property."

How can I find out more?

The county site has up-to-date information on the map revision process. There
also will be a series of public forums where property owners can ask questions
of local government officials and FEMA representatives.

When are the forums?

The forums are each from 4 to 7 p.m.

nTuesday at the Sarasota Community Bayfront Center, 803. N Tamiami Tr.

nWednesday, Jan. 21 at the Venice Community Center, 326 Nokomis Ave. S.

nThursday, Jan. 22 at the Morgan Family Community Center at 6207 W. Price Blvd.
in North Port.

PROPERTIES MOVING INTO HIGH-RISK FLOOD ZONES

Sarasota County

10,500

North Port

22,614

Venice

5,200

City of Sarasota

4,400

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: In a 2013 photo, the water appears knee-deep at the intersection of
Vernell Street and Backert Road in North Port. H-T ARCHIVE Cars slow down as
they heed a warning of rising water on a stretch of River Road in North Port
recently. This city is one area that would see significant impacts from the
revamp of flood maps. H-T ARCHIVE / 2013

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 51 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                     PR.com

                     December 3, 2016 Saturday 6:30 AM EST

Flood Panel LLC Names National Flood Protection, LLC a National Corporate
Partner

BYLINE: Flood Panel

LENGTH: 661  words


Jupiter, FL,  December 03, 2016 --(PR.com)-- Flood Panel LLC, the leading
manufacturer of commercial floodproof shields in the U.S., announced that
National Flood Protection, LLC of Norwich, Connecticut, is its first national
corporate partner. National Flood Protection will supply, install and provide
consultation services for Flood Panel's full line of commercial flood doors and
flood barriers to customers across the country.

"As our first national corporate partner, Flood Panel will work with National
Flood Protection to make our innovative flood protection systems available to
more customers nationwide," said Tom Osborne, president, Flood Panel. "We are
excited to work with National Flood Protection to deliver our high quality flood
doors and flood barriers to customers in more places where flooding is a growing
threat to business structures."

"Demand for smart flood protection systems for commercial structures has been
growing due to extreme weather events and climate change," said Russ Ellington,
president, National Flood Protection. "By becoming a national corporate partner
with Flood Panel, we are positioned to meet the flood protection needs of
customers in all 50 states."

National Flood Protection will provide comprehensive flood mitigation services
for commercial buildings nationwide, including:

- Pre-design consultation - Consult in the pre-design phase of each flood
barrier system project to ensure best practices, add value engineering, and
avoid potential field condition problems.

- Building evaluation - Evaluate and make all recommendations to dry floodproof
each structure per FEMA Technical Bulletin 3-93 guidelines. The completed
process helps the client realize a significant reduction in flood insurance
premiums.

- Engineering - A team of qualified engineers evaluates each project and ensure
the flood barrier system and building structure is able to withstand the
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads imposed by flood waters.

- Design - A team of qualified architects evaluates each project to ensure all
flood barrier systems are properly specified, attached to the building per
manufacturer guidelines, and are aesthetically pleasing.

- Installation - A national network of subcontractors installs flood mitigation
system throughout the country. Each installation is supervised by a qualified
National Flood Protection superintendent.

- Emergency Response Plans - Provide assistance to create a Flood Emergency
Response Plan per FEMA guidelines for each project site.

- Maintenance - Provide clients with a project-specific inspection and
maintenance plan to ensure periodic review of flood mitigation systems.

National Flood Protection is a member of Flood Panel's Certified Network, which
includes general contractors, architects, engineers, distributors and building
owners who have completed Flood Panel's exclusive floodproof training seminars
certified by the Architectural Institute of America. For more information on
National Flood Protection, visit www.nationalfloodprotection.us.

Flood Panel's comprehensive, expert consultancy services include the development
of site-specific Flood Emergency Response Plans as recommended by FEMA. Required
by many public building authorities, the response plan is a step-by-step guide
to prepare structures for a flood threat, and is an integral part of any
floodproofing design.

About Flood Panel LLC

Flood Panel LLC, based in Jupiter, Fla., designs and manufactures high-quality
flood protection products, including flood panels and flood doors, for
commercial construction projects. The company provides a consultancy approach
that includes an approved network of installers, structural engineers,
architects and distributors, a complete range of flood product supplies, expert
flood protection analysis and a highly-trained project management team to
provide assistance from pre-construction through post-installation and
maintenance. For more information, visit www.floodpanel.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


               Copyright 2016 PR.com, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 52 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                           September 27, 2009 Sunday
                                  Main Edition

Floods don't stay in mapped lines;
Program to chart areas of risk hasn't kept up.;
Many homeowners find their only coverage was by the water itself.

BYLINE: Carrie Teegardin; Staff

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2002 words


Federal government maps predict in parcel-by-parcel detail where the water will
travel when a megastorm hits.

Those maps anticipated that I-20 would remain high and dry, when flooding
actually closed the highway down. The projections envisioned nothing more than a
big puddle in the Food Depot parking lot in Austell, but what developed around
the store was more like a lake.

And what the maps foresaw as a contained overflow of Cobb County's Noonday Creek
became a surge of water that filled the living rooms of homes blocks away.

Relying strictly on federal flood maps to determine whether a property merits
flood insurance can lead to financial disaster for homeowners, The Atlanta
Journal-Constitution found in an examination of the National Flood Insurance
Program.

Many property owners whose homes were ruined had no idea that their standard
homeowners insurance policy would not cover damage caused by a massive flood.
Those who did understand the policies probably had no ink-ling that a property
located outside the flood zone still faced a significant chance of getting hit.

"Who would think we need flood insurance, especially in landlocked Atlanta,"
said Jennipher Ward, whose Austell home was swamped last week.

The current system that relies on homeowners to understand the complexities of
flood risk doesn't make sense, said Birny Birnbaum, a former insurance regulator
who is a consumer representative to the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners.

"It's really analogous to telling a consumer, when you go get a health insurance
policy it's your responsibility to pick the illnesses you are insured for,"
Birnbaum said. "It's crazy."

Companies don't cover it

Insurance companies sell flood insurance for the federal government. But they
have long refused to take on the risk of covering flood damage because of its
potentially catastrophic nature. "The risk from an event like that is too great
for any carrier to take on," said Justin Tomczak, a spokesman for State Farm
Insurance.

The federal government, which routinely sank millions into disaster recovery
efforts after major flood events, decided to start selling coverage itself in
1968.

Almost anyone can buy flood insurance. But the only property owners required to
buy it are those who have federally backed mortgages on property that lies
within the official flood hazard area.

Some homeowners whose property lies outside the floodplain do buy the coverage.
But most don't, either because they assume their homeowners policy covers
flooding or because they live outside the flood zone and assume they're not at
risk. By last year, the program had 5.6 million policies nationwide, including
almost 15,000 in the 17 counties where federal disaster assistance was requested
by the state of Georgia.

The average flood insurance policy costs $616 a year, according to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, a figure that includes policies on residential and
commercial buildings. For properties outside the flood zone, the average annual
cost is $333.

Local governments across the country must decide whether to participate in the
National Flood Insurance Program. The vast majority do, although 66 communities
across Georgia, most of them small cities outside the metro area, are not in the
program.

When they join, local governments must agree to control development within their
flood zones. In exchange, each community's residents are allowed to purchase
coverage from the program.

The maps that establish the official flood zones are the key to the program
because homeowners and mortgage lenders rely so heavily on them to assess
whether properties are at risk.

But in reality, the maps aren't nearly as reliable as homeowners might want them
to be. They are often hopelessly outdated, especially in a rapidly developing
place like Atlanta where new homes and parking lots can shift the flood zone's
boundaries.

Even when the maps are up- to-date, they measure the flood expected to result
from a storm that has a 1 percent chance of occurring in any given year. Storms
can exceed that expectation. And even in lesser rainfalls, floodwaters can
travel beyond the official zones because drainage systems may be blocked or
overwhelmed. When that happens the water backs up and can rush into the homes
nearby.

About 25 percent of the flood insurance program's claims paid every year are on
properties outside the official flood zone, clear proof that the flood zones
miss many houses at risk of damage.

Mapping experts are well aware of the shortcomings of the maps. But most
homeowners haven't a clue and follow the conventional wisdom that flood
insurance is for the flood zone.

Tomczak, of State Farm, said only a "low percentage" of policyholders calling
this week about flooding problems have flood coverage.

An estimated 2,000 people in Austell lost their homes or sustained significant
damage in last week's flood. But only 60 flood insurance policies were in force
on Austell properties, federal data show.

Georgia updating maps

About five years ago, Congress recognized that many flood maps across the
country were 20 years out of date and authorized a nationwide modernization
effort.

Georgia is in the late stages of completing its modernization.

To try to make the maps more accurate, state and federal officials worked with
local governments and conducted some new flood studies. But the federal money
available for updating the data didn't cover anything close to a comprehensive
study of every stream and river.

The process of getting the maps approved is a lengthy one. In some Georgia
counties, new flood maps were approved so recently that some homeowners whose
properties are now considered within the flood zone probably had no idea they
were at risk until water started pouring into their homes last week.

The Georgia General Assembly considered a bill this year that would have
required the state to notify property owners if updates to maps placed them in a
flood zone. But the bill did not pass. Its sponsor, state Rep. Buddy Carter
(R-Pooler), said he will try again next year.

J. Robert Hunter, the Consumer Federation of America's insurance director, ran
the federal flood insurance program during the 1970s when the program was new.
At that time, Hunter said, he had a goal of updating the maps every few years to
account for the changes development would create in the boundaries.

"Even then we were worried that development would always keep ahead of us and so
our maps would always be a little low," Hunter said.

When testifying before a congressional committee in 2006, Hunter advised that if
the maps are not kept updated, the federal program should be ended. "The
antiquated maps in use right now are a disgrace," he testified.

In addition to underestimating which properties will flood, outdated maps also
underprice the cost of flood insurance policies for properties built in a
floodplain, because the risk of flooding is underestimated, Hunter said.

That means taxpayers end up bearing unnecessary extra costs for the property
owners buying the coverage, who already enjoy a favorable rate because of public
subsidies.

Zones of inaccuracy

It's unclear now how far off the maps are for the Atlanta area. In some parts of
town, the rainfall that came with the recent storm exceeded the so-called "100
year flood," the event that has a 1-in-100 chance of occurring each year.

The U.S. Geological Survey concluded last week that rainfall in parts of Cobb
and Douglas counties was so intense that it had only a 1-in-500 chance of
occurring. With such an event, the flooding would be expected to extend beyond
the official floodplain.

But less momentous events have also caused flooding to extend beyond the flood
zone. Floods caused by Hurricane Dennis in 2005 damaged scores of homes in the
Atlanta region that were not included in the floodplain.

Mapping experts all over Atlanta are anxious to compare the floodplain maps with
aerial maps of the flooding that actually occurred. Ernie Smith, the GIS
coordinator in Newton County, said the flooding appeared to remain close to the
predicted flood zone around the Alcovy and South rivers. But around the Yellow
River the flooding appears to exceed the expected boundaries, he said.

An AJC analysis found similar inconsistencies. In an area along I-575, south of
Woodstock, for example, the AJC found that floodwaters exceeded the flood zone
by as much as 500 yards in some places.

Given that flooding so often occurs outside the official floodplain, some
experts believe it's time for a change in the nation's approach to flood
coverage.

"There needs to be a system in which a lot more people are naturally moved into
the flood insurance system," said Robert W. Klein, an insurance expert at
Georgia State University.

Birnbaum, the consumer representative at the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners, said flood coverage should simply be a standard part of most
homeowners insurance policies.

"It's just a no-brainer," said Birnbaum, director of the Texas-based Center for
Economic Justice.

If insurance companies provided the coverage, they would make sure flood maps
were up-to-date and that those buying coverage would pay what they should. That
alone would discourage building in risky areas and would encourage investments
in the sort of infrastructure that would limit potential flood damage. More
people would get the coverage and the cost for everyone would go down, Birnbaum
said.

The way it works now, insurers get paid by the flood insurance program to sell
the policies and process the claims. But they have no risk of losses.

"The industry has got it so it's not responsible for the claims, but it's still
able to profit from it," Birnbaum said. "It's absurd."

Flood 2009 Insurance problem pblemblempro problx

Find the latest information on the recent rains and continued flood coverage.

Staff writers Aaron Gould Sheinin, Jennifer Brett and April Hunt, and database
specialist John Perry contributed to this report.

17-county disaster

Flooding in metro Atlanta and across North Georgia last week caused millions in
damage. Residents of the following counties are eligible for federal assistance:
Bartow, Carroll, Catoosa, Chattooga, Cherokee, Cobb, Coweta, DeKalb, Douglas,
Heard, Fulton, Gwinnett, Newton, Paulding, Rockdale, Stephens and Walker.

Map predictions fall short

In some areas, last week's floods far exceeded official flood hazard zones that
determine flood insurance requirements and development restrictions. This map
shows the projected flood inundation based on Noonday Creek stream gauge
readings and U.S. Geological Survey elevation data. In this area near the Cobb
and Cherokee county border, floodwaters spread as far as 500 yards beyond the
official floodplain. Similar analyses in areas near stream gauges on Suwanee,
Peachtree, Nancy and on Nickajack creeks found that floodplain maps accurately
predicted flooding.

COMPILED BY JOHN G. PERRY

.

How we got today's report Coverage continues on ajc.com

We'll have the most recent stories and photos as the metro area recovers from
the flood and deals with Saturday's storms.

Weather forecasts can change quickly. We'll be watching the weather and also
checking on weekend traffic and area events.

Go to ajc.com/go/floodvideo for our minute-by-minute review of this past week.

Find out how to avoid scam artists while seeking repairs.

Go to our resources page for information on how to get and give help,
www.ajc.com/news/where-to-turn-for-144041.html.

Look through galleries of gripping photography --- ours and images submitted by
you. Continue to send in your photos,
projects.ajc.com/photos/upload/metro-atlanta-weekend-storms.

Find updates at twitter.com/ajc, photos on Facebook.com (search "ajc") and
breaking news alerts at ajc.com/mobile.Reporter Bill Torpy borrowed a kayak in
an effort to get into the marooned Connemara subdivision in Lawrenceville.
Advised against crossing the floodwaters, Torpy found a circuitous land route
into the neighborhood and spent two days there reporting his story. A14

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2009 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 53 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              May 26, 2013 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Storms: Rising water, rising rates

BYLINE: JOSH BOATWRIGHT, Tribune staff

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1054 words


Federal program aims to increase premiums to reflect flood risk

BY JOSH BOATWRIGHT

Tribune staff

Forecasters predict an active hurricane season this year, with as many as 20
named storms bringing winds as highas 100 mph.

Rising floodwaters and insurance costs, though, may pose a bigger problem than
wind for many Tampa Bay area residents.

Floods can be triggered by no more than an afternoon thunderstorm and have
caused more damage over the years than other tropical weather hazards, experts
say. Especially during hurricane season, which begins Saturday, powerful storms
can develop throughout the area on an almost daily basis.

The financial cost of floods has sparked a sweeping reform of the federal
government's National Flood Insurance Program, which has started increasing
rates by as much as 25 percent for policyholders who live in high-risk areas.

More than a third of flood insurance policies in Pinellas County and about 20
percent of those in Hillsborough could see major rate hikes in the coming years
as the federal program looks to make premiums more accurately reflect risk.

Residents in flood-prone places such as South Tampa, a 3-mile wide peninsula,
may start paying significantly more for extra flood insurance, insurance agents
say.

"It's going to reach a point where you pay $4,000 for homeowner's insurance and
$2,000 for flood insurance," said Phil Cole, who sells flood policies in Town 'N
Country, South Tampa and Westchase.

Last year, Congress passed major changes to the National Flood Insurance Program
meant to eliminate artificially low rates and shore up funds that have been
eviscerated by large-scale disasters such as Hurricane Katrina and superstorm
Sandy.

Many policies, particularly in high-risk zones known as Special Flood Hazard
Areas, are set to increase by 20 percent to 25 percent annually in the next few
years.

The program has subsidized about 20 percent of flood policies nationwide on
older homes built before accurate flood maps were drawn. Flood maps are
typically updated every five years or when new land usage has an impact on
drainage. Most subsidized homes were built prior to the 1980s.

That subsidy has been removed for new policies on these high-risk properties,
and more will be phased out this fall.

Policies on homes that have repeatedly flooded as well as nonresidential
properties are set to go up by 25 percent Oct. 1.

For now, homeowners will be able to maintain their flood insurance rates on
their primary residences, but the subsidies will end when they renew their
policies, purchase new ones, sell their homes or if their properties suffer
repeated flood losses.

After 2014, existing policies for properties deemed safe from flooding could
increase the next time a city or county redraws its flood maps.

A bill introduced last week by Louisiana Sen. Mary Landrieu seeks to delay the
implementation of the rate hikes until an affordability study mandated in the
legislation is completed. Her bill would also protect properties that have been
grandfathered in at lower rates.

Floridians hold 37 percent of flood insurance policies nationwide, more than 2
million, according to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

There were 142,757 flood insurance policies in Pinellas County as of April 1 and
69,820 in Hillsborough County, according to FEMA. About 35 percent of Pinellas
flood insurance policies and 21 percent in Hillsborough are subsidized.

Most people who buy flood insurance policies do so because their lenders require
it, Cole said.

"I hear frequently from a client that 'I only owe $5,000 on a house, and I want
to get rid of my $1,500 flood policy," he said.

Flood insurance can range in price from a few hundred to several thousand
dollars, depending on a home's location, age and other risk factors.

"A big issue is that rates can vary depending on the height the first floor is
above the flood level, which means some homes might have a $300 policy and
another nearby might be $1,500," Cole said.

The federal government began providing flood insurance in the late-1960s because
most private insurers would not offer it, but it is sold by private insurance
agents.

Homeowners in lower-risk areas aren't required to buy flood coverage, which is
not included in homeowner's insurance.

Cole has been writing flood protection since the federal program started. His
customers are alarmed by the increasing rates.

"People see the rates going up and they are afraid of what will happen," Cole
said.

Residents in waterfront communities such as Shore Acres in St. Petersburg could
face a dilemma if their premiums increasedrastically.

Streets in the neighborhood flood during prolonged afternoon thunderstorms, and
many homes have flooded during tropical storms in recent years. Many residents
wouldn't be able to afford a major hike in flood insurance rates, said Patti
Cook, a former neighborhood association president.

"Even though the economy, I feel, is coming back somewhat, people just can't
afford to pay that," she said.

"So I would think you'd see a lot more for-sale signs in Shore Acres."

Although it has been decades since the Tampa Bay area has taken a direct hit by
a major hurricane, drenching storms such as Tropical Storm Debby last summer
illustrate the risks flooding poses.

It wasn't only waterfront towns such as Pass-a-Grille that were submerged by
storm surge; some inland areas were under a foot of rainwater.

"That produces the most damage and kills the majority of people, not the wind;
it's the water," said Dennis Feltgen, a spokesman for the National Hurricane
Center in Miami.

Although homeowners outside flood-prone areas may not be required by their
lenders to buy flood insurance, they run a great risk by not doing so, said Tom
Iovino, a spokesman for Pinellas County Emergency Management.

Floodwaters can quickly turn streets into rivers, inundate homes, destroy
personal belongings and displace families.

Finding out a homeowner's policy wouldn't cover a family's losses would be
devastating, Iovino said.

"Not only have they lost everything, but now they're not going to get
reimbursed," he said.

jboatwright@tampatrib.com

(727) 215-1277

tjackovics@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7817

Information from The Associated Press was used in this report.

Copyright © 2013, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 54 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            Barry And District News

                            April 12, 2008 Saturday

Floods: Advice and guidance

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 530 words


FOLLOWING the serious flooding that hit parts of Barry and other areas of the UK
last summer, the Environment Agency has launched three simple flooding guides
that offer crucial advice on how to protect your home and family - before,
during and after flooding.

A total of 28 properties in Barry were flooded last July, including schools,
homes and businesses when flash-floods struck the town.

And with climate change likely to increase the risk of extreme weather events
and floods, the guides form an essential part of the Environment Agency's
ongoing Flood Awareness Campaign.

The campaign urges every household and business to check their flood risk by
calling Floodline on 0845 9881188 or using the online postcode checker at
www.environment-agency.gov.uk/flood More than 170,000 homes and businesses are
situated in areas at risk of coastal or river flooding in Wales.

Even those properties not at risk of river or coastal flooding can still be
affected by surface water flooding, in cases where drainage systems are unable
to deal with intense rainfall - as happened in Barry last year.

With an estimated £12.4 billion worth of property, transport infrastructure and
other assets at risk from flooding in Wales - not to mention the personal cost
in terms of damaged possessions and irreplaceable memories - flooding can have a
devastating impact on people's lives.

The new Environment Agency guides outline the steps to take in advance of,
during and after flooding, to minimise this damage and disruption and keep your
family safe.

The three guides are: (BLOB) Preparing for a flood - Practical advice on what to
do to protect your home and family, including how to create a flood plan,
prepare a flood kit of essential items, and lists of key contacts. It explains
flood warning codes, outlining what action should be taken when a flood happens
and gives advice on how you can minimise flood water entering your property.

(BLOB) During a flood - Advice on how to stay safe and what to do in a flood,
how to protect your possessions, utilising your flood kit and what to do in an
evacuation.

(BLOB) After a flood - Guidance on how to recover following a flood, including
what to do on returning to your property, clearing up, dealing with an insurance
claim and finding temporary housing. It also contains essential information to
ensure your home is protected from future flooding.

Environment Agency Wales Flood Awareness Campaign Co-ordinator Aled Hughes said:
"The extreme rainfall that we saw in 2007 is likely to become more frequent as
we feel the increasing effects of climate change.

"People should not assume that because their property has not flooded in the
past, it will not flood in the future.

"It is imperative that we raise awareness of flood risk, enabling people to put
measures in place to prepare for flooding and to take the appropriate action to
minimise the effects if it occurs.

"People must be prepared for floods and know what to do if the worst happens,"
he added.

For information about how to prepare for flooding and to obtain copies of the
Environment Agency's three flooding guides visit
www.environment-agency.gov.uk/flood or call Floodline 0845 988 1188.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 NewsQuest Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 55 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                             Kidderminster Shuttle

                             April 14, 2008 Monday

Flood advice guides launched

SECTION: KIDDER NEWS LATEST

LENGTH: 456 words


WITH climate change likely to increase the risk of extreme weather events and
floods, the Environment Agency has launched three simple flooding guides
offering crucial advice on how to protect homes and families before, during and
after flooding.

The guides are part of the agency's Flood Awareness Campaign, which urges every
household and business to check their flood risk by calling Floodline on 0845
9881188 or using the online postcode checker at
www.environment-agency.gov.uk/flood .

More than 2.2 million homes are situated in areas at risk of coastal or river
flooding in England and Wales and even those properties not at risk of river or
coastal flooding can still be affected by surface water flooding in cases where
drainage systems are unable to deal with intense rainfall.

With an estimated £1 billion being spent repairing damage caused by flooding
annually - not to mention the personal cost in terms of damaged possessions and
irreplaceable memories - flooding can have a devastating impact on people's
lives.

The Environment Agency guides outline the steps to take before, during and after
flooding, to minimise the damage and disruption and keep families safe.

The three guides are: Preparing for a flood - The guide contains practical
advice on what to do to protect the home and family, including how to create a
flood plan, prepare a flood kit of essential items and lists of key contacts. It
explains the different flood warning codes, outlining what action should be
taken when a flood happens and gives advice on what you can do to minimise flood
water entering properties.

During a flood - Offering advice on how to stay safe and what to do in a flood,
the publication indicates what steps should be taken in an emergency, how to
protect possessions, utilising flood kit and what to do in an evacuation.

After a flood - Providing guidance on how to recover following a flood,
including what to do on returning to your property, clearing up after a flood,
dealing with an insurance claim and finding temporary housing. It also contains
essential information to ensure homes are protected from future flooding.

Environment Agency West Area flood risk manager, Anthony Perry, said: "People
must be prepared for floods and know what to do if the worst happens.

"We strongly advise that every household in a flood risk area has their own plan
of action that can be quickly put in place during a flood emergency. All
households should read our three new flooding guides as, in many cases,
preparation makes a big difference."

For further information about how to prepare for flooding and to obtain copies
of the Environment Agency's three flooding guides visit
www.environment-agency.gov.uk/flood or call Floodline 0845 988 1188.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 NewsQuest Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 56 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                            November 16, 1998 Monday
                                  Late Edition

Flood cover on the way - at a price

BYLINE: DAMIEN MURPHY

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 516 words


The NRMA will become Australia's first insurance company to offer flood cover
after the outcry over insurers' refusal to pay victims of the Wollongong storms.

But people in flood-prone properties can expect to pay as much as $3,000 a year
- six times the average premium for a home-and-contents policy.

Australian insurers have never offered flood coverage, but the NRMA is confident
policy holders will be able to insure against flood damage next year.

It is assembling a team to identify flood-susceptible areas so flood premiums
can be set in much the same way that burglary policies are calculated, according
to the risk of the suburb.

The plan will be unveiled today at a meeting of major insurers called by the
Insurance Council of Australia to discuss the industry's direction in the wake
of storms and floods in Wollongong and Coffs Harbour.

The NRMA chief executive officer, Mr Eric Dodd, said the company was determined
to ensure customers were never again placed in the position of some of the
Wollongong and Coffs Harbour victims.

"There are good reasons why most home insurance policies cover storm damage but
not flood damage - not least being the responsibility of governments and local
councils for proper flood planning," he said.

"But the financial future of families whose homes have been wrecked by freak
weather should not hinge on fine definitions of flood and storm.

"For people who live in high-risk areas the cost of flood cover will be
substantial. But the price of flood insurance will also put pressure on
governments to invest in flood mitigation works. If they can reduce the risk we
can reduce the premium."

Australian insurance companies have resisted calls to provide flood cover for
years, even though it is offered by parent companies in England.

The Wollongong floods turned into a public relations disaster for insurance
companies which, despite record profits, refused to pay storm victims.

After the public outcry, three companies - the NRMA, GIO and Royal & Sun
Alliance - have agreed to pay storm victims. Other insurance firms, such as NZI,
FAI, MMI, Mercantile Mutual, Commonwealth Connect, CIC and Commercial Union,
have not done so.

There were few strings attached to the NRMA payment but its bigger rival, GIO,
decided against making ex gratia payments to victims to avoid setting a
precedent on paying flood damage.

Mr Dodd said the NRMA board of management had asked its research team to make
recommendations on flood cover by February.

A team of insurance underwriters, engineers and urban planners has started
investigating risk rating methodologies for flood-prone areas in Sydney and
major regional centres.

Mr Dodd said that apart from traditional opposition to flood cover, the lack of
reliable and readily accessible information on the relative risk of different
sites was another major reason insurers had been reluctant to offer cover.

"With the assistance of State and local authorities, the project team will
assemble a data base on flood risk that will assist us in offering coverage at
price that reflects the risk faced by individual customers," he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 1998 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 57 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                                  COURIER-MAIL

                           January 26, 1994 Wednesday

'IT WILL HAPPEN AGAIN'

SOURCE: QNP

BYLINE: JOHNSON R

LENGTH: 950 words


KEYWORD-HIT By BOB JOHNSON T WENTY years on from the great Australia Day flood
the question m ust be asked _ can it happen again? The short answer is yes. The
harder questions to answer are ""when?" and ""how bad will it be?". Engineers
and weather experts agree that south-east Queensland will again experience the
kind of heavy _ and perhaps much, much heavier _ rainfall which brought the 1974
flood and the floods of 1893. It may happen more than once. What will happen
then? Will suburban pockets in areas such as Jindalee, Graceville, Yeronga,
Oxley, Indooroopilly , Milton, Goodna and Ipswich see flood levels as high as,
or even higher than, 1974? Will new suburbs developed since 1974 on land only
marginally flooded then or just out of that flood's harm be safe in a bigger or
different flood? Could South Bank Parklands, the Queensland Cultural Centre, the
new Brisbane Convention Centre, be affected? Retired engineer Geoff Cossins has
had a lifetime's involvement with the Brisbane River _ and has no doubt that big
floods will come again. ""It is simply a matter of getting a big enough
rainstorm," he said. ""The two dams (Somerset and Wivenhoe) can only take the
top off such a flood that this kind of rain will cause." Queensland weather
bureau director Rex Falls is also in no doubt that a future deluge could be more
severe than that of 1974 or 1893. He said the bureau, using improved methods of
calculating rainfall predictions, recently had increased by 10-20 per cent the
possible maximum rainfall levels for the Brisbane River catchment areas. Mr
Falls said that, before the Wivenhoe Dam, floods of the size of those in 1974
and 1893 were a ""one in 50 years event". He said the dams' capacity to store
flood runoff from the Stanley and Brisbane rivers meant that such floods in the
Brisbane River were now considered a ""one in 400 years event". But such rain
would have a similar effect on Brisbane creeks as the 1974 rain, particularly
because of the increased urbanisation in the past 20 years. Mr Falls is also
concerned for Ipswich, where the flood mitigation measures of the Somerset and
Wivenhoe dams have had no effect. ""The Bremer River, with its high water
velocities, has great flood potential," he said. Former Brisbane lord mayor Clem
Jones, who was running the city at the time of the 1974 flood, believes that
with similar rainfall in circumstances similar to 1974 the city would not have
the same flooding. ""But it must be recognised that intense rainfall in other
circumstances could cause a flood problem," Mr Jones said. He was worried that
with such rainfall the city's waterways might not be in a condition to cope with
the runoff and similar flooding could occur. Geoff Cossins was on the team which
designed and built the Somerset Dam on the Stanley River just above its junction
with the Brisbane River 50 years ago. He was with the Brisbane City Council for
35 years and at the time of the 1974 flood was the engineer in charge of the
dam. In a paper presented last year to the Institution of Engineers, he said
that half the total catchment of the Brisbane River was downstream of the
Somerset and Wivenhoe dams and rain in this area could cause a significant flood
peak in urban areas. ""The two dams are operated to add as little water as poss
ible to the peak of unregulated flood in the urban areas consistent with not
overflowing the dams or causing damage to them," he said. ""It is therefore
inevitable, in a big enough storm, that some water will have to be discharged on
to the peak of the unregulated catchment flood to prevent the dams being
overtopped. ""If the storm is big enough, the resultant flood peak in Brisbane
will exceed both the actual 1893 and 1974 levels and can go much higher." Mr
Cossins said that, because of the two dams and other flood mitigation, future
generations would experience only one-third of the floods of the past which
caused damage in Brisbane _ but he warned it would become increasingly difficult
to persuade the community of the possibility of a rare, devastating flood. ""The
major problem will still remain of arousing the community from its collective
complacency about the possibility of rare very high floods and the further
problem of getting them to respond to the lengthy advance flood warnings that
will be available," he said. ""It will be possible to warn anyone 24 hours in
advance of the flooding of their property. ""The problem remains whether it will
be possible to get people to respond to a flood warning when no one in the
community has ever experienced a flood, let alone a devastating flood." Mr
Cossins said that, contrary to popular opinion, the forecasting of the 1974
flood levels had been extremely accurate after the first two days of confusion.
""These forecasts were not made available to the public as a result of a high
administrative decision," he said. ""It is understood that the theory behind
this decision was that if the public knew what was going to happen they would
panic. Studies carried out by social scientists in disaster situations have
shown that this theory is not tenable." The warnings by Geoff Cossins, Rex Falls
and Clem Jones do not paint a rosy picture for a flood-free future for Brisbane.
Certainly the prospect is not as bad as it was before the Somerset and Wivenhoe
dams. And the warning systems and the relief and rescue plans are well developed
as a result of the 1974 experience. But there seems no doubt about the answer to
the first question _ it can happen again. ""How bad?" has to be answered: ""It
could be very bad." The ""when" is a little more difficult _ in 100 years, in 10
years, next year, next month, next week?

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PIC OF A FAMILY AND THE RUINS OF THEIR HOME AFTER THE 74 FLOODWATERS
RECEDED

JOURNAL-CODE: CML

                   Copyright 1994 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                          FOCUS - 58 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                 Yorkshire Post

                           January 24, 2018 Wednesday

The Flood Company to the rescue

LENGTH: 636  words


A firm designing flood mitigation products is looking to target more commercial
work as businesses look to protect their factories, offices and warehouses.

The Flood Company, based in Elland, says it has seen growth spike in recent
years due to the end-to-end services it provides from conducting flood risk
surveys to bespoke barriers.

The Boxing Day floods of 2015 have led to Yorkshire businesses being more aware
of risks, says James Ruddiman, sales director at the family-run company.

Floods are also becoming more frequent due to climate change and towns and
cities getting bigger - leading to more building on flood plains, Mr Ruddiman
said.

He told The Yorkshire Post: "We see us moving more towards the commercial side
of the market. We were traditionally residential but we see growth in the
commercial side of our product range."

The firm, which was only established six years ago, has added a range of new
innovative products such as steel gates to cater for the commercial market.

Manufacturers are quite receptive to the idea of flood proofing their premises,
according to Mr Ruddiman, as they usually have high value assets.

Firms carrying perishable goods are also increasingly looking to mitigate
against extreme weather events as are businesses who normally rely on a constant
flow of customer traffic such as pubs.

Mr Ruddiman said: "Pubs are quite common for us because flooding prevents them
from having punters for a significant period of time.

"Most businesses need to get up and running pretty quick but companies that rely
on that constant flow of customers is quite a strong area for demand."

The Flood Company was started out of the Ruddiman family home. The idea for the
business came while Mr Ruddiman's brother and father were running a
dehumidifying service.

Mr Ruddiman said: "The Flood Company was started by my dad Tony Ruddiman and my
brother Luke Ruddiman.

"They started off a business drying out properties after they'd been flooded.
What they found was that they were constantly asked by customers if they could
help prevent this happening again. My brother is the innovator behind these
products. He went away and started innovating flood mitigation products.

"We found that there was more demand for the flood mitigation than for drying
properties out."

The Flood Company moved into a premises in Elland last year, right next to the
river and a stone's throw from Elland Bridge which was destroyed in the Boxing
Day flood in 2015.  When the firm first moved in it was unable to obtain flood
insurance. However, it decided to put its money where its mouth is by putting in
its own flood mitigation systems.

Mr Ruddiman said: "The property is right next to the river in a high flood risk
zone but what we did was we installed our flood mitigation products around the
building.

"We were not able to get flood insurance when we first took on the property but
once we'd installed all of these flood mitigation products we did a survey of
the building which we entered to our insurer.

"They were then able to get us flood insurance with an excess of only £350,
which is very good for something that was previously not insurable."

Wealth of expertise

James Ruddiman previously worked as a foreign exchange trader for the Bank of
Tokyo in London.

He recently returned to Yorkshire to bring his finance expertise to the family
firm.

His brother Luke previously worked as a plumber for a local company. James
Ruddiman said: "He was a commercial plumber working with kitchens and ovens
across the country. My dad Tony Ruddiman has had a number of businesses in the
Huddersfield area from furniture to mobile phones."

The Flood Company designs its own products. They are then manufactured in the
UK.

"We install the products and then maintain them so we provide a full service,"
says Mr Ruddiman.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NLYP


                       Copyright 2018 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 59 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                 Yorkshire Post

                           January 24, 2018 Wednesday

The Flood Company to the rescue

LENGTH: 636  words


A firm designing flood mitigation products is looking to target more commercial
work as businesses look to protect their factories, offices and warehouses.

The Flood Company, based in Elland, says it has seen growth spike in recent
years due to the end-to-end services it provides from conducting flood risk
surveys to bespoke barriers.

The Boxing Day floods of 2015 have led to Yorkshire businesses being more aware
of risks, says James Ruddiman, sales director at the family-run company.

Floods are also becoming more frequent due to climate change and towns and
cities getting bigger - leading to more building on flood plains, Mr Ruddiman
said.

He told The Yorkshire Post: "We see us moving more towards the commercial side
of the market. We were traditionally residential but we see growth in the
commercial side of our product range."

The firm, which was only established six years ago, has added a range of new
innovative products such as steel gates to cater for the commercial market.

Manufacturers are quite receptive to the idea of flood proofing their premises,
according to Mr Ruddiman, as they usually have high value assets.

Firms carrying perishable goods are also increasingly looking to mitigate
against extreme weather events as are businesses who normally rely on a constant
flow of customer traffic such as pubs.

Mr Ruddiman said: "Pubs are quite common for us because flooding prevents them
from having punters for a significant period of time.

"Most businesses need to get up and running pretty quick but companies that rely
on that constant flow of customers is quite a strong area for demand."

The Flood Company was started out of the Ruddiman family home. The idea for the
business came while Mr Ruddiman's brother and father were running a
dehumidifying service.

Mr Ruddiman said: "The Flood Company was started by my dad Tony Ruddiman and my
brother Luke Ruddiman.

"They started off a business drying out properties after they'd been flooded.
What they found was that they were constantly asked by customers if they could
help prevent this happening again. My brother is the innovator behind these
products. He went away and started innovating flood mitigation products.

"We found that there was more demand for the flood mitigation than for drying
properties out."

The Flood Company moved into a premises in Elland last year, right next to the
river and a stone's throw from Elland Bridge which was destroyed in the Boxing
Day flood in 2015.  When the firm first moved in it was unable to obtain flood
insurance. However, it decided to put its money where its mouth is by putting in
its own flood mitigation systems.

Mr Ruddiman said: "The property is right next to the river in a high flood risk
zone but what we did was we installed our flood mitigation products around the
building.

"We were not able to get flood insurance when we first took on the property but
once we'd installed all of these flood mitigation products we did a survey of
the building which we entered to our insurer.

"They were then able to get us flood insurance with an excess of only £350,
which is very good for something that was previously not insurable."

Wealth of expertise

James Ruddiman previously worked as a foreign exchange trader for the Bank of
Tokyo in London.

He recently returned to Yorkshire to bring his finance expertise to the family
firm.

His brother Luke previously worked as a plumber for a local company. James
Ruddiman said: "He was a commercial plumber working with kitchens and ovens
across the country. My dad Tony Ruddiman has had a number of businesses in the
Huddersfield area from furniture to mobile phones."

The Flood Company designs its own products. They are then manufactured in the
UK.

"We install the products and then maintain them so we provide a full service,"
says Mr Ruddiman.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NLYP


                       Copyright 2018 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 60 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                     The Daily Item (Sunbury, Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            November 3, 2009 Tuesday

City's flood system study delayed

BYLINE: Amanda O'Rourke, The Daily Item, Sunbury, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 708 words


Nov. 3--SUNBURY -- Completion of a Federal Emergency Management Agency-mandated
study of the city's flood protection system has been delayed by the weather.

Greg Wilt, assistant general manager and flood department manager of the Sunbury
Municipal Authority, said engineers from the U.S. Army Corps expected to
complete the study by the Oct. 23 deadline, but rainy weather through the month
kept Susquehanna River levels up, delaying the deflation of the Adam T. Bower
Memorial Dam and preventing engineers from inspecting sump wells in the flood
protection system's pump stations.

These inspections are expected to be complete by the third week of November,
Wilt said, when river levels drop to about 8 feet, and the Army Corps intends to
issue its final report to FEMA by mid-2010.

"What it appears to me is it's going to take FEMA 18 months for them to revise
the (flood) maps and put into effect new flood insurance rates," Wilt said. "So
there is sufficient time for the Army Corps to complete the study."

He based this on communication he received from FEMA that indicated an 18-month
time lag before the issuance of new flood maps.

In the meantime, the city's flood protection system remains certified, Wilt
said, and flood insurance rates in the city remain unchanged.

Attempts to confirm this independently through FEMA were unsuccessful Monday.

FEMA requires municipalities like Sunbury that operate and maintain state or
federal flood protection levees and floodwalls designed for 100-year flood
protection to certify that the structures provide that level of protection. The
certification is part of the work to modernize federal flood maps.

The agency notified the city in August 2007 that a study of its flood protection
system must be performed in order for the system to be certified. If the system
meets FEMA standards, it stays on the agency's flood maps and flood insurance
rates stay the same.

The levee certification process includes a comprehensive engineering study of
the flood protection system, including a hydrologic/hydraulic study that
incorporates new development in the area; an analysis evaluating the structural
stability of the levees and the floodwall during the design flow; an evaluation
of potential seepage; and potential settlement of the levees and floodwall.

If the Sunbury flood protection system is not certified by the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, the new FEMA flood insurance maps will designate the areas behind
the levee and floodwall as being flood-prone, which would significantly increase
the cost of flood insurance for residents, particularly for those buying homes
with government-backed loans.

Wilt said he has received no feedback from the Army Corps regarding how the
flood protection system is faring throughout the months-long review process.

"It's very possible the report could indicate a deficiency which would need to
be addressed. I'd be surprised if there isn't something that needs fine-tuned or
adjusted in a 60-year-old system," he said. "But I'm not really very concerned
at this point because we do have a very good system that is well maintained and
well recognized for its level of maintenance and operation."

The estimated cost of the study hovers at $660,000, with 75 percent of that
being paid by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers through a combination of funds
from the American Recovery and Investment Act of 2009 and the Omnibus
Appropriations Act of 2009.

Half of the remaining 25 percent has been picked up by the state Department of
Environmental Protection, with the final 12.5 percent expected to be provided
locally.

With no final bill for how much the study will cost, Wilt said it has not been
determined how the local funding obligation, originally estimated to be about
$82,500, will be met.

Mayor Jesse C. Woodring did not return a phone call Monday about the issue.

To see more of The Daily Item or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.dailyitem.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, The Daily Item, Sunbury, Pa.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20091103-DN-City-s-flood-system-study-delayed-1103

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DN


                                 Copyright 2009


                          FOCUS - 61 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                  Stock & Land

                            April 24, 2014 Thursday

VICTORIAN graingrowers generally crave rain, but as

BYLINE: GREGOR HEARD

SECTION: FEATURE 1; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 419 words


VICTORIAN graingrowers generally crave rain, but as with anything to do with the
Australian climate, there's often too much of a good thing.

Famous floods are remembered through the generations, and even though annual
rainfall appears to be declining, Mother Nature still has a trick or two up her
sleeve, as the 2011 floods proved.

Just before Stock & Land's time, the 1909 floods are still spoken about in
hushed tones across the State.

Places along the coast such as Port Fairy resembled the neighbouring sea, while
inland rivers such as the Wimmera and Loddon had one-in-a-100-year floods,
according to Flood Victoria.

Immediately after World War II, Western District residents were hard hit by
another one-in-100-year flood along the Glenelg River.

The 1950s and 1970s were also wet decades, with frequent floods right across the
State.

One heavy rain that led to floods that was probably more welcomed than others
was the 1983 flood.

Hot on the heels of shocking drought and the horrors of Ash Wednesday, a La Nina
weather pattern settled in through 1983, causing heavy rain and flooding, but
also replenishing diminished water reserves in many areas.

The style of floods across Victoria has varied as dramatically as the landscape.

In the north-east, floods on fast flowing rivers such as the Ovens, King and
Mitta Mitta are common, caused by the high rainfall in these areas, but disperse
quickly.

Contrasting to this are the fascinating inland river systems such as the Avoca
and Wimmera Rivers, which, due to the flat topography, can spill out to cover
many kilometres with a shallow pool of water.

Such an event occurred on the Avoca during the 2011 floods, when it was
estimated the flood waters covered more than 40 kilometres east to west with 50
millimetres of water.

Although immensely damaging in terms of farm infrastructure, the floods play a
critical role in filling ephemeral swamps and lakes with water and boosting
water levels in man-made storages.

Systems such as the famous Barmah Forest and the bird haven of the Kerang Lakes
are reliant on flood waters for their health.

An interesting by-product of human interaction with the environment has been the
change in flood patterns.

During the record-breaking 2011 floods, flood managers noticed the floodwaters
behaving markedly differently to how they had during previous floods.

Water went in areas it didn't go in other floods and didn't flood areas it
formerly did, all because of subtle changes such as a removal of a culvert here
or a filled dam there.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2014 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 62 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Trust (Abuja)

                             July 26, 2011 Tuesday

The Flood Menace [analysis]

LENGTH: 685  words


The rainy season is upon us and it has, again, brought floods in its wake.
Several states have been affected by the floods, bringing to the fore once again
their scourge in different parts of the country. Lagos has been particularly hit
by the disaster this year. According to estimates, the amount of rain that would
normally be recorded for a whole month fell in one day this month in Lagos, with
devastating consequences. Economic and social activities were disrupted; many
people were marooned in their homes unable to go out while those who ventured
out found the roads impassable. Some lost their lives in the process. Many
houses were flooded resulting in the loss of property.

Last year floods wreaked havoc in Sokoto and Jigawa states and the victims are
still counting their losses. In the case of Jigawa state, heavy rains led to
floods blamed on the opening of the floodgates of two swollen dams in
neighbouring Kano state-the Challawa and Tiga. Water from these rivers spilled
over into Jigawa state, submerging many villages and farmlands. Many lives were
lost and thousands were rendered homeless. Similarly the Goronyo dam in Sokoto
State overflowed as a result of heavy rainfall, wreaking havoc, including loss
of lives, destruction of farmlands, roads and bridges in its immediate environs.
In an attempt to avoid another flood disaster in the area, the Sokoto Rima River
Basin Development Authority warned those living in the flood plains of Goronyo
dam about the impending floods. The impact of the impending floods would be
mitigated if the local authorities follow up the warning with mandatory
evacuations. A longer term solution to the problem would be resettling people in
areas less prone to floods and discourage people from building houses on flood
plains.

While nothing can reasonably be done about heavy rains, states can however take
preventive measures and be better prepared for floods when they occur. In the
case of Lagos, dumping of refuse in canals and blocking of drains have long been
a major cause of floods in that city. If residents stopped dumping garbage into
canals, this would reduce the impact of floods. An effective system of garbage
disposal in Lagos could go a long way in preventing the dumping of refuse into
canals. The government should intensify efforts at clearing blocked drains. Lack
of proper town planning, or enforcing existing building codes, is also a
problem. Many houses were built directly along waterways and canals, making them
prone to flooding. Such structures should be removed. Without the political will
to do so, the situation will continue unabated. Ideally, Lagos is desperately in
need of a massive programme of urban renewal, given the decades of
infrastructure decay in the city. Despite the efforts of the Lagos state
government to transform Lagos, there are huge challenges to be surmounted if it
is to become much more user-friendly than it is presently. Rising sea levels
attributed to global warming has also been a factor contributing to floods in
Lagos, as is land reclamation.

All over the country governments' response to flood disasters has tended to be
inadequate. There is a need for early warning by state authorities in order to
minimise damage caused by floods. Although the Lagos state government had warned
residents in flood-prone areas to relocate before the latest floods, it is
difficult for people to move at short notice for lack of an alternative. The
Nigerian Meteorological Service should endeavour to give as accurate weather
forecasts as it can possibly give so as to alert Nigerians to take the necessary
precautions. An enlightenment campaign is required to sensitise people about the
dangers of floods. Above all victims of flood should not be abandoned;
government should endeavour to assist them in getting them back to normal life.
Since it is now clear that some parts of the country are prone to annual floods,
it behoves the Nigerian authorities and citizens alike to take precautionary
measures at the onset of the rainy season so as to minimise the damage done in
the event that it leads to floods.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 63 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               The Wimmera Farmer

                             July 20, 2017 Thursday
                                Internet Edition

New flood guides for Horsham, Natimuk

BYLINE: Erin Witmitz

LENGTH: 359 words


HORSHAM and Natimuk residents will be more prepared to deal with floods after
the State Emergency Service released new guides.

Service community resilience co-ordinator Melissa Douglas said the guides were
created to ensure the community was as prepared as possible for a flood.

"Many people have lived through floods before or they live near rivers, so it's
good for them to know that the information is out there," she said.

Ms Douglas said the SES developed guides across the state following the 2011
floods.

"We also worked with the Wimmera Catchment Management Authority, which have done
flood studies, and therefore we can get new information about things like water
heights," she said.

Assistance chief officer Stephen Warren said in the next few months, SES
volunteers would door-knock known high flood-risk homes and businesses in
Horsham and Natimuk to present the flood guides.

"Residents are encouraged to talk with volunteers during the door-knocks to
learn how they can be prepared when there are flood warnings and to also share
their past flood experiences," he said.

"The door-knocks aim to provide an opportunity to learn about or share
experiences of flood risk as it relates to people's home and property."

Mr Warren said a little preparation in homes could go a long way.

"We all need to take responsibility for our safety and learn the flood risks,"
he said.

"Flood water is the biggest killer of adults in Australian waters, it's not just
drowning that kills."

The SES also worked with Horsham Rural City Council to develop a municipal flood
emergency plan.

This plan captures the roles of all agencies in preparing for, responding to and
recovering from flood events within the municipality.

"This emergency plan is greatly supported by residents understanding their own
flood risk and ensuring they are ready for floods or any emergency," Mr Warren
said.

"This also takes the pressure off emergency services to reduce the need to
respond to incidents that could have been prevented."

Mr Warren said copies of the flood guides would be available at Horsham Rural
City Council offices, information centres and on the SES website
www.ses.vic.gov.au.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 64 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              India Insurance News

                      August 30, 2014 Saturday 6:30 AM EST

Gulf Coast Educators Insurance Dispels Flood Insurance Myths

LENGTH: 407  words


Aug. 30 -- US-based Gulf Coast Educators Insurance issued the following news
release:

Most Florida residents are well exposed to hurricane preparedness information
during hurricane season. One of the top items is to have adequate home owners
insurance. However, experience from past hurricane disasters forget to mention
the importance of flood insurance and how it is separate from property insurance
policies.

"If a Florida homeowner doesn't have Flood Insurance, standard insurance
policies do not cover damage from storm surge or heavy rains from a flood
related weather event, which means that they will be responsible for the entire
cost of repair from flood damage and thus puts them at risk for financial
hardship," states Ron DeFreitas, owner/operator of Gulf Coast Educators
Insurance.

Floods are actually the most common natural disaster in the United States. Many
Florida homeowners are under the impression that if their home gets flooded,
that federal disaster assistance will pay for the damages. "Federal disaster
assistance typically is a low interest loan that helps cover damage costs, and
not compensation for your losses. Additionally, those loans are only available
if the president formally declares a disaster and it must be repaid," adds
DeFreitas.

Another frequently asked question is if homeowners need flood insurance if they
live in a low-risk flood zone. While flood insurance is not federally required,
anyone can be vulnerable to flooding. According to Floodsmart.gov, 25% of all
National Flood Insurance Program claims are from people mapped outside of
high-risk flood areas.

Florida property owners are also subject to flood zone map changes. Flood risk
can, and does, change over time. These changes happen because of new
developments, changes in levees, and environmental changes. If consumers are
uncertain of what zone their home or apartment resides, it is recommended that
they call Gulf Coast Educators Insurance so that they are aware of their flood
risk and find out when new flood maps will be available.

Some floods are not always a disaster and can be the result of broken sewer
lines or a rainstorm. If these cases, federal assistance flood insurance will
not cover a homeowners damage. "There is a 30-day waiting period before a flood
insurance policy becomes effective, so it's important to talk with a trusted
insurance agent as soon as possible," says DeFreitas.

Source: Gulf Coast Educators Insurance

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2014 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 65 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 16, 2018 Tuesday
                                Ontario Edition

OPINION;
How we can better mitigate flood risk

BYLINE: GLEN HODGSON

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 864 words


The scenes last year of wide spread flooding in Quebec, the Ottawa region and
then the "500-year flood" in Houston were stark reminders of the risks - and
massive human and physical costs - of these natural disasters.

Up to 10 per cent of Canadians live in high-risk flood zones. They live in
floodplains, urban areas with inadequate storm-water drainage or in lowlying
coastal areas subject to saltwater inundation.

Mapping of flood risk in Canada is inconsistent and may not be widely available.
Many property owners have chosen to live or work in these areas based on
inadequate and incomplete historical information. While mapping is improving
today with more sophisticated technology, risk mapping and flood-risk
information are not managed or distributed under an integrated system.

How is flood risk managed?

Today, it is a combination of public, private and personal risk management. This
is still a nascent market for insurers, who have begun to offer flood coverage
in Canada over the past two years. Properties in high-risk flood zones are very
difficult to insure because of the exceptional risk and, if coverage is
available at all, the premiums are usually very expensive as a result.

The perceived availability of disaster relief - de facto free insurance coverage
- may deter atrisk property owners from seeking flood insurance in advance.

And flood risk is poorly understood by the general public - in a recent survey
by the University of Waterloo, only 6 per cent of Canadians surveyed were aware
they live in a designated floodrisk area.

Moreover, extreme weather related to climate change appears to be increasing the
frequency and severity of flooding events. This trend has enlarged existing
flood zones and even created new flood-prone areas previously thought to be
riskfree. It is hard to ignore the growing relationship between climate change
and the resulting impact of severe flooding events.

There is no easy fix for destruction and damage from flooding. The
responsibility and incentives for managing property development and for reducing
flood risks are not well aligned.

There are differences in property-development management practices between, and
even within, provinces. Local governments approve property development, and
receive development fees and property taxes. But they do not always assume
responsibility for landuse planning nor do they bear the full costs of flood
relief.

All orders of government incur costs during immediate disaster response.
Canadian government spending on floods and recovery has increased dramatically
since 2000, reaching a high of $2-billion in 2013-14.

Flood-recovery costs have been projected by the Parliamentary Budget Office to
remain high for the federal government, at $700million annually.

In short, Canada's system for managing flood risk is a patchwork, a legacy built
up over time. So where should we start improving the flood-risk management
system? A number of critical elements ought to be addressed.

RISK IDENTIFICATION AND AWARENESS

There is a vital need to raise the "flood-risk IQ" of Canadians through
education and regular communication on flood risk. A collaborative framework
might include a formal program of public education on the risk and costs of
flooding, and how it could be better managed.

RISK REDUCTION AND MITIGATION

Policy measures that could be designed and implemented in advance include:
Comprehensive mapping and information-sharing; Improved land-use planning and
building codes; Investment in flood-prevention infrastructure; Mitigation by
communities and property owners.

It should be emphasized that risk-reduction measures are a necessary, but not
sufficient, precondition for improved flood management. Even if all the elements
of risk reduction identified here are acted upon, some existing properties in
flood zones will remain at risk.

FINANCIAL-RISK MANAGEMENT

Although the insurance industry is increasing its capacity to provide flood
coverage, coverage is uneven and properties in highrisk flood zones are
difficult and expensive to insure. A publicprivate risk-sharing partnership (as
has been developed in other countries) that draws on the strengths of all
parties will likely be required to improve overall Canadian flood-risk
management, while also improving incentives for property owners to mitigate
their own specific flood risks. A U.S.-style system, in which the government
provides the high-risk flood coverage, but under-funds evenutal liabilities,
should be avoided, however.

DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND RECOVERY

It is reasonable to expect Canadian governments to aspire to best-in-class
practice for managing disasters, as is the case in many areas of public policy.
The ideal goal could be to build a coordinated and integrated panCanadian
response and recovery plan for floods and other potential disasters.

A national conversation on improved flood management has begun among Canadian
governments, the insurance industry, academics and think tanks and other
stakeholders.

This conversation is an important starting point, but much more analysis,
discussion, concrete decisions and action will be required if Canada is to
reduce the risks and improve the management of flooding.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2018 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 66 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 30, 2015 Monday

Arizona: Arizonans Need to be Prepared for Floods

LENGTH: 584  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Emergency and Military Affairs has issued the following news
release:

PHOENIX -- When most people think of Arizona, they don't imagine floodwaters
rushing down a residential street, overflowing retention basins, and shutting
down freeways. However, flooding occurs often in Arizona, between 40 and 100
times a year.

The summer of 2014 brought devastating floods to Arizona.  The rainfall on
September 8 totaled between three - six inches in some places. The floodwaters
roared into, and covered entire neighborhoods in water and closed down
Interstate 10.

The summer flood events reminded Arizonans that it does flood around the state,
and everyone needs to take steps to prepare themselves.

Flooding usually occurs at two speeds-slowly, as an overland flood, or rapidly
like in a flash flood.

Overland floods occur when waterways overflow their banks from excessive
rainfall or snow melt, or when a levee or dam breaks, flooding the surrounding
areas. Rainfall that exceeds the capacity of streets and drains can also cause
overland flooding.

While overland floods develop slowly, flash floods tend to develop in minutes,
sometimes with no warning. They can happen after a heavy rain, a sudden release
of water, or a dam or levee break. Flash floods are fast moving and carry debris
with their powerful currents.

Ken Waters is the Warning Coordination Meteorologist at the National Weather
Service (NWS) in Phoenix. He warns that flash floods can happen quickly and with
no notice. "Dry washes can be particularly dangerous with strong enough water
flow to pick up automobiles in only minutes," he said.  "Flash flooding can also
cause rock debris falls on winding mountain roads."

Preparation starts with knowing the flood hazards in your area. Be aware of the
places that are known to flood, like streams, low-lying ground and drainage
channels. Flood Smart (link is external) has interactive maps, information on
flood insurance and more.

As a flood can occur anywhere it rains, prepare for the potential of a flood.
Write a family communication plan (link is external) detailing what your family
should do during an emergency. Include multiple escape routes from your home, by
car and by foot. Practice evacuating with your family.

Prepare a 72-hour emergency supplies kit (link is external) for your family. The
kit should include enough food, water and supplies for each member of your
family. Be sure to include pets and any necessary medications.

Know the different flood terms. A Flood Watch means flooding is possible. The
NWS issues a Flash Flood Watch when flash flooding is possible and you should be
prepared to move to higher ground.

A Flood Warning means flooding is occurring or will occur soon; if advised to
evacuate, you should do so immediately. Flash flood Warnings mean a flash flood
is occurring and you should seek higher ground on foot immediately.

Waters reminds people to be alert to what is happening around them. "Pay
attention to cell phone alerts known as Wireless Emergency Alerts that can warn
of impending flash flooding conditions in your area," he said. "Don't cross
normally dry washes that have fast flowing water as you can't tell how deep the
water is."

If you must evacuate due to flooding, be aware of what is happening around you.
Do not walk or drive in moving water. You do not know how deep the water is or
what may be hiding underneath it.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 67 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 30, 2015 Monday

Arizona: Arizonans Need to be Prepared for Floods

LENGTH: 584  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Emergency and Military Affairs has issued the following news
release:

PHOENIX -- When most people think of Arizona, they don't imagine floodwaters
rushing down a residential street, overflowing retention basins, and shutting
down freeways. However, flooding occurs often in Arizona, between 40 and 100
times a year.

The summer of 2014 brought devastating floods to Arizona.  The rainfall on
September 8 totaled between three - six inches in some places. The floodwaters
roared into, and covered entire neighborhoods in water and closed down
Interstate 10.

The summer flood events reminded Arizonans that it does flood around the state,
and everyone needs to take steps to prepare themselves.

Flooding usually occurs at two speeds-slowly, as an overland flood, or rapidly
like in a flash flood.

Overland floods occur when waterways overflow their banks from excessive
rainfall or snow melt, or when a levee or dam breaks, flooding the surrounding
areas. Rainfall that exceeds the capacity of streets and drains can also cause
overland flooding.

While overland floods develop slowly, flash floods tend to develop in minutes,
sometimes with no warning. They can happen after a heavy rain, a sudden release
of water, or a dam or levee break. Flash floods are fast moving and carry debris
with their powerful currents.

Ken Waters is the Warning Coordination Meteorologist at the National Weather
Service (NWS) in Phoenix. He warns that flash floods can happen quickly and with
no notice. "Dry washes can be particularly dangerous with strong enough water
flow to pick up automobiles in only minutes," he said.  "Flash flooding can also
cause rock debris falls on winding mountain roads."

Preparation starts with knowing the flood hazards in your area. Be aware of the
places that are known to flood, like streams, low-lying ground and drainage
channels. Flood Smart (link is external) has interactive maps, information on
flood insurance and more.

As a flood can occur anywhere it rains, prepare for the potential of a flood.
Write a family communication plan (link is external) detailing what your family
should do during an emergency. Include multiple escape routes from your home, by
car and by foot. Practice evacuating with your family.

Prepare a 72-hour emergency supplies kit (link is external) for your family. The
kit should include enough food, water and supplies for each member of your
family. Be sure to include pets and any necessary medications.

Know the different flood terms. A Flood Watch means flooding is possible. The
NWS issues a Flash Flood Watch when flash flooding is possible and you should be
prepared to move to higher ground.

A Flood Warning means flooding is occurring or will occur soon; if advised to
evacuate, you should do so immediately. Flash flood Warnings mean a flash flood
is occurring and you should seek higher ground on foot immediately.

Waters reminds people to be alert to what is happening around them. "Pay
attention to cell phone alerts known as Wireless Emergency Alerts that can warn
of impending flash flooding conditions in your area," he said. "Don't cross
normally dry washes that have fast flowing water as you can't tell how deep the
water is."

If you must evacuate due to flooding, be aware of what is happening around you.
Do not walk or drive in moving water. You do not know how deep the water is or
what may be hiding underneath it.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 68 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Wimmera Mail-Times

                             July 20, 2017 Thursday
                                Internet Edition

New flood guides for Horsham, Natimuk

BYLINE: Erin Witmitz

LENGTH: 359 words


HORSHAM and Natimuk residents will be more prepared to deal with floods after
the State Emergency Service released new guides.

Service community resilience co-ordinator Melissa Douglas said the guides were
created to ensure the community was as prepared as possible for a flood.

"Many people have lived through floods before or they live near rivers, so it's
good for them to know that the information is out there," she said.

Ms Douglas said the SES developed guides across the state following the 2011
floods.

"We also worked with the Wimmera Catchment Management Authority, which have done
flood studies, and therefore we can get new information about things like water
heights," she said.

Assistance chief officer Stephen Warren said in the next few months, SES
volunteers would door-knock known high flood-risk homes and businesses in
Horsham and Natimuk to present the flood guides.

"Residents are encouraged to talk with volunteers during the door-knocks to
learn how they can be prepared when there are flood warnings and to also share
their past flood experiences," he said.

"The door-knocks aim to provide an opportunity to learn about or share
experiences of flood risk as it relates to people's home and property."

Mr Warren said a little preparation in homes could go a long way.

"We all need to take responsibility for our safety and learn the flood risks,"
he said.

"Flood water is the biggest killer of adults in Australian waters, it's not just
drowning that kills."

The SES also worked with Horsham Rural City Council to develop a municipal flood
emergency plan.

This plan captures the roles of all agencies in preparing for, responding to and
recovering from flood events within the municipality.

"This emergency plan is greatly supported by residents understanding their own
flood risk and ensuring they are ready for floods or any emergency," Mr Warren
said.

"This also takes the pressure off emergency services to reduce the need to
respond to incidents that could have been prevented."

Mr Warren said copies of the flood guides would be available at Horsham Rural
City Council offices, information centres and on the SES website
www.ses.vic.gov.au.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 69 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Wimmera Mail-Times

                              July 21, 2017 Friday
                           Print & Internet Editions

New flood guides for Horsham, Natimuk

BYLINE: Erin Witmitz

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 356 words


HORSHAM and Natimuk residents will be more prepared to deal with floods after
the State Emergency Service released new guides.

Service community resilience co-ordinator Melissa Douglas said the guides were
created to ensure the community was as prepared as possible for a flood.

"Many people have lived through floods before or they live near rivers, so it's
good for them to know that the information is out there," she said.

Ms Douglas said the SES developed guides across the state following the 2011
floods.

"We also worked with the Wimmera Catchment Management Authority, which have done
flood studies, and therefore we can get new information about things like water
heights," she said.

Assistance chief officer Stephen Warren said in the next few months, SES
volunteers would door-knock known high flood-risk homes and businesses in
Horsham and Natimuk to present the flood guides.

"Residents are encouraged to talk with volunteers during the door-knocks to
learn how they can be prepared when there are flood warnings and to also share
their past flood experiences," he said.

"The door-knocks aim to provide an opportunity to learn about or share
experiences of flood risk as it relates to people's home and property."

Mr Warren said a little preparation in homes could go a long way.

"We all need to take responsibility for our safety and learn the flood risks,"
he said.

"Flood water is the biggest killer of adults in Australian waters, it's not just
drowning that kills."

The SES also worked with Horsham Rural City Council to develop a municipal flood
emergency plan.

This plan captures the roles of all agencies in preparing for, responding to and
recovering from flood events within the municipality.

"This emergency plan is greatly supported by residents understanding their own
flood risk and ensuring they are ready for floods or any emergency," Mr Warren
said.

"This also takes the pressure off emergency services to reduce the need to
respond to incidents that could have been prevented."

Mr Warren said copies of the flood guides would be available at Horsham Rural
City Council offices, information centres and on the SES website.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2017 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 70 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 27, 2016 Tuesday

Regulatory update: United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission has issued Order
regarding (ML16300A199 ) Dresden Nuclear Power Station, Units 2 and 3 - Flood
Hazard Mitigating Strategies Assessment (CAC Nos. MF7921 and MF7922)

LENGTH: 3548  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission has issued the
following document:



 UNITED STATES

 NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION

 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20555-0001

 Mr. Bryan C. Hanson

 Senior Vice President

 Exelon Generation Company, LLC

 President and Chief Nuclear Officer

 Exelon Nuclear

 4300 Winfield Road

 Warrenville, IL 60555

 December 8, 2016

 SUBJECT: DRESDEN NUCLEAR POWER STATION, UNITS 2 AND 3 - FLOOD HAZARD

 MITIGATION STRATEGIES ASSESSMENT (CAC NOS. MF7921 AND MF7922)



 Dear Mr. Hanson:

 By letter dated March 12, 2012 (Agencywide Documents Access and Management
System

 (ADAMS) Accession No. ML 12053A340), the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
(NRC)

 issued a request for information to all power reactor licensees and holders of
construction

 permits in active or deferred status, pursuant to Title 10 of the Code of
Federal Regulations,

 Section 50.54(f), "Conditions of Licenses" (hereafter referred to as the
"50.54(f) letter"). The

 request was issued in connection with implementing lessons learned from the
2011 accident

 at the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant, as documented in the NRC's
Near-Term Task

 Force report (ADAMS Accession No. ML 111861807).

 Enclosure 2 to the 50.54(f) letter requested that licensees reevaluate flood
hazards for their

 sites using present-day methods and regulatory guidance used by the NRC staff
when

 reviewing applications for early site permits and combined licenses. Concurrent
with the

 reevaluation of flood hazards, licensees were required to develop and implement
mitigating

 strategies in accordance with NRC Order EA-12-049, "Order Modifying Licenses
with Regard

 to Requirements for Mitigation Strategies for Beyond-Design-Basis External
Events" (ADAMS

 Accession No. ML 12054A735). In order to proceed with implementation of Order
EA-12-049,

 licensees used the current licensing basis flood hazard or the most recent
flood hazard

 information, which may not be based on present-day methodologies and guidance,
in the

 development of their mitigating strategies.

 By letter dated June 30, 2016 (ADAMS Accession No. ML 16182A388), the Exelon
Generation

 Company, LLC (the licensee) submitted the flooding mitigation strategies
assessment (MSA) for

 Dresden Nuclear Power Station, Units 2 and 3 (Dresden). The MSAs are intended
to confirm

 that licensees have adequately addressed the reevaluated flooding hazards
within their

 mitigating strategies for beyond-design-basis external events. The purpose of
this letter is to

 provide the NRC's assessment of the Dresden MSA.

 B. Hanson - 2 -

 The NRC staff has concluded that the Dresden MSA was performed consistent with
the

 guidance described in Appendix G of NEI 12-06, Revision 2, as endorsed by Japan
LessonsLearned

 Division (JLD) Interim Staff Guidance {ISG) JLD-ISG-2012-01, Revision 1, and
that the

 licensee has demonstrated that the mitigation strategies are reasonably
protected from

 reevaluated flood hazard conditions. This closes out the NRC's efforts
associated with CAC

 Nos. MF7921 and MF7922.

 If you have any questions, please contact me at 301-415-6197 or at
Tekia.Govan@nrc.gov

 Enclosure:

 Staff Assessment Related to the

 Mitigating Strategies for Dresden

 Docket Nos. 50-237 and 50-249

 cc w/encl: Distribution via Listserv

 Sincerely,

 Jt ·o-v:¢k~

 Tekia Govan, Project Manager

 Hazards Management Branch

 Japan Lessons-Learned Division

 Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation

 STAFF ASSESSMENT BY THE OFFICE OF NUCLEAR REACTOR REGULATION

 RELATED TO MITIGATION STRATEGIES FOR DRESDEN NUCLEAR POWER STATION,

 UNITS 2 AND 3, AS A RESULT OF THE REEVALUATED FLOODING HAZARD NEAR-TERM

 TASK FORCE RECOMMENDATION 2.1 - FLOODING (CAC NOS. MF7921 AND MF7922)

 1.0 INTRODUCTION

 By letter dated March 12, 2012 (Agencywide Documents Access and Management
System

 (ADAMS) Accession No. ML 12053A340), the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
(NRC)

 issued a request for information to all power reactor licensees and holders of
construction

 permits in active or deferred status, pursuant to Title 1 O of the Code of
Federal Regulations

 (10 CFR), Section 50.54{f), "Conditions of Licenses" (hereafter referred to as
the "50.54(f)

 letter"). The request was issued in connection with implementing lessons
learned from the

 2011 accident at the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant as documented in
the NRC's

 Near-Term Task Force (NTTF) report (ADAMS Accession No. ML 111861807).

 Enclosure 2 to the 50.54(f) letter requested that licensees reevaluate flood
hazards for their

 respective sites using present-day methods and regulatory guidance used by the
NRC staff

 when reviewing applications for early site permits and combined licenses.
Concurrent with the

 reevaluation of flood hazards, licensees were required to develop and implement
mitigating

 strategies in accordance with NRC Order EA-12-049, "Order Modifying Licenses
with Regard

 to Requirements for Mitigation Strategies for Beyond-Design-Basis External
Events" (ADAMS

 Accession No. ML 12054A735). That order requires holders of operating reactor
licenses and

 construction permits issued under 10 CFR Part 50 to modify the plants to
provide additional

 capabilities and defense-in-depth for responding to beyond-design-basis
external events, and

 to submit to the NRC for review a final integrated plan that describes how
compliance with the

 requirements of Attachment 2 of the order was achieved. In order to proceed
with

 implementation of Order EA-12-049, licensees used the current licensing basis
flood hazard or

 the most recent flood hazard information, which may not be based on present-day


 methodologies and guidance, in the development of their mitigating strategies.

 The NRC staff and industry recognized the difficulty in developing and
implementing mitigating

 strategies before completing the reevaluation of flood hazards. The NRC staff
described this

 issue and provided recommendations to the Commission on integrating these
related activities

 in COMSECY-14-0037, "Integration of Mitigating Strategies for
Beyond-Design-Basis External

 Events and the Reevaluation of Flood Hazards," dated November 21, 2014 (ADAMS
Accession

 No. ML 14309A256). The Commission issued a staff requirements memorandum on

 March 30, 2015 (ADAMS Accession No. ML 15089A236), affirming that the
Commission expects

 licensees for operating nuclear power plants to address the reevaluated flood
hazards, which

 are considered beyond-design-basis external events, within their mitigating
strategies.

 Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI) 12-06, Revision 2, "Diverse and Flexible Coping
Strategies

 (FLEX) Implementation Guide" (ADAMS Accession No. ML 16005A625), has been
endorsed by

 Enclosure

 - 2 -

 the NRG as an appropriate methodology for licensees to perform assessments of
the mitigating

 strategies against the reevaluated flood hazards developed in response to the
March 12, 2012,

 50.54(f) letter. The guidance in NEI 12-06, Revision 2, and Appendix G in
particular, supports

 the proposed Mitigation of Beyond-Design-Basis Events rulemaking. The NRC's
endorsement

 of NEI 12-06, including exceptions, clarifications, and additions, is described
in Japan LessonsLearned

 Division (JLD) Interim Staff Guidance (ISG) JLD-ISG-2012-01, Revision 1,

 "Compliance with Order EA-12-049, 'Order Modifying Licenses with Regard to
Requirements for

 Mitigation Strategies for Beyond-Design-Basis External Events"' (ADAMS
Accession No.

 ML 15357A163). As discussed in JLD-ISG-2012-01, Appendix G of NEI 12-06,
Revision 2,

 describes acceptable methods for demonstrating that the reevaluated flooding
hazard is

 addressed within the Dresden Nuclear Power Station, Units 2 and 3 (Dresden),
mitigating

 strategies for beyond-design-basis external events.

 2.0 BACKGROUND

 By letter dated November 4, 2015 (ADAMS Accession No. ML 15307 A056), the NRG
issued an

 interim staff response (ISR) letter for Dresden. The ISR letter provided the
reevaluated flood

 hazard mechanisms that exceeded the current design basis (COB) for Dresden,
which are to be

 used in conducting the mitigating strategies assessment (MSA), as described in
NEI 12-06. For

 Dresden, the mechanisms listed as not bounded by the COB in the ISR letter are
local intense

 precipitation (LIP) and upstream dam failure. By letter dated June 30, 2016
(ADAMS Accession

 No. ML 16182A388), Exelon Generation Company, LLC (the licensee) submitted the
Dresden

 MSA for review by the NRG staff.

 3.0 TECHNICAL EVALUATION

 3.1 Dresden's Current FLEX Strategies

 The licensee stated in the MSA that Dresden's FLEX strategy is based upon the
probable

 maximum flood (PMF) event from the Des Moines and Kankakee Rivers, combined
with

 upstream dam failure and wave runup. The river PMF event, along with upstream
dam failure

 and wave runup, has a current design basis (COB) flood level of 528 ft mean sea
level (MSL).

 The licensee's FLEX strategy did not consider a LIP event because the COB
flooding level for

 LIP of 517.45 ft MSL is below the site grade level of 517.5 ft MSL. Both of
these flooding

 mechanisms were evaluated in the Dresden Flood Hazard Reevaluation Report
(FHRR)

 (ADAMS Accession No. ML 15072A007).

 The following FLEX support guides (FSGs) are used in conjunction with other
site emergency

 procedures for the combined river PMF flood event: FSG-01, "Station Blackout;"
FSG-80, "FLEX

 Flood Pump Deployment/Operation;" FSG-61, "FLEX Fire System Isolation;" and
FSG-62,

 "FLEX Generator Deployment During a Flood." The use of these FSGs, along with
the Dresden

 flood procedure, provide instructions for FLEX equipment deployment and staging
for the

 combined effects PMF flood event.

 A brief summary of the licensee's FLEX strategies is as follows:

 o Deployment of barge-mounted FLEX flood pumps in the Dresden Unit 3 turbine
building

 trackway and filling all the diesel fuel barrels on the barge. The Dresden
Units 2 and 3

 emergency diesel generator (EOG) fuel oil tank vent line extension pipe(s) are
installed.

 - 3 -

 The 8.5.b pump used for FLEX, dam failure submersible pumps/power racks,
portable

 isolation condenser diesel-driven make-up pump, and hoses are relocated to an
offsite

 location above elevation 529 ft MSL so they are available during the period
when flood

 waters recede to the plant grade level. The FLEX diesel generator and
associated

 power distribution unit are staged on top of the Dresden Unit 2 turbine
building trackway

 interlock. A boat with necessary supplies and fuel is also staged near the
barge.

 o Installation of plate-type flood barriers to cover all reactor building
openings and EOG

 rooms.

 o Shut down of both Dresden Units 2 and 3 after receiving weather notification
of rainfall

 that will lead to the prediction of flood waters exceeding 509 ft MSL on site,
with a given

 warning time of at least 23 hrs.

 o Filling Dresden Units 2 and 3 reactor vessels to aid in cool down if time is
available

 before service water systems are secured at flood elevation 513 ft MSL.

 o Installation of the flood barriers or construction of a flood protection berm
to protect the

 isolation condenser make-up pump building to a flood elevation of 519.6 ft MSL.


 o Filling of all water storage tanks.

 o Alignment and initiation of one barge-mounted FLEX flood pump when the flood
level

 reaches elevation 518 ft MSL. The FLEX flood pump takes flood water suction
from the

 test boiler pit and delivers it to the fire header at elevation 538 ft MSL. The
flood pump

 provides make-up water to the isolation condensers, spent fuel pools (SFPs) and
the

 reactor vessel until flood waters recede and recovery and cleanup activities
start. The

 barge-mounted flood pump will be started at a flood level elevation of 518 ft
MSL.

 o Operation of the service water system when the flood level recedes to below
elevation

 509 ft MSL.

 3.2. Evaluation of Associated Effects

 Flood-related associated effects for Dresden were assessed during the NRC
staff's review of

 the Dresden FHRR (ADAMS Accession No. ML 15072A007).

 3.3 Evaluation of Flood Event Duration

 Flood event duration parameters (including warning time and period of
inundation) were

 assessed during the NRC staff's review of the Dresden FHRR (ADAMS Accession No.


 ML 15072A007).

 - 4 -

 3.4 Evaluation of Flood Protection Features - Local Intense Precipitation and
Upstream

 Dam Failure

 Section 4 in the Dresden MSA describes the COB LIP flood as having a maximum
flood

 elevation of 517.45 ft MSL, whereas the plant floor level is elevation 517 .5
ft MSL. Therefore,

 during the COB LIP, water does not enter any structures at the COB 517.5 ft MSL
elevation.

 The licensee stated in the Dresden FHRR that the maximum reevaluated LIP flood
elevation is

 518.1 ft MSL and the maximum flood inundation time above elevation 517.5 ft MSL
is 1.75 hrs.

 The licensee identified the largest leak path for water intrusion into the
Dresden Unit 2 reactor

 building is through the turbine building trackway interlock, where the maximum
flood height is

 518.04 ft MSL for 1.35 hrs. The licensee indicated in the Dresden MSA that the
reevaluated LIP

 flood will accumulate in Dresden Unit 2 reactor building torus basement through
large pipe

 annular openings at elevation 517 .5 ft MSL near the south wall. For each unit,
the licensee has

 placed one FLEX pump on a 12-in high pedestal in the torus basement. The
12-inch pedestal is

 a flood protection measure based upon the licensee's determination that the
reevaluated LIP

 flood water can cause 9.78 in of flooding in the torus basement. Therefore, the
FLEX pumps, in

 both Dresden Units 2 and 3, would not be affected by the reevaluated LIP flood
event.

 Dresden MSA, Section 6.1, describes how FLEX equipment survives the reevaluated
LIP flood

 event. Most time-critical equipment is staged in a robust FLEX Building A,
which is located

 about 50 ft from the southwest corner of the reactor building and is not
subject to the

 reevaluated LIP flood. The FLEX equipment in FLEX Building Bis either trailer
mounted or

 elevated so that it is not impacted by the reevaluated LIP flood. The FLEX
Building C is a

 commercial building with a floor level at elevation 517.83 ft MSL. The FLEX
Building C is

 outside the protected area in a parking lot on the southeast side of the
reactor building. The

 licensee also described that the connection points for electrical cables are at
least 3.5 ft above

 the plant grade and are not impacted by the reevaluated LIP flood.

 The NRC staff reviewed the licensee's assessment of the reevaluated LIP flood
level in the

 Dresden FHRR and MSA. Due to the use of the 12-inch pedestal and the height of
the LIP

 water intrusion of 9.78 in into the torus basements, the NRC staff agrees that
the FLEX pumps

 in those locations would not be impacted by the reevaluated LIP flood event.
The NRC staff

 performed the mitigation strategies audit of the Dresden site in August 2015.
As a result of the

 site audit walkdown, the NRC staff agrees that the FLEX storage locations will
provide adequate

 flood protection for the reevaluated LIP hazard. This is based on the location
of the FLEX

 Building A being above 518.5 ft MSL, the FLEX equipment being mounted on
trailers and

 elevated well above the reevaluated LIP flood level of 518.1 ft MSL, and the
fact that FLEX

 Building C not having any vital FLEX equipment needed for the reevaluated LIP
flood event.

 The NRC staff further agrees that the deployment and configuration of the FLEX
waterproof

 cable connections 3.5 ft above the plant grade elevation of 517.5 ft MSL would
be protected

 from the reevaluated LIP event.

 As described in Section 3.2 of this staff assessment, the reevaluated river PMF
results from

 flooding of the Des Moines and Kankakee Rivers. When combined with the upstream
dam

 failure and wave run up, Section 4 of the Dresden MSA describes that the COB
combined effects

 flood elevation to be 528 ft MSL. The licensee determined in the Dresden FHRR
that the

 maximum reevaluated combined effects flood elevation is 529.0 ft MSL. The
licensee stated

 that the difference is attributed to a higher reevaluated wind-wave runup
height of 4 ft, instead of

 - 5 -

 3 ft in the CDB. The stillwater flood level remains at elevation 525 ft MSL for
both the COB and

 reevaluated combined effects PMF flood events. The licensee evaluated the
combined effects

 PMF flood event to create the FLEX flooding strategy. As described above, this
involves

 deployment and staging of FLEX equipment on top of a barge and buildings prior
to the flood

 event, installation of flood protection barriers for the reactor buildings, and
the execution of the

 above actions 23 hours prior to the flood event. After conducting the
reevaluation of the

 combined effects flood at the higher elevation of 529 ft MSL, the licensee
concluded that the

 reevaluated combined effects PMF flood remains bounded by the FLEX flooding
evaluation.

 Specifically, the licensee determined that the current FLEX strategies would
remain unaffected

 due to the location and preparation of the FLEX equipment in advance of the
flood event.

 The NRC staff reviewed the licensee's assessment of the reevaluated combined
effects PMF

 flood event in the Dresden FHRR and MSA to confirm that the licensee's current
FLEX strategy

 will not be impacted by the additional 1 ft of wind-wave runup due to the
deployment and

 placement of the FLEX equipment prior to the flood event. The NRC staff also
noted that the

 use of flood barriers for the combined effects PMF flood event would be
dependent on national

 weather forecasting and deployed ahead of time to protect the reactor
buildings.

 3.5 Conclusion

 The NRC staff has reviewed the information provided in the Dresden MSA related
to the original

 FLEX strategies, as assessed against the reevaluated hazard(s) described in
Section 2 of this

 staff assessment, and found that the licensee has adequately assessed the ISR
for the

 reevaluated LIP flood event and combined effects PMF flood event to determine
that the FLEX

 strategy can be implemented as currently designed. The NRC staff made its
determination

 based upon:

 o The use of weather forecast to shut down both Units and pre-deploy and stage

 equipment to be used for FLEX 23 hours before the PMF flood event;

 o The current FLEX flooding strategy bounding the revised combined effects PMF
flood

 event at 529 ft, which would not impact the warning time and deployment of FLEX


 equipment and flood barge to transport and stage FLEX equipment prior to the

 combined effects PMF flood event;

 o The configuration of pedestals in the Dresden Units 2 and 3 reactor building
torus

 basements to protect the FLEX pumps from the intrusion of LIP flood water;

 o The location and flood protection features of the three FLEX storage
buildings; and

 o The waterproof FLEX cable connections being placed 3.5 ft above the site CDB

 elevation of 517.5 ft on the reactor buildings.

 Therefore, the NRC staff concludes that the licensee has demonstrated the
capability to

 implement the original FLEX strategies, as designed, under the conditions
associated with the

 reevaluated LIP and combined effects PMF floods, including associated effects
and flood event

 duration, as described in NEI 12-06, Revision 2, and JLD-ISG-2012-01, Revision
1.

 - 6 -

 4.0 CONCLUSION

 The NRC staff has reviewed the information presented by the licensee in the MSA
for Dresden.

 The NRC staff confirmed that the licensee's flood hazard MSA for Dresden was
performed

 consistent with the guidance in Appendix G of NEI 12-06, Revision 2, as
endorsed by

 JLD-ISG-2012-01, Revision 1. Based on the licensee's use of the hazard
characterized in the

 NRC staff's ISR, the methodology used in the Dresden MSA evaluation, and the
description of

 its current FLEX strategy in the Dresden MSA, the NRC staff concludes that the
licensee has

 demonstrated that the mitigation strategies are reasonably protected from
reevaluated flood

 hazards conditions.

 B. Hanson - 2 -

 The NRC staff has concluded that the Dresden MSA was performed consistent with
the

 guidance described in Appendix G of NEI 12-06, Revision 2, as endorsed by Japan
LessonsLearned

 Division (JLD) Interim Staff Guidance (ISG) JLD-ISG-2012-01, Revision 1, and
that the

 licensee has demonstrated that the mitigation strategies are reasonably
protected from

 reevaluated flood hazard conditions. This closes out the NRC's efforts
associated with CAC

 Nos. MF7921 and MF7922.

 If you have any questions, please contact me at 301-415-6197 or at
Tekia.Govan@nrc.gov

 Enclosure:

 Staff Assessment Related to the

 Mitigating Strategies for Dresden

 Docket Nos. 50-237 and 50-249

 cc w/encl: Distribution via Listserv

 DISTRIBUTION:

 Public

 JLD R/F

 RidsNRRJLD Resource

 RidsNrrDorllpl3-2 Resource

 RidsNrrDorl Resource

 RidsNrrPMDresden Resource

 Sincerely,

 IRA/

 Tekia Govan, Project Manager

 Hazards Management Branch

 Japan Lessons-Learned Division

 Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation

 RidsNrrlaSLent Resource

 RidsOgcMailCenter Resource

 RidsOpaMail Resource

 RidsAcrsAcnw MailCtr Resource

 RidsNroDsea Resource

 RidsRgn3MailCenter Resource

 SBailey, NRR

 MHalter, NRR

 GBowman, NRR

 TGovan, NRR

 JHughey, NRR

 JBoska, NRR

 ADAMS Accession No. ML 16300A199

 OFFICE NRR/JLD/JHMB/PM NRR/JLD/LA NRR/JLD/JERB/BC NRR/JLD/JHMB/BC
NRR/JLD/JHMB/PM

 NAME TGovan Slent SBailey GBowman TGovan

 DATE 11/8/2016 11/7/2016 11/25/2016 12/5/2016 12/8/2016

 OFFICIAL RECORD COPY



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 71 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 27, 2016 Tuesday

Regulatory update: United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission has issued Order
regarding (ML16300A199 ) Dresden Nuclear Power Station, Units 2 and 3 - Flood
Hazard Mitigating Strategies Assessment (CAC Nos. MF7921 and MF7922)

LENGTH: 3548  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission has issued the
following document:



 UNITED STATES

 NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION

 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20555-0001

 Mr. Bryan C. Hanson

 Senior Vice President

 Exelon Generation Company, LLC

 President and Chief Nuclear Officer

 Exelon Nuclear

 4300 Winfield Road

 Warrenville, IL 60555

 December 8, 2016

 SUBJECT: DRESDEN NUCLEAR POWER STATION, UNITS 2 AND 3 - FLOOD HAZARD

 MITIGATION STRATEGIES ASSESSMENT (CAC NOS. MF7921 AND MF7922)



 Dear Mr. Hanson:

 By letter dated March 12, 2012 (Agencywide Documents Access and Management
System

 (ADAMS) Accession No. ML 12053A340), the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
(NRC)

 issued a request for information to all power reactor licensees and holders of
construction

 permits in active or deferred status, pursuant to Title 10 of the Code of
Federal Regulations,

 Section 50.54(f), "Conditions of Licenses" (hereafter referred to as the
"50.54(f) letter"). The

 request was issued in connection with implementing lessons learned from the
2011 accident

 at the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant, as documented in the NRC's
Near-Term Task

 Force report (ADAMS Accession No. ML 111861807).

 Enclosure 2 to the 50.54(f) letter requested that licensees reevaluate flood
hazards for their

 sites using present-day methods and regulatory guidance used by the NRC staff
when

 reviewing applications for early site permits and combined licenses. Concurrent
with the

 reevaluation of flood hazards, licensees were required to develop and implement
mitigating

 strategies in accordance with NRC Order EA-12-049, "Order Modifying Licenses
with Regard

 to Requirements for Mitigation Strategies for Beyond-Design-Basis External
Events" (ADAMS

 Accession No. ML 12054A735). In order to proceed with implementation of Order
EA-12-049,

 licensees used the current licensing basis flood hazard or the most recent
flood hazard

 information, which may not be based on present-day methodologies and guidance,
in the

 development of their mitigating strategies.

 By letter dated June 30, 2016 (ADAMS Accession No. ML 16182A388), the Exelon
Generation

 Company, LLC (the licensee) submitted the flooding mitigation strategies
assessment (MSA) for

 Dresden Nuclear Power Station, Units 2 and 3 (Dresden). The MSAs are intended
to confirm

 that licensees have adequately addressed the reevaluated flooding hazards
within their

 mitigating strategies for beyond-design-basis external events. The purpose of
this letter is to

 provide the NRC's assessment of the Dresden MSA.

 B. Hanson - 2 -

 The NRC staff has concluded that the Dresden MSA was performed consistent with
the

 guidance described in Appendix G of NEI 12-06, Revision 2, as endorsed by Japan
LessonsLearned

 Division (JLD) Interim Staff Guidance {ISG) JLD-ISG-2012-01, Revision 1, and
that the

 licensee has demonstrated that the mitigation strategies are reasonably
protected from

 reevaluated flood hazard conditions. This closes out the NRC's efforts
associated with CAC

 Nos. MF7921 and MF7922.

 If you have any questions, please contact me at 301-415-6197 or at
Tekia.Govan@nrc.gov

 Enclosure:

 Staff Assessment Related to the

 Mitigating Strategies for Dresden

 Docket Nos. 50-237 and 50-249

 cc w/encl: Distribution via Listserv

 Sincerely,

 Jt ·o-v:¢k~

 Tekia Govan, Project Manager

 Hazards Management Branch

 Japan Lessons-Learned Division

 Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation

 STAFF ASSESSMENT BY THE OFFICE OF NUCLEAR REACTOR REGULATION

 RELATED TO MITIGATION STRATEGIES FOR DRESDEN NUCLEAR POWER STATION,

 UNITS 2 AND 3, AS A RESULT OF THE REEVALUATED FLOODING HAZARD NEAR-TERM

 TASK FORCE RECOMMENDATION 2.1 - FLOODING (CAC NOS. MF7921 AND MF7922)

 1.0 INTRODUCTION

 By letter dated March 12, 2012 (Agencywide Documents Access and Management
System

 (ADAMS) Accession No. ML 12053A340), the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
(NRC)

 issued a request for information to all power reactor licensees and holders of
construction

 permits in active or deferred status, pursuant to Title 1 O of the Code of
Federal Regulations

 (10 CFR), Section 50.54{f), "Conditions of Licenses" (hereafter referred to as
the "50.54(f)

 letter"). The request was issued in connection with implementing lessons
learned from the

 2011 accident at the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant as documented in
the NRC's

 Near-Term Task Force (NTTF) report (ADAMS Accession No. ML 111861807).

 Enclosure 2 to the 50.54(f) letter requested that licensees reevaluate flood
hazards for their

 respective sites using present-day methods and regulatory guidance used by the
NRC staff

 when reviewing applications for early site permits and combined licenses.
Concurrent with the

 reevaluation of flood hazards, licensees were required to develop and implement
mitigating

 strategies in accordance with NRC Order EA-12-049, "Order Modifying Licenses
with Regard

 to Requirements for Mitigation Strategies for Beyond-Design-Basis External
Events" (ADAMS

 Accession No. ML 12054A735). That order requires holders of operating reactor
licenses and

 construction permits issued under 10 CFR Part 50 to modify the plants to
provide additional

 capabilities and defense-in-depth for responding to beyond-design-basis
external events, and

 to submit to the NRC for review a final integrated plan that describes how
compliance with the

 requirements of Attachment 2 of the order was achieved. In order to proceed
with

 implementation of Order EA-12-049, licensees used the current licensing basis
flood hazard or

 the most recent flood hazard information, which may not be based on present-day


 methodologies and guidance, in the development of their mitigating strategies.

 The NRC staff and industry recognized the difficulty in developing and
implementing mitigating

 strategies before completing the reevaluation of flood hazards. The NRC staff
described this

 issue and provided recommendations to the Commission on integrating these
related activities

 in COMSECY-14-0037, "Integration of Mitigating Strategies for
Beyond-Design-Basis External

 Events and the Reevaluation of Flood Hazards," dated November 21, 2014 (ADAMS
Accession

 No. ML 14309A256). The Commission issued a staff requirements memorandum on

 March 30, 2015 (ADAMS Accession No. ML 15089A236), affirming that the
Commission expects

 licensees for operating nuclear power plants to address the reevaluated flood
hazards, which

 are considered beyond-design-basis external events, within their mitigating
strategies.

 Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI) 12-06, Revision 2, "Diverse and Flexible Coping
Strategies

 (FLEX) Implementation Guide" (ADAMS Accession No. ML 16005A625), has been
endorsed by

 Enclosure

 - 2 -

 the NRG as an appropriate methodology for licensees to perform assessments of
the mitigating

 strategies against the reevaluated flood hazards developed in response to the
March 12, 2012,

 50.54(f) letter. The guidance in NEI 12-06, Revision 2, and Appendix G in
particular, supports

 the proposed Mitigation of Beyond-Design-Basis Events rulemaking. The NRC's
endorsement

 of NEI 12-06, including exceptions, clarifications, and additions, is described
in Japan LessonsLearned

 Division (JLD) Interim Staff Guidance (ISG) JLD-ISG-2012-01, Revision 1,

 "Compliance with Order EA-12-049, 'Order Modifying Licenses with Regard to
Requirements for

 Mitigation Strategies for Beyond-Design-Basis External Events"' (ADAMS
Accession No.

 ML 15357A163). As discussed in JLD-ISG-2012-01, Appendix G of NEI 12-06,
Revision 2,

 describes acceptable methods for demonstrating that the reevaluated flooding
hazard is

 addressed within the Dresden Nuclear Power Station, Units 2 and 3 (Dresden),
mitigating

 strategies for beyond-design-basis external events.

 2.0 BACKGROUND

 By letter dated November 4, 2015 (ADAMS Accession No. ML 15307 A056), the NRG
issued an

 interim staff response (ISR) letter for Dresden. The ISR letter provided the
reevaluated flood

 hazard mechanisms that exceeded the current design basis (COB) for Dresden,
which are to be

 used in conducting the mitigating strategies assessment (MSA), as described in
NEI 12-06. For

 Dresden, the mechanisms listed as not bounded by the COB in the ISR letter are
local intense

 precipitation (LIP) and upstream dam failure. By letter dated June 30, 2016
(ADAMS Accession

 No. ML 16182A388), Exelon Generation Company, LLC (the licensee) submitted the
Dresden

 MSA for review by the NRG staff.

 3.0 TECHNICAL EVALUATION

 3.1 Dresden's Current FLEX Strategies

 The licensee stated in the MSA that Dresden's FLEX strategy is based upon the
probable

 maximum flood (PMF) event from the Des Moines and Kankakee Rivers, combined
with

 upstream dam failure and wave runup. The river PMF event, along with upstream
dam failure

 and wave runup, has a current design basis (COB) flood level of 528 ft mean sea
level (MSL).

 The licensee's FLEX strategy did not consider a LIP event because the COB
flooding level for

 LIP of 517.45 ft MSL is below the site grade level of 517.5 ft MSL. Both of
these flooding

 mechanisms were evaluated in the Dresden Flood Hazard Reevaluation Report
(FHRR)

 (ADAMS Accession No. ML 15072A007).

 The following FLEX support guides (FSGs) are used in conjunction with other
site emergency

 procedures for the combined river PMF flood event: FSG-01, "Station Blackout;"
FSG-80, "FLEX

 Flood Pump Deployment/Operation;" FSG-61, "FLEX Fire System Isolation;" and
FSG-62,

 "FLEX Generator Deployment During a Flood." The use of these FSGs, along with
the Dresden

 flood procedure, provide instructions for FLEX equipment deployment and staging
for the

 combined effects PMF flood event.

 A brief summary of the licensee's FLEX strategies is as follows:

 o Deployment of barge-mounted FLEX flood pumps in the Dresden Unit 3 turbine
building

 trackway and filling all the diesel fuel barrels on the barge. The Dresden
Units 2 and 3

 emergency diesel generator (EOG) fuel oil tank vent line extension pipe(s) are
installed.

 - 3 -

 The 8.5.b pump used for FLEX, dam failure submersible pumps/power racks,
portable

 isolation condenser diesel-driven make-up pump, and hoses are relocated to an
offsite

 location above elevation 529 ft MSL so they are available during the period
when flood

 waters recede to the plant grade level. The FLEX diesel generator and
associated

 power distribution unit are staged on top of the Dresden Unit 2 turbine
building trackway

 interlock. A boat with necessary supplies and fuel is also staged near the
barge.

 o Installation of plate-type flood barriers to cover all reactor building
openings and EOG

 rooms.

 o Shut down of both Dresden Units 2 and 3 after receiving weather notification
of rainfall

 that will lead to the prediction of flood waters exceeding 509 ft MSL on site,
with a given

 warning time of at least 23 hrs.

 o Filling Dresden Units 2 and 3 reactor vessels to aid in cool down if time is
available

 before service water systems are secured at flood elevation 513 ft MSL.

 o Installation of the flood barriers or construction of a flood protection berm
to protect the

 isolation condenser make-up pump building to a flood elevation of 519.6 ft MSL.


 o Filling of all water storage tanks.

 o Alignment and initiation of one barge-mounted FLEX flood pump when the flood
level

 reaches elevation 518 ft MSL. The FLEX flood pump takes flood water suction
from the

 test boiler pit and delivers it to the fire header at elevation 538 ft MSL. The
flood pump

 provides make-up water to the isolation condensers, spent fuel pools (SFPs) and
the

 reactor vessel until flood waters recede and recovery and cleanup activities
start. The

 barge-mounted flood pump will be started at a flood level elevation of 518 ft
MSL.

 o Operation of the service water system when the flood level recedes to below
elevation

 509 ft MSL.

 3.2. Evaluation of Associated Effects

 Flood-related associated effects for Dresden were assessed during the NRC
staff's review of

 the Dresden FHRR (ADAMS Accession No. ML 15072A007).

 3.3 Evaluation of Flood Event Duration

 Flood event duration parameters (including warning time and period of
inundation) were

 assessed during the NRC staff's review of the Dresden FHRR (ADAMS Accession No.


 ML 15072A007).

 - 4 -

 3.4 Evaluation of Flood Protection Features - Local Intense Precipitation and
Upstream

 Dam Failure

 Section 4 in the Dresden MSA describes the COB LIP flood as having a maximum
flood

 elevation of 517.45 ft MSL, whereas the plant floor level is elevation 517 .5
ft MSL. Therefore,

 during the COB LIP, water does not enter any structures at the COB 517.5 ft MSL
elevation.

 The licensee stated in the Dresden FHRR that the maximum reevaluated LIP flood
elevation is

 518.1 ft MSL and the maximum flood inundation time above elevation 517.5 ft MSL
is 1.75 hrs.

 The licensee identified the largest leak path for water intrusion into the
Dresden Unit 2 reactor

 building is through the turbine building trackway interlock, where the maximum
flood height is

 518.04 ft MSL for 1.35 hrs. The licensee indicated in the Dresden MSA that the
reevaluated LIP

 flood will accumulate in Dresden Unit 2 reactor building torus basement through
large pipe

 annular openings at elevation 517 .5 ft MSL near the south wall. For each unit,
the licensee has

 placed one FLEX pump on a 12-in high pedestal in the torus basement. The
12-inch pedestal is

 a flood protection measure based upon the licensee's determination that the
reevaluated LIP

 flood water can cause 9.78 in of flooding in the torus basement. Therefore, the
FLEX pumps, in

 both Dresden Units 2 and 3, would not be affected by the reevaluated LIP flood
event.

 Dresden MSA, Section 6.1, describes how FLEX equipment survives the reevaluated
LIP flood

 event. Most time-critical equipment is staged in a robust FLEX Building A,
which is located

 about 50 ft from the southwest corner of the reactor building and is not
subject to the

 reevaluated LIP flood. The FLEX equipment in FLEX Building Bis either trailer
mounted or

 elevated so that it is not impacted by the reevaluated LIP flood. The FLEX
Building C is a

 commercial building with a floor level at elevation 517.83 ft MSL. The FLEX
Building C is

 outside the protected area in a parking lot on the southeast side of the
reactor building. The

 licensee also described that the connection points for electrical cables are at
least 3.5 ft above

 the plant grade and are not impacted by the reevaluated LIP flood.

 The NRC staff reviewed the licensee's assessment of the reevaluated LIP flood
level in the

 Dresden FHRR and MSA. Due to the use of the 12-inch pedestal and the height of
the LIP

 water intrusion of 9.78 in into the torus basements, the NRC staff agrees that
the FLEX pumps

 in those locations would not be impacted by the reevaluated LIP flood event.
The NRC staff

 performed the mitigation strategies audit of the Dresden site in August 2015.
As a result of the

 site audit walkdown, the NRC staff agrees that the FLEX storage locations will
provide adequate

 flood protection for the reevaluated LIP hazard. This is based on the location
of the FLEX

 Building A being above 518.5 ft MSL, the FLEX equipment being mounted on
trailers and

 elevated well above the reevaluated LIP flood level of 518.1 ft MSL, and the
fact that FLEX

 Building C not having any vital FLEX equipment needed for the reevaluated LIP
flood event.

 The NRC staff further agrees that the deployment and configuration of the FLEX
waterproof

 cable connections 3.5 ft above the plant grade elevation of 517.5 ft MSL would
be protected

 from the reevaluated LIP event.

 As described in Section 3.2 of this staff assessment, the reevaluated river PMF
results from

 flooding of the Des Moines and Kankakee Rivers. When combined with the upstream
dam

 failure and wave run up, Section 4 of the Dresden MSA describes that the COB
combined effects

 flood elevation to be 528 ft MSL. The licensee determined in the Dresden FHRR
that the

 maximum reevaluated combined effects flood elevation is 529.0 ft MSL. The
licensee stated

 that the difference is attributed to a higher reevaluated wind-wave runup
height of 4 ft, instead of

 - 5 -

 3 ft in the CDB. The stillwater flood level remains at elevation 525 ft MSL for
both the COB and

 reevaluated combined effects PMF flood events. The licensee evaluated the
combined effects

 PMF flood event to create the FLEX flooding strategy. As described above, this
involves

 deployment and staging of FLEX equipment on top of a barge and buildings prior
to the flood

 event, installation of flood protection barriers for the reactor buildings, and
the execution of the

 above actions 23 hours prior to the flood event. After conducting the
reevaluation of the

 combined effects flood at the higher elevation of 529 ft MSL, the licensee
concluded that the

 reevaluated combined effects PMF flood remains bounded by the FLEX flooding
evaluation.

 Specifically, the licensee determined that the current FLEX strategies would
remain unaffected

 due to the location and preparation of the FLEX equipment in advance of the
flood event.

 The NRC staff reviewed the licensee's assessment of the reevaluated combined
effects PMF

 flood event in the Dresden FHRR and MSA to confirm that the licensee's current
FLEX strategy

 will not be impacted by the additional 1 ft of wind-wave runup due to the
deployment and

 placement of the FLEX equipment prior to the flood event. The NRC staff also
noted that the

 use of flood barriers for the combined effects PMF flood event would be
dependent on national

 weather forecasting and deployed ahead of time to protect the reactor
buildings.

 3.5 Conclusion

 The NRC staff has reviewed the information provided in the Dresden MSA related
to the original

 FLEX strategies, as assessed against the reevaluated hazard(s) described in
Section 2 of this

 staff assessment, and found that the licensee has adequately assessed the ISR
for the

 reevaluated LIP flood event and combined effects PMF flood event to determine
that the FLEX

 strategy can be implemented as currently designed. The NRC staff made its
determination

 based upon:

 o The use of weather forecast to shut down both Units and pre-deploy and stage

 equipment to be used for FLEX 23 hours before the PMF flood event;

 o The current FLEX flooding strategy bounding the revised combined effects PMF
flood

 event at 529 ft, which would not impact the warning time and deployment of FLEX


 equipment and flood barge to transport and stage FLEX equipment prior to the

 combined effects PMF flood event;

 o The configuration of pedestals in the Dresden Units 2 and 3 reactor building
torus

 basements to protect the FLEX pumps from the intrusion of LIP flood water;

 o The location and flood protection features of the three FLEX storage
buildings; and

 o The waterproof FLEX cable connections being placed 3.5 ft above the site CDB

 elevation of 517.5 ft on the reactor buildings.

 Therefore, the NRC staff concludes that the licensee has demonstrated the
capability to

 implement the original FLEX strategies, as designed, under the conditions
associated with the

 reevaluated LIP and combined effects PMF floods, including associated effects
and flood event

 duration, as described in NEI 12-06, Revision 2, and JLD-ISG-2012-01, Revision
1.

 - 6 -

 4.0 CONCLUSION

 The NRC staff has reviewed the information presented by the licensee in the MSA
for Dresden.

 The NRC staff confirmed that the licensee's flood hazard MSA for Dresden was
performed

 consistent with the guidance in Appendix G of NEI 12-06, Revision 2, as
endorsed by

 JLD-ISG-2012-01, Revision 1. Based on the licensee's use of the hazard
characterized in the

 NRC staff's ISR, the methodology used in the Dresden MSA evaluation, and the
description of

 its current FLEX strategy in the Dresden MSA, the NRC staff concludes that the
licensee has

 demonstrated that the mitigation strategies are reasonably protected from
reevaluated flood

 hazards conditions.

 B. Hanson - 2 -

 The NRC staff has concluded that the Dresden MSA was performed consistent with
the

 guidance described in Appendix G of NEI 12-06, Revision 2, as endorsed by Japan
LessonsLearned

 Division (JLD) Interim Staff Guidance (ISG) JLD-ISG-2012-01, Revision 1, and
that the

 licensee has demonstrated that the mitigation strategies are reasonably
protected from

 reevaluated flood hazard conditions. This closes out the NRC's efforts
associated with CAC

 Nos. MF7921 and MF7922.

 If you have any questions, please contact me at 301-415-6197 or at
Tekia.Govan@nrc.gov

 Enclosure:

 Staff Assessment Related to the

 Mitigating Strategies for Dresden

 Docket Nos. 50-237 and 50-249

 cc w/encl: Distribution via Listserv

 DISTRIBUTION:

 Public

 JLD R/F

 RidsNRRJLD Resource

 RidsNrrDorllpl3-2 Resource

 RidsNrrDorl Resource

 RidsNrrPMDresden Resource

 Sincerely,

 IRA/

 Tekia Govan, Project Manager

 Hazards Management Branch

 Japan Lessons-Learned Division

 Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation

 RidsNrrlaSLent Resource

 RidsOgcMailCenter Resource

 RidsOpaMail Resource

 RidsAcrsAcnw MailCtr Resource

 RidsNroDsea Resource

 RidsRgn3MailCenter Resource

 SBailey, NRR

 MHalter, NRR

 GBowman, NRR

 TGovan, NRR

 JHughey, NRR

 JBoska, NRR

 ADAMS Accession No. ML 16300A199

 OFFICE NRR/JLD/JHMB/PM NRR/JLD/LA NRR/JLD/JERB/BC NRR/JLD/JHMB/BC
NRR/JLD/JHMB/PM

 NAME TGovan Slent SBailey GBowman TGovan

 DATE 11/8/2016 11/7/2016 11/25/2016 12/5/2016 12/8/2016

 OFFICIAL RECORD COPY



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 72 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  December 27, 1993, MONDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

THE FOLLY OF REBUILDING ON FLOOD PLAINS

BYLINE: Walter L. Eschbach

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 13B

LENGTH: 1187 words

COMMENTARY COLUMN


As Henry David Thoreau wrote, "Man is rich in proportion to the number of things
he can afford to leave alone." Likewise the flood plains of rivers and streams
demand nothing more than to be left alone, to thrive or perish as nature wills.
But humanity's continuous invasion of these bottomlands and persistent return
after every disastrous flood are on the verge of causing great imbalances that
could result in long-range losses and economic collapse.

Floods are a natural and inevitable characteristic of rivers and streams, and
they have occurred since the beginning of time. Floods may be "acts of God," but
flood losses in human life, property and social disruption result from improper
use of flood-prone lands. It is simplistic to suggest that if flood plains were
undeveloped, virtually no flood losses would occur.

There have been many government studies to warn of the danger of floods, and
numerous hydrologic maps to pinpoint the areas most vulnerable to flooding. It
is not as if no one knows where the rivers flow and what happens when they spill
over their banks. It is no coincidence that the devastation from the Mississippi
and Missouri rivers last summer was almost a perfect overlay to flood maps
prepared by four separate federal agencies 15 years ago.  These flood maps were
freely distributed to counties, communities and concerned property owners. They
are still available to the public.

The Great Flood of 1993 ranks as the second-most-destructive weather disaster in
U.S. history, causing damage estimated at nearly $ 20 billion.  Overflow along
the Mississippi and Missouri rivers swept away sections of levees, bridges,
railroads, highways, buildings, homes, crops, a lifetime of mementos and even
loved ones. The real costs may never be fully accounted. It will be difficult to
know the true losses caused by interruption in commerce and utilities, efforts
impended by volunteers, human suffering and loss of life attributed to this
summer flood.

The real tragedy for the people now suffering most from the Great Flood of 1993
is that it's really too late. They now have to put their lives back together.
What's done is done, and nothing can offer any guarantee that if they return to
the same flood-prone area, what befell them this summer won't befall them this
winter or next spring or summer.

Unfortunately the Great Flood of 1993 will be equaled or exceeded at some date.
Floods of this magnitude can happen "back to back," that is, two or more in one
year or in succeeding years. During the historic period of the Mississippi and
Missouri river valleys, maximum floods known as "bluff-to-bluff" floods did
exist. Geologists are sure that prehistoric floods of even greater magnitude
occurred.

We must prevent, rather than relieve, flood disasters. If sound federal, state
and local flood management policies were to keep development away from the flood
plains, a breakthrough could be made in reducing costly flood hazards. Congress,
state legislatures, county officials and city fathers tend to waltz around the
issue. They avoid the politically unpalatable business of preventing people from
making needless flood hazards in the first place.

Those industrial and commercial establishments and residents who desire to build
or rebuild in flood plains should act with restraint and humility.  Where once
they built in blind arrogance, they must now pause, re-evaluate and think again.
If they don't, they should be made responsible for the results of their own
actions rather than a financial risk for all taxpayers. The roulette game of
heedless development in flood plains costs everyone.

There is just no getting around the fact that flood plains must be left alone.
Not "until" and not "unless." Just alone, period. There are limits to what can
be done. We must learn to live within our means. We will have to say "Stop! That
will be enough" to those who tempt the rivers in a manner that defies common
sense.

It is of interest to note that more than 240 years ago, when the middle
Mississippi Valley was under French rule, the king of France granted land along
the rivers to various individuals while stipulating that whatever property loss
the individual suffered from flood was a servitude incident to his grant. In
those days, flood losses were not considered a public responsibility.

Today all we're doing is reacting to flood emergencies by advancing flood-plain
welfare practices. We are doing this at a time when national economic challenges
demand restraint in federal spending. We must change direction, with
flood-conscious management policies that prevent flood disasters.

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 73 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                             March 15, 2016 Tuesday

Living in a Flood Zone: What Should I Ask My Insurance Agent?

BYLINE: Diana Rodriguez-Zaba

SECTION: SUBMITTED CONTENT; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 1349 words


Have you ever considered what you and your family would do if your neighborhood
was flooded? The truth is, no one who lives in Chicago and the suburbs can
afford to ignore the fact that we live and work in flood-prone areas. If you are
close enough to Chicagoland's mighty rivers, including Des Plaines River or
Calumet River, you probably understand the vagaries of flooding after heavy
rainstorms, sustained rain events or snow thaw in spring.

Flooding damage -- even those caused by other factors such as plumbing failures
due to the area's aging infrastructure -- will require water damage restoration
and possibly mold removal services in Chicago. Flooding causes untold misery for
property owners and [URL]millions in property
damage;http://www.houselogic.com/home-advice/disaster-insurance/protect
-yourself-and-your-home-flooding/[/URL] not to mention loss of irreplaceable
items. Clearly, we need to have a plan of action and recovery strategy in place
in case of a flooding event.

<h2>Understand Flood Zones & FEMA Flood Maps</h2>

The Federal Emergency Management Agency has prepared flood overlay maps to
indicate areas where weather-related floods are most likely. These map overlays
serve as the basis for flood insurance rates. The FEMA flood maps specific to
your area provide valuable information about the likelihood and the potential
extent of a flooding event.

If you are considering purchasing a home in Chicago or suburbs, it pays to know
the flood zone classification of the property. Flood insurance is mandatory in
FEMA-designated flood zones. If you have a mortgage, you will need to show proof
of flood coverage, or the mortgage company will obtain one for you without rate
shopping on your behalf. Even if your home is mortgage free, you should still
carry flood coverage for practical purposes.

<b>#1: How are my flood insurance rates determined?</b>

Your flood insurance premiums are based on the Flood Insurance Rate Map or FIRM
created by FEMA. Areas are designated according to [URL]flood
risks;http://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=81aec0a771a043df8819a66f4
1efda66[/URL] with each area assigned a classification code. The codes
correspond to the estimated risks of facing floods and determine which
properties should have mandatory flood coverage.

<h2>Understanding Flood Insurance Coverage</h2>

As a property owner, you could be misled into thinking that your homeowner's
insurance policy includes flood coverage. In most cases, homeowner's insurance
will cover loss or damage to property due to various causes except flooding.
This is a typical provision for homeowners' policies providing coverage for
homes in flood-prone, and your flood policy may be carried by a different
agency, so you need to understand your coverage.

<b>#2: What are the coverage limits on my flood policy, and how is replacement
value calculated?</b>

Insurance coverage is capped based on the type of coverage you get and the
premium you commit to paying on a monthly, quarterly or annual basis. Should an
event trigger insurance compensation, the maximum insurance payout allowable has
to be commensurate to the rate you are paying and the replacement value of your
property and chattels. Ask your insurance agent how the company determines
replacement value for all covered item, and make sure to document the condition
of your property with photos or video recording.

<b>#3: Under what conditions would exclusions and limitations kick in after a
flood event?</b>

Insurance policies are written to specify what should be covered and the
circumstances under which coverage would be paid out, but water damage may be
due to reasons other than flooding. For instance, rain water seepage into
basements could cause serious damage to walls, insulation and carpets. However,
damage from water intrusion that was not technically caused by flooding under
your policy definitions may be covered by your homeowners' insurance policy.

The issue of water damage to property becomes complicated when a bunch of events
contributed to the damage. Sewage backup into your home's plumbing could flood
your property, which is unpleasant to deal with and requires [URL]professional
water damage restoration
services;https://www.servicemasterbyzaba.com/emergency-restoration-serv
ices/water-damage-repair/[/URL]. This type of damage should be covered by backup
insurance, which is separate from your homeowners' and flood policies and does
not usually include coverage for mold either. Complications arise when the sewer
backup was due to factors that may be flood-related such as ground saturation
from heavy rains.

Ask your insurance provider to explain policy exclusions clearly so that you can
consider how your specific risks are well covered. Property insurance is
complicated and has become more specialized, but you have the option of using
one agent to arrange coverage for all your needs, streamlining the process of
buying property insurance.

<h2>Preparing your Property for Potential Flooding</h2>

To minimize flood related property damage, take [URL]precautionary
measures;http://www.bankrate.com/finance/weather/natural-disasters/6-wa
ys-protect-home-flooding.aspx[/URL] long before the Great Flood. In Chicago and
the suburbs, a flood warning system is in place but even that won't give you
time to batten down the hatches. The best defense against flooding is to make
sure that the elevation of your property exceeds the flood level or the expected
height of rising water in your area if flooding occurs.

<b>#4: What structural improvements have proven effective in minimizing flood
damage in this area?</b>

After years in the industry, the insurance agents and we know of various
measures that have worked successfully and others that are not worth your money.
Safeguard water-sensitive components such as electrical systems, parts of the
heating, ventilation and air conditioning system, and any appliances and
furniture by raising them above flood level on fixed platforms. Most likely,
your insurance agents have first-hand experience of flooding issues in the area,
so tap into their expertise for strategies you can use to protect your property.

<b>#5: What safety precautions have other residents implemented?</b>

Other property owners who have been in the area for a while would have developed
some coping strategies to mitigate flooding damage. These practices may include
installation of an interior or exterior backflow valve to address sewer backup,
anchoring ground equipment on elevated platforms or complete retrofitting to
raise the level of the structure completely, which is an expensive project.

<h2>Conclusion</h2>

Living in a flood-prone area in Chicago and the suburbs means that you should be
proactive about loss prevention and mitigation. If you currently live in areas
subject to flooding, ask us your questions as we at [URL]ServiceMaster
Restoration by Zaba</a are the passionate local leader in water damage
restoration for Chicago and its suburbs.

* Tap into the expertise and local knowledge of your insurance agent by asking
the right questions.

* Understand what flood maps are, and know your flood zone classification.

* Pay attention to changes in FEMA's flood maps and changes to flood insurance
premiums.

* Review your flood policy provisions with your insurance agent to make sure you
have sufficient coverage for flood damage as well as expenses that may arise
from <a href="https://www.servicemasterbyzaba.com/emergency-restoration-service
s/mold-removal-chicago/">mold testing and
remediation;https://www.servicemasterbyzaba.com/[/URL].

* If you have the means, consider some retrofitting projects such as raising
ground-level equipment above flood level.

Author: Diana Rodriguez-Zaba

Bio: Diana Rodriguez-Zaba launched two ServiceMaster franchises in 2008:
ServiceMaster Restore focusing on emergency fire and water restoration and other
emergency services; and ServiceMaster Clean, providing specialty cleaning
services for commercial and residential properties. The Daily Herald Business
Ledger presented Diana with its prestigious CFO of the Year award this past
summer.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Spring river flood in the streets of Des Plaines, IL

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 74 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                 Irish Examiner

                           November 18, 2010 Thursday

ESB reduces dam water levels to protect city

SECTION: IRELAND

LENGTH: 657 words


It is the first change in the company's dam management procedures since last
November's flood disaster caused an estimated  150 million worth of damage in
Cork city.

The ESB released millions of tonnes of water from the dams on November 19 last.

In the face of fierce criticism over the last year, it has consistently defended
its role that night, and the flood warnings it issued to the authorities.

But as flood victims prepare mark the first anniversary of the catastrophe
tomorrow, the power company has confirmed that it has reduced by half a metre
(50cm) the winter spill levels   the levels at which it must discharge water
at both the Inniscarra and Carrigadrohid dams.

"These measures will have some beneficial effect, the extent of this depending
on the size of the flood," a company spokesman said.

"The benefit would be marginal for larger floods but could be more significant
for smaller more frequent floods. These measures should not be seen in isolation
as a solution to the downstream flooding problems as the key issue is to
complete the downstream works to enable ESB to discharge more in advance of
heavy rain."

Barry Keane, who has been campaigning for flood victims for the last year,
welcomed the move.

"It's 50cm in the right direction. But the levels need to go lower in extreme
weather conditions."

Fine Gael Cllr Dara Murphy, who was Lord Mayor during the civic emergency
sparked by the flood, also welcomed the move. "The ESB now needs to bring this
new operational change to the attention of insurance companies and An Bórd
Pleanála.

"They need to have that comfort given to them directly, and be shown the
technical data that supports what the ESB is saying."

The new levels have been introduced in recent days following a request from the
Office of Public Works for the company to consider interim flood mitigation
measures pending the completion of downstream works, which are the subject of a
review of the Lee catchment flood risk assessment and management study.

The study said other changes in the dam management will only have significant
benefits in terms of reducing flood risk if they are undertaken with these
downstream works.

"Following completion of downstream works, ESB would be in a position to change
operating procedures to allow increased discharges from Inniscarra, improving
our ability to lower reservoir levels in advance of heavy rain," the spokesman
said.

However, changes will be needed to the 1940s statutory framework governing how
the ESB operates, he said. Just how the reduced spill levels effect the
operation of the dams, and whether or not the new levels will have the desired
effect, will be monitored over the coming months.

Meanwhile, residents whose homes were destroyed in the flood will gather at
Grenville Place near the Mercy University Hospital tomorrow morning where
repairs have yet to begin on a flood-breached quay wall.

Flood forum: Lobby group launch

A TOWN ravaged by floods last year will launch a national lobby group this
weekend to help other at-risk communities.

The Skibbereen Floods Committee in west Cork will host a one-day conference in
the town on Saturday during which the Irish National Flood Forum will be
launched. It aims to:

* Advise and support communities and individuals in flood risk zones.

* Raise awareness of the plight of flood victims.

* Encourage the establishments of community led groups to reduce flood risk.

* Encourage a multi-agency approach between those that flood and those that
manage flood risk.

* Organise "flood fairs" to provide public information and advice.

* Work with community led groups in England, Scotland and Europe and form a
single voice for flood-risk communities.

The conference, at the West Cork Hotel, will be addressed by Minister Martin
Mansergh, the minister with responsibility for flood protection, and by experts
in flood management, hydrology, mental health, and insurance.

The event is free.

* www.irishnationalfloodforum.com

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2010 Thomas Crosbie Media Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 75 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 25, 2017 Friday

Hurricane Harvey Arrives as Flood Insurance Deadline Looms

LENGTH: 882  words



New York: Natural Resources Defense Council has issued the following news
release:
Hurricane Harvey will strike the Texas coast with gale force winds,
life-threatening storm surge, and torrential rainfall. Several coastal counties
have rightfully issued evacuation notices, which should be heeded as storm
conditions will be severe.  Catastrophic flooding is expected as some areas may
receive over 30 inches of rain.


Hopefully, Harvey will not be as destructive as reported, and that people are
able to evacuate safely. This storm's predicted intensity must be taken
seriously, and the proper aid and support provided to those communities in its
path.  Fair and equitable recovery is a must as disasters of this potential
magnitude can be devastating for the impacted communities.
Unfortunately, major weather disasters, especially floods, have been increasing
in frequency, leaving a significant impact on affected communities. In 2016
alone, the United States experienced 14 Presidentially-declared major flood
disasters, which cost hundreds of millions of dollars in Federal assistance. And
flood disasters are projected to occur more often as climate change raises sea
levels and alters precipitation patterns.
Reauthorization of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) presents a
perfect opportunity to strengthen the nation's resilience to flooding. The
NFIP's current structure is ill-equipped for a future of more extreme flood
events. Congress must reform the program to be "climate-smart."  Greater
disclosure and transparency of flood risks, more effective and timely relocation
assistance, and a continued move toward risk-based rates must be included in any
reauthorization of the program.
Greater disclosure and transparency of flood risks are especially meaningful
reforms. As flooding is the most common natural disaster in the United States,
greater disclosure and transparency of flood risks makes sense both from a
public safety standpoint and a fiscal standpoint.
Disclosure of Flood Risk Information Upon Transfer of Property
Currently, two proposals, one in the Senate and one in the House, would require
sellers of a house to disclose past flood damages to potential buyers. This
proposal would have an impact nationwide as states would be required to enact
sufficient flood disclosure laws in order to remain in NFIP.
Many states, like Texas, already have disclosure provisions in place. In Texas,
statute requires the seller to provide a disclosure form on whether he/she is
aware of previous flooding, if the home is located in the 100-year floodplain,
and present flood insurance coverage. The current proposals in the Congress just
would ensure there is national consistency.
Availability of Flood Information Upon Request
While laws to disclose flood risks and past flood damages are important, laws
like those in Texas do not inform the current owner of past damages.  If a flood
did not occur under the previous owner, there may be no disclosure of flood
risk.  That's why homeowners should be able to get a full record of all previous
flood damages from FEMA. Providing homeowners better access to their property's
flood history could help encourage homeowners to consider purchasing and
maintaining flood insurance or undertaking mitigation actions to lower their
property's flood risk. Congressman Sean Duffy has sought to provide homeowners a
"right to know" about their property's past flood insurance claim payments and
flood damages through his 21st Century Flood Reform Act.
Public Availability of Program Information
In addition to information for current and prospective owners and renters,
information about flood risks must also be more widely available to the public
at large. The public has a right to know where flood damages occur, the cost of
those damages, and what communities are doing to reduce their residents
vulnerability to flooding and sea level rise. FEMA has a wealth of information
on community compliance with minimum building codes and standards, repeatedly
flooded properties, and efforts that have been undertaken to decrease future
flood damages, but very little of this information is available to the public.
All of this information should be available to decision makers, researchers,
community organizations, and the public. Fortunately, Congressman Duffy also has
proposed requiring FEMA create a public, open-data system to share information
related to a community or region's flood risk. Respecting privacy rights, any
member of the public would have access to FEMA's NFIP data, including
information on property-specific claims and policy history.
Flood risks are increasing for many regions of the United States. As the NFIP is
currently $24.6 billion in debt, any reforms must focus on spurring mitigation,
in addition to moving the program toward full risk-based rates, to achieve
lasting stability for the program.
The NFIP is set to expire on September 30th.  When Congress returns from recess,
it will have only 25 days to reauthorize a program that provides flood insurance
for 5 million homes in 22,000 communities across the United States. Congress
must not only renew the NFIP before it lapses, but the it must reform the
program to achieve long-term stability and flood risk management.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 76 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                       July 17, 2005 Sunday Home Edition

Shifting flood plains;
Development creates new risks from rising water as many learn the hard way

BYLINE: CHARLES SEABROOK

SECTION: News; Pg. 1A;

LENGTH: 1205 words


Scores of Georgians who once thought it would take Noah's flood to damage their
homes may soon find themselves officially in a flood plain --- a designation
that might mean hundreds of dollars in annual insurance costs.

State environmental officials are updating outdated flood plain maps for all 159
counties. The process is already under way in most of Georgia's fastest-growing
counties, including Fulton, Cobb, Cherokee, Henry and Paulding.

For developers, it might mean additional costs and delays for building under
stricter flood plain regulations.

When developers clear-cut trees and construct buildings and roads, flood plains
often shift and expand. That makes thousands more houses vulnerable to rising
water and makes the old maps obsolete, officials say.

"With all the development going on, many flood plains shift within just a few
years," said Collis Brown, flood plain management coordinator with the state
Environmental Protection Division.

Some metro Atlantans learned the hard way last week that they are now in flood
plains. Their homes were severely damaged by floods spawned by heavy rain from
Hurricane Dennis.

One homeowner in south Cobb County, Sheldon Vick, said he was "overwhelmed" as
the rising water inundated his ranch-style house and those of his neighbors on
Clay Road. Vick, 39, said he didn't get flood insurance when he bought his home
last fall because he wasn't told that his property was in a flood plain.

"This was my first home," said Vick, a customer service manager at SunTrust
Bank. "I'm not sure I'll be able to return to it."

Gov. Sonny Perdue has asked that parts of Cobb, Douglas and Cherokee counties be
designated disaster areas because of the flooding, much of which was outside of
mapped flood plains.

The flood plain maps, mandated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
delineate which properties lie within the 100-year flood plain --- meaning that
they face a 1 percent chance of flooding in any given year. Cities and counties
use the maps to help regulate flood plain development.

For homeowners, living in a flood plain requires those with a mortgage to buy
FEMA flood insurance, either directly or through a third party. Homeowners
without mortgages are urged to buy the insurance voluntarily.

The average flood insurance policy costs a little more than $400 a year for
about $100,000 of coverage, according to FEMA.

But like Vick, many homeowners --- and even mortgage lenders --- may not know
that their properties are now in a flood-prone area. About 70 percent of the
maps for 446 Georgia counties and municipalities participating in FEMA's
National Flood Protection Program are as much as 20 years behind the times,
officials say.

"Given the rapid development in the metro Atlanta area, those maps can quickly
become outdated," said Steve Haubner, principal engineer with the Atlanta
Regional Commission.

Among the first to get notices that they now live in a flood plain will be a
number of Henry County residents.

The county already has held public hearings on proposed changes in its flood
plain map. A training session is scheduled next month for bankers, mortgage
companies, real estate professionals and others to explain how the new map will
affect buying a house in the newly designated flood plains.

Another meeting is set for September to explain the map to homeowners, although
county officials have not determined the exact number of houses that will be
affected.

"Homeowners in the flood plain will need flood insurance," said Henry County
spokeswoman Julie Hoover-Ernst.

Over the next few years, other communities throughout Georgia will be going
through a similar process.

A natural buffer

Flood plains serve as the natural buffer for rising water, most often caused by
big rainstorms. The flood plains give the excess stormwater a place to go when
rivers and streams no longer can contain the water within their banks.

But when houses and other structures are in the flood plain, rising water can
cause huge property losses --- and distraught families.

Floods inflict more damage and economic loss upon the United States than any
other kind of natural disaster, according to FEMA.

A flood plain may change for a variety of reasons. In metro Atlanta, the loss of
tree cover, and the covering of ground with concrete, asphalt, rooftops and
other hard surfaces, are the biggest reasons for the increasing amount of runoff
and expanding flood plains.

Construction crews lay an average of 28 acres a day of impervious surfaces in
the 16-county Atlanta metro area, according to a study this year by the
University of Georgia. That's nearly equivalent to the inside of Lenox Square or
Gwinnett Place malls.

The analysis of Landsat satellite data from 1992 to 2001 also found that the
region lost 54 acres of trees a day during the decade, up from the 50-acre daily
loss calculated from 1988 to 1998. In essence, the figures show that for every
two acres of trees cut down, about one acre of roads, parking lots, driveways
and rooftops is added.

Environmental experts say the combination of tree loss and added hardtop leads
to more heat, more air pollution, higher energy bills --- and more flooding.
"The more you build, the more you change the flood plain," said Brown of the
Environmental Protection Division.

In a forested area, more than 90 percent of the rainfall may be absorbed by the
vegetation and ground, said Haubner of the ARC. But in a highly impervious area,
such as a shopping mall, as much as 90 percent of the rainfall may flow quickly
into a stream.

"As you increase runoff, intuitively the water is going to spill off its banks
farther and farther," Haubner said.

Officials in Lovejoy believe that last week's flood damage in a 134-home
development there was worsened by an adjacent 16-acre tract that had been
cleared of trees, causing stormwater to cascade into yards.

Overwhelmed by deluge

Most counties and municipal governments require developers to build stormwater
mitigation structures, such as retention ponds, to control runoff and reduce
flooding in flood-prone areas. But the man-made structures can be overwhelmed by
a deluge such as the one in Atlanta last week.

Some local governments have condemned property in flood plains and bought out
homeowners to prevent flood damage. Georgia authorizes counties to exercise the
power of eminent domain to accomplish flood control.

In 2000, Cobb County bought and demolished more than 50 houses near Noonday
Creek to create a natural setting within the flood plain and avoid flood damage.

Brown, of the EPD, said he and his "limited staff" would investigate last week's
floods to determine whether flood plains had shifted and whether stormwater
mitigation structures failed in those areas. The information, he said, would be
incorporated in the updated maps.

The EPD's statewide remapping fits into a nationwide FEMA initiative to update
the entire country's flood plain maps. The new maps will be digitized, which
means they will be available on the Internet and can be more easily updated in
the future.

"The updating will be a tremendous task," Brown said. "But it will be worth it."

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: JOHN SPINK / Staff Joseph Castro and his uncle were flooded out of
their home off Clay Road in Mableton. Many of their neighbors, unaware that
their properties now lie in a flood plain, do not have flood insurance. ; ANDY
SHARP / Staff A man facing the front door of a flooded house. DALE E. DODSON /
Staff WHAT CAUSES FLOODING Development causes previously unaffected areas to
flood.  Undeveloped land Streams in undeveloped areas rise more slowly and reach
lower peaks than in developed land.  (Graphic illustrates the various ways in
which undeveloped land prevents flooding and also shows a stream level during
flood compared to normal stream level) > Tree roots help soil absorb rainwater >
Ground acts as a sponge, soaking up water before it reaches streams Developed
land Streams in developed areas rise quickly and reach higher peaks because of
increased runoff.  (Graphic illustrates the various ways in which developed land
facilitates flooding.) > Streets, driveways, roofs and parking lots are
impervious to water (Graphic shows the "normal" level of a stream in a developed
area as being much higher than an undeveloped area's stream.) Sources:
University of Georgia Institute of Ecology, U.S. Geological Survey

                Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 77 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                 Cowra Guardian

                                 March 20, 2012

Road repairs begin

SECTION: NEWS - GENERAL

LENGTH: 676  words


Following recent heavy rain and flooding, Cowra Shire has been declared a
Natural Disaster Area by the State Government.

"Council is still in the process of identifying works necessary to repair the
damage caused to our public infrastructure by the floods and the cost of these
repairs," Council General Manager, Paul Devery said.

"We are confident that the repair bill for flood damage will be over the
$250,000 threshold required for State government natural disaster assistance,"
Mr Devery said.

It is estimated over 250km of road network in the Cowra Shire has been affected
by floods, along with damage to culverts, bridges, water mains and causeways.

Council has now completed ninety per cent of the emergency repair work required
to re-open roads and make them safe for travel.

"Council is still keen to receive advice from the community on any damage to
roads, bridges and culverts in the Shire as a result of flooding they may have
observed," Mr Devery said.

A list of damaged infrastructure in the Cowra Shire follows. Residents with
information on damaged infrastructure not contained in this list can contact the
Cowra Infrastructure and Operations department on ph. 6340 2070 to report any
damage.

Residents should note that State owned roads, such as the Canowindra Road and
Boorowa Road, are managed by Road and Maritime Services (RMS, previously the
RTA) and Council is working with the RMS to have those roads repaired as soon as
possible.

Please note that State owned roads, such as the Canowindra Road and Boorowa
Road, are managed by Road and Maritime Services (RMS, previously the RTA) and
Council is working with the RMS to have those roads repaired as soon as
possible.

C - Cowra Roads

R - Rural Roads

RG - Regional Roads

W - Water repairs

C Campbell Street Flood damage Feb/March 2012

C Low Level Bridge Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Barryrennie Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Brook Lane Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Broula Road at Wattamondara Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Conimbla Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R George Russell Drive Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Greenethorpe Road at Back Creek Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Kangarooby Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Merriganowry Road at the bridge on the Lachlan River Flood damage Feb/March
2012

R Morrisons Bridge Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Noonbinna East Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Noonbinna Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R North Logan Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Pinehill Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Reids Flat Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Willagalong Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Bang Bang Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Chiverton Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Crowther Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Cucumber LnFlood damage Feb/March 2012

R Eagleview Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Gallaghers Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Gleneriffe Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Hillcrest Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Moola Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Mt McDonald Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Quartpot Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Reg Hailstone Way Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Scrubby Rush Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

R Sugarloaf Rd Flood damage Feb/March 2012

RG Belubula Way Flood damage Feb/March 2012

RG Belubula Way Limestone Creek BridgeFlood damage Feb/March 2012

RG Darbys Falls Road Flood damage Feb/March 2012

RG Warraderry Way Flood damage Feb/March 2012

RG Darbys Falls CulvertFlood damage Feb/March 2012

R Sutherland Rd Flood damage March 2012

R Tallarook Rd Flood damage March 2012

R Healy's Rd Flood damage March 2012

W Koorawatha Mains break Flood damage March 2012

R Moss Rd Flood damage March 2012

R Greenthorpe Rd Flood damage March 2012

W Pearce's Scheme Flood damage March 2012

R Conimbla Rd Flood damage March 2012

R Stoneyhill Rd Flood damage March 2012

R Racecourse Rd Flood damage March 2012

R Cannon Rd Flood damage March 2012

R Binda Rd Flood damage March 2012

R Crowther Rd Flood damage March 2012

R Bluemantle Rd Flood damage March 2012

R Elsievale Rd Flood damage March 2012

R Wiltondale Rd Flood damage March 2012

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2012 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 78 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                Burnley Express

                                December 8, 2006

Flood Warning Can Prevent Washout

LENGTH: 436 words


EARBY residents are being urged to flood the Environment Agency with their
contact details to avoid getting washed out.

The agency is offering the service to properties in and around the Water Street
area which are at risk of flooding from Earby Beck.

People who sign up will be able to receive an Environment Agency flood warning
for their area by either phone or fax.

Officers have been able to extend their service thanks to rain gauge equipment
on the moors above Earby, and monitoring technology which was installed on the
beck earlier this year.

Last month saw the Environment Agency's flood campaign launched, aimed at
raising awareness of flooding among businesses and residents in vulnerable
areas.

Flood incident management officer Graham Lindsey said: "Earby has a long history
of flooding and we have been working with Earby Flood Group to find out how we
can manage the problem more effectively.

"Although we can never stop the floods happening altogether, we can help save
people and their property during a flood. However, the flood warning service is
only effective if people sign up."

The Earby Flood Group was set up two years ago after flooding in August, 2004,
when more than 16 properties were affected.

The group has 11 flood wardens who liaise with the Environment Agency during a
flood alert, and up to 15 volunteers.

They meet regularly to discuss flooding issues and to develop their flood plan
for the town.

During heavy rainfall, the flood plan is put into operation and means that the
flood warden liaises with the Environment Agency while other wardens and
volunteers phone around the town and knock on doors to alert people.

With the group's help, the Environment Agency hopes to get the majority of
people in the town, eligible for a warning, signed up to the service.

Flood group member Pat Spenceley said: "We have a wonderful flood group but the
only people who can really protect their properties are the homeowners
themselves. They need to take responsibility for their own safety and they can
make a start by signing up to this service.

"Some people think that, if they register for a warning then it will mean their
house insurance goes up, but this is wrong. Insurers already know whether you
are likely to flood regardless of the service. By signing up, people are
actually doubling their insurance against flooding, and what's more, the service
is free."

A river level gauge has now been installed near Earby Youth Hostel and a rain
gauge has been placed at Proctor Heights, three kilometres south of the town,
which will help the Environment Agency monitor river levels more effectively.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 79 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Globe (Worthington, Minnesota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 23, 2010 Thursday

Update: Flood watch canceled; warnings still in effect

BYLINE: The Daily Globe, Worthington, Minn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 654 words


Sept. 23--3 p.m.

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- The area's flash flood watches have been canceled, but
flood warnings below remain in effect. Please continue to stay aware of weather
conditions.

11:45 a.m.

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- Additional flood warnings have been issued.

The flood warning continues for the Des Moines River near Windom. At 10 a.m.
Thursday, the stage was 19.4 feet. Flood stage is considered to be 19.0 feet.
The river rose above flood stage today, and is expected to crest near 23.0 feet
today, falling below flood stage Friday. At stages near 23.0 feet, the higher
west bank overflows, flooding agricultural land.

A flood warning continues for the Big Sioux River at Sioux Falls North Cliff
from this afternoon until further notice. At 10 a.m. Thursday, the stage was at
13.6 feet. Flood stage is 16.0 feet. The river is expected to rise above flood
stage by 5 p.m. today and crest near 21.1 feet by Saturday.

A flood warning has been extended for the Rock River at Rock Rapids, set to
expire at 12 p.m. Sunday. At 10 a.m. today the stage was 12.5 feet. Flood stage
is 13.0 feet. The river is forecast to rise above the flood stage by 2 p.m.
today and crest near 14.8 feet Friday. The river will fall below flood stage by
Saturday. At stages near 16.0 feet, the higher banks on the left side of the
river and the lower banks on the right side will begin to flood.

11:19 a.m. Original Post

SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- Osceola, O'Brien, Dickinson and Lyon counties are under a
flash flood watch until 7 p.m. tonight. Rock County is under a flood warning
until 4:30 p.m. today, and the Des Moines River at Jackson and the Rock River at
Rock Rapids are expected to flood.

In Rock County, local law enforcement officials reported flooding on Rock County
7 north of Hardwick. Radar continued to show an area of heavy rainfall across
the warned area. Additional rainfall through this evening is expected to average
between 1 and 2 inches. Runoff from this rainfall will cause flooding to occur
in Luverne, Blue Mounds State Park and Hardwick.

In addition, a flood warning has been issued for the Des Moines River at
Jackson, until further notice. At 7 a.m. this morning, the river was at 10.6
feet, and flood stage is 12.0 feet. The river rose above flood stage this
morning and will crest near 15.6 feet by Friday. At stages near 17.0 feet, the
lower levees in Jackson are overtopped, and parks and ballfields would be
flooded.

A flood warning has been issued for the Rock River at Rock Rapids, from this
afternoon to late Saturday night. At 7 a.m. Thursday the stage was 11.2 feet.
The flood stage is 13.0 feet. Minor flooding is forecast. The river is projected
to rise above flood stage by 4 p.m. today and crest near 15.2 feet by Friday.
The river will fall below flood stage by Saturday. At stages near 16.0 feet, the
higher banks on the left side of the river, and the lower banks on the right
side will begin flooding.

A strong low pressure system will move east across the area today. Additional
moderate to heavy rain can be expected until this system passes. The rain will
decrease from the southwest this afternoon and evening. Widespread additional
rainfall of 1 to 2 inches are expected in southwest Minnesota and northwest
Iowa.

Heavier additional rainfall amounts of 2 to 4 inches are possible. Combined with
saturated and already flooding conditions from rainfall Wednesday and Wednesday
night, these rainfall amounts will create a continued threat of flash flooding
in the area.

To see more of The Daily Globe, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.dglobe.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Daily Globe, Worthington, Minn.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or
call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20100923-QG-Update-Flood-watch-canceled-warnings-still-in-effect-0923-20100923

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QG


                         Copyright 2010 The Daily Globe


                          FOCUS - 80 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                          China Daily - Africa Weekly

                                  July 6, 2016

Li calls for better planning to prevent floods

BYLINE: Hu Yongqi

LENGTH: 470  words


Premier Li Keqiang called for better scientific planning and a greater sense of
responsibility in flood prevention and control during a meeting with provincial
leaders of flooded areas.

Premier Li Keqiangchairs a meeting on flood prevention on Tuesday night in
Yueyang city after inspecting flood-control work in the flooded areas of the
Yangtze and Huaihe rivers during the day.

Li chaired a meeting on flood prevention on Tuesday night in Yueyang city after
inspecting flood-control work in the flooded areas of the Yangtze and Huaihe
rivers during the day. The meeting established plans for flood prevention and
control, emergency response and disaster relief.

According to a report presented at the meeting by the State Flood Control and
Drought Relief Headquarters, the early arrival of heavy rainfall has led to the
flooding and parts of the country face extremely difficult conditions of rain
and flooding this year.

Premier Li Keqiang chairs a meeting on flood prevention on Tuesday night in
Yueyang city after inspecting flood-control work in the flooded areas of the
Yangtze and Huaihe rivers during the day.

Water levels have crossed the warning mark in the middle and lower reaches of
the Yangtze River, the Dongting and the Poyang lakes, as well as more than 200
rivers, damaging middle- and small-sized flood control facilities.

Li said that water conservation and flood prevention and control have always
been of utmost importance to the stability of the country and well-being of
people.

"We must, first and foremost, ensure the safety of the people as well as the
security of major embankments and major facilities. Second, we need to focus our
efforts on preventing basin-wide floods and secondary disasters," he said.

Premier Li Keqiang chairs a meeting on flood prevention on Tuesday night in
Yueyang city after inspecting flood-control work in the flooded areas of the
Yangtze and Huaihe rivers during the day.

Key water conservation projects should be better leveraged, and controlled
reservoirs and gate dams should be fully utilized to retain and discharge water,
and reduce and shift the flood peaks, Li said.

"We should also improve all kinds of emergency plans, particularly the plan for
the orderly evacuation of people, and mobilize the system of collective
surveillance and prevention to guard against torrential floods, landslides, mud
slides and other disasters," he said, adding that "we need to ensure the
effectiveness of the basic jobs of monitoring, forecasting and early warning as
well as risk detection and elimination," he said.

"We must always put people first, act in accordance with law and make sound
plans for flood prevention and control, and mobilize the widest possible masses,
so that we can be fully prepared to fight even the most catastrophic flood and
minimize its damage," Li said.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1497


                    Copyright 2016 China Daily Information.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 81 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                            July 27, 2016 Wednesday

Do everything possible to prevent man-made causes

BYLINE: Mohammad Hafizz Dzulkifli

SECTION: Letters; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 589 words


IN the past decade, the country has suffered numerous floods, with the latest
serious incident occurring in the east coast of the peninsula at the end of 2014
and early last year.

With up to 200,000 people affected and 21 killed, the floods were described as
the worst in decades.

It took more than a year for those affected to recover and return to their
normal lives.

Malaysia's location makes it prone to the southwest and northeast monsoons.

What are the authorities doing to prevent floods? Are they unavoidable? Do we
have a proper flood-mitigation system?

Who is to blame when floods occur? Have we done enough in terms of
flood-prevention efforts?

What about flash floods? Do we pay attention to this occurrence, which happens
almost daily in some parts of Kuala Lumpur, as well as other parts of the
country?

Flash floods may be brief, but the damage they cause is significant.

At the time this letter is written, there have been three incidences of flash
floods over the past month. They took place in Klang, Shah Alam and Teluk
Bahang, Penang.

The flash floods in Klang reportedly occurred following two hours of heavy rain.

The Drainage and Irrigation Department had to manually open the water gate in
Jalan Banting, Pandamaran, to reduce the water level.

The same thing happened in Shah Alam, where a continuous downpour led to flash
floods in a residential area near Seri Muda.

There was also heavy rain in Teluk Bahang, but other factors may have
contributed to the flash floods that occurred there.

According to Balik Pulau member of parliament Datuk Seri Dr Hilmi Yahaya and the
Teluk Bahang Fire and Rescue Department, one of the reasons for the flash floods
was the poor drainage system at Sungai Teluk Bahang.

Teluk Bahang assemblyman Datuk Shah Headan Ayoob Hussain Shah, meanwhile, said
the flash floods may have been triggered by hill-clearing activities.

The flash floods in Teluk Bahang were regarded as the worst flooding that Penang
had seen in years, affecting the Penang International Airport, which saw the
arrival hall being inundated with floodwaters and several flights being delayed.

Although the factors that led to the flash floods in the three places are still
being investigated, we can assume that the main factor was poor drainage.

The drainage system in these places cannot cope well when there are sudden heavy
downpours.

Flash floods occur when excessive water fills land areas in a short time.
Usually, they happen with little or no warning.

The destruction caused by flash floods, combined with their speed and
unpredictability, makes them dangerous.

Fortunately, preventive measures for the usual flooding and flash floods are
similar.

The government came up with flood-control measures following the disastrous
great flood of 1971.

The Natural Disaster Relief Committee was established in 1972, with the task of
coordinating flood-relief operations at the national, state and district levels,
and with a view to prevent the loss of human lives and to reduce the damage
caused by floods.

Flood prevention should begin with individuals' efforts. People should not be
too dependent on the government to prevent or deal with natural disasters.

Despite facing floods annually, the mentality of most Malaysians remains
unchanged.

Environmental awareness remains low. Rivers are still polluted with litter.

Even though we cannot do anything about the natural causes of flooding, we
should do everything we can to prevent man-made causes.

MOHAMMAD HAFIZZ DZULKIFLI,

policy and communication executive, Forum Air Malaysia

( END )

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2016 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 82 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                           September 18, 2011 Sunday
                                  Main Edition

RISING COSTS OF INSURANCE;
Flood protection falters

BYLINE: Russell Grantham; Staff

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1829 words



HIGHLIGHT: Small pool of policies means higher costs. Taxpayers on the hook as
claims for federal disaster aid mount.


Soon after heavy rains swelled the creek behind their Austell home and filled
its lower floor with 7 feet of water in 2009, Keimon Hill and his girlfriend
moved back in and replaced what they could.

Eventually, so did most of their neighbors.

"We lost a lot of memorable stuff, stuff we can't get back," said Hill, 33. They
didn't have flood insurance to cover roughly $40,000 of damages, but got $20,000
in federal disaster aid.

To avoid future losses, they bought flood insurance, for about $1,000 a year.

"We got it right after the flood," said Hill. "The way things are going, you
never know."

But such floods --- and their consequences --- are getting all too predictable.
There's been a rising tide of flood damage in recent years, say experts, which
has helped to sink the nation's flood insurance program in red ink.

Most affected homeowners and businesses don't have flood insurance and suffer
heavy losses, either because they underestimated the risk or mistakenly thought
their regular home insurance covered floods.

That's the dismal situation many of the nation's property owners face this year
--- more than 80 years after the private insurance industry largely stopped
offering flood insurance, and 43 years after the federal government stepped in
and created the National Flood Insurance Program.

Federal officials say it's still too early to tally the total damages from
floods so far this year. Such disasters range from record springtime high water
along the Missouri and Mississippi rivers, to Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm
Lee, which recently caused at least 40 deaths and widespread flooding in the
northeast.

Not counting insurance claims that the federal government's program will
eventually pay, those and other disasters this year are expected to cost
taxpayers at least $6.7 billion to provide federal emergency assistance.

But even before this year's above-average surge of storms and water, the
nation's approach to preventing floods and compensating for damages was
foundering. Government officials say the National Flood Insurance Program,
created in 1968, likely won't be able to repay the billions of dollars it
borrowed from the Treasury Department to cover damages after Hurricane Katrina
hit in 2005. As of the end of August, the program was $17.75 billion in debt.

Experts say the federal program is in trouble for several reasons:

Only a small fraction of people --- mostly those facing the greatest risk from
flooding --- buy flood insurance, undermining the primary way that insurers pool
money from large numbers of customers to spread risk among a large population.
The NFIP has 5.6 million policies in place --- less than 5 percent of the
nation's households.

Floods are becoming more costly as storms have intensified in recent decades and
more people have built more structures in or near flood zones. More than half
the nation's population and half its productive capacity are now located in
coastal and floodplain areas, according to the Congressional Research Service.
Several studies also have found that flood- and storm-related disasters have
worsened in recent decades, even after accounting for inflation, growing
populations and increased construction in flood zones.

The NFIP is shouldering far greater financial risks than it is charging
homeowners and business for, partly because it has failed to update many of its
flood zone maps and to enforce rules aimed at curbing risky development in
flood-prone areas. Critics say the cut-rate premiums encourage people to
repeatedly rebuild flood-damaged homes and build new ones in hazardous areas
with taxpayers' support.

The insurance program's worsening financial condition has prompted Congress to
try to fix it ahead of a Sept. 30 funding deadline. A bill approved by the House
of Representatives in July requires the federal insurance program to charge
rates that match its real costs and to improve its flood zone maps. A different
version is pending in the Senate.

But some critics say the proposed reforms are only a stopgap. The flood
insurance program won't be viable until flood insurance is included in all
homeowners' policies, and private insurance companies shoulder more of the risk,
said Birny Birnbaum, a former insurance regulator who is now executive director
of the Center for Economic Justice in Austin, Texas.

"The only real long-term solution is to make flood a private-sector peril," said
Birnbaum. "Right now, everybody's paying for flood insurance, but they're paying
for it through their taxes."

Birnbaum said the current system is inefficient and costly. With multiple sets
of insurance covering some homes, the government and other insurers now often
argue over whether hurricane damage was caused by floods, which would cost the
NFIP, or wind, the other insurers' responsibility.

"Companies have dumped risks whenever some big event cost too much," said
Birnbaum. "The industry socializes the risk while privatizing the profit to
themselves. ... So what you end up with is a really absurd system."

Insurers counter that they typically don't offer flood insurance because the
risk of floods is different than most risks.

"It's a difficult peril to underwrite for," said Chris Hackett, director of
personal lines policy for the Property Casualty Insurers Association of America.
He said he hasn't "seen much interest" among private firms in entering the flood
insurance market.

Such insurers are leery of the market because only customers in the most
flood-prone areas are likely to buy insurance, making it too risky and costly
for companies to offer.

Also, unlike relatively random hazards such as house fires, floods --- the
nation's most costly disasters --- often hit large sections of cities, states
and coastlines at one time. That could swamp insurers with more claims than they
have money to pay.

Private companies bail out

A few countries, including the United Kingdom, Spain and Japan, have taken the
approach advocated by Birnbaum. According to the Insurance Information
Institute, a trade group, insurers in those nations bundle flood coverage as a
standard part of insurance policies, thus spreading the costs among many more
customers.

Insurers once took a similar approach in the United States. But private
insurance companies generally stopped offering flood insurance coverage after
the Great Mississippi River Flood of 1927, according to the American Institutes
for Research, which did a chronology of events leading to the creation of the
National Flood Insurance Program.

The 1927 flood killed up to 500 people and inundated almost 13 million acres ---
an area equal to about a third of Georgia.

Decades would pass before the federal government stepped in to plug the gap.

Government efforts in the 1950s to launch flood insurance programs stalled amid
industry opposition. But by the mid-1960s, the mounting costs of federal
disaster assistance after several major hurricanes led to the creation of the
current program. Its architects hoped it would reduce the cost of disaster
assistance by generating premiums and pushing development out of harm's way.

Under the 1968 law, the federal government offered subsidized flood insurance to
homeowners and businesses if their communities agreed to control development in
recognized flood zones. The government also mapped flood zones nationwide.
Homeowners in areas expected to flood at least every 100 years were required to
have the insurance, but anyone else could buy it as well.

Jump forward 43 years, and things aren't working as well as they looked on paper
then.

A 2009 report by the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service noted that,
because of lax enforcement, fewer than half of properties in the flood zones
were insured. Many other areas outside official flood zones had a high risk of
flooding, resulting in large uninsured losses and the need for federal disaster
aid.

The researchers said the NFIP needs to do a better job of working with
communities to control development in flood areas, updating its maps and telling
the public about flood risks. Unrealistically low insurance rates also may be
encouraging too much development in flood-prone areas, they said.

Those rates eventually could go much higher, if lawmakers' efforts to make the
NFIP financially sound are enacted. The Property Casualty Insurers Association
of America, a trade group, recently estimated that the NFIP's average premiums
cover only half the true cost, and that premiums would need to triple in
high-risk flood zones.

In Austell, those official flood zones are expected to expand by about 8 percent
as a result of the NFIP's first flood map update since 2008.

The Austell maps are part of a general update of flood maps for seven metro
Atlanta counties --- Cobb, Coweta, DeKalb, Douglas, Forsyth, Fulton and Gwinnett
--- that are being released for public comment this month. Still preliminary
now, they are expected to take effect a year from now.

The earlier maps placed Hill's home outside the flood zone, but a check of his
address on the NFIP's website (www.floodsmart.gov) now places his home in a
"high risk" area.

Like Hill, perhaps a hundred of the victims of Austell's 2009 flood now have
flood insurance, said Duane Demeritt, the city's floodplain administrator. Only
a handful had it before the 2009 flood, he said.

But that leaves hundreds of other formerly flooded homes that are still not
covered at a time when each big flood seems to be a bit worse, he said.

"A lot of people still say they don't need it," said Demeritt.

Unmatched coverage

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution is committed to covering insurance issues that
impact the Atlanta region. That coverage continues today with our examination of
flood insurance.

Rising tide of flood damage

The National Flood Insurance Program's finances haven't recovered since damage
payments to Hurricane Katrina victims swamped its premium income in 2005.
Lawmakers are trying to reform the government insurance program to make it more
viable.

Year Premiums collected Damages paid

2000 $1.7 billion $252 million

2001 $1.7 billion $1.3 billion

2002 $1.8 billion $434 million

2003 $1.9 billion $781 million

2004 $2 billion $2.2 billion

2005 $2.2 billion $17.7 billion

2006 $2.6 billion $641 million

2007 $2.9 billion $612 million

2008 $3 billion $3.5 billion

2009 $3.2 billion $773 million

2010 $3.4 billion $728 million

Source: Federal Emergency Management Agency

Most expensive floods

Six of the 10 most costly floods since 1978, in terms of insured damages paid by
the National Flood Insurance Program, have occurred since 2001. The figures
don't include uninsured damages.

Event Date Damages paid

Hurricane Katrina 2005 $16.2 billion

Hurricane Ike 2008 $2.6 billion

Hurricane Ivan 2004 $1.6 billion

Tropical Storm Allison 2001 $1.1 billion

Louisiana flood 1995 $585 million

Hurricane Isabel 2003 $493 million

Hurricane Rita 2005 $471 million

Hurricane Floyd 1999 $462 million

Hurricane Opal 1995 $406 million

Hurricane Hugo 1989 $376 million

Source: Federal Emergency Management Agency

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2011 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 83 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                      Pioneer Press (St. Paul, Minnesota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            September 3, 2007 Monday

Nearly everyone can get flood insurance

BYLINE: David Hanners and Maryjo Webster, Pioneer Press, St. Paul, Minn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1539 words


Sep. 3--Ceil Strauss wanted flood insurance for her home in Hastings, so she
called her agent.

"He told me, 'You can't get flood insurance; you're not in the flood plain,' "
Strauss recalled.

Most folks might shrug, take the agent at his word and hope they never get
flooded. But as a hydrologist in the Department of Natural Resources' Floodplain
Community Assistance Program, Strauss knew a thing or two about who can get
flood insurance and who can't.

She knew that, as long as the city or county she lived in participated in the
federal flood insurance program -- and hers did -- she was eligible to buy a
flood policy.

After floods devastated portions of southeast Minnesota two weekends ago,
homeowners who found their damages not covered by insurance echoed a common
refrain: They had wanted to buy flood insurance, but their insurance agents told
them they couldn't get it.

In reality, almost all of the flood-affected homeowners -- including those in
hard-hit towns like Rushford and Stockton -- were eligible. In Winona, Fillmore
and Houston counties, which sustained the worst flooding, only 11 small
communities don't participate in the Federal Emergency Management Agency's flood
insurance program.

Statewide, nine of every 10 homeowners can get flood coverage.

Still, some large communities have been slow to enroll. For example, Apple
Valley, a suburb of 50,100, only joined the program in April 2006. A government
delay in updating "flood hazard" maps has meant residents in some communities,
such as Woodbury, can get only limited coverage.

Woodbury resident Mike Kazmerski said that, after flooding in 2004, he checked
into the program and was told that, because of the mapping issue, area
homeowners were eligible for only a limited amount of flood insurance.

"The result for us is that, while I feel another flooding event could severely
impact our home, we'd only have $35,000 of coverage. We're pretty much
uncovered," he said.

Woodbury, like Apple Valley, is considered part of FEMA's "emergency phase"
insurance program, meaning the coverage is lower. A homeowner in a community
under FEMA's regular program can insure a home for up to $250,000 and its
contents for up to $100,000.

The cost of annual premiums ranges between $200 and $300 a year.

Flash floods from quick, heavy rains contributed to seven deaths and caused $26
million in public infrastructure damage in six counties in southeastern
Minnesota, according to FEMA's preliminary estimate.

Although an estimate of property damage is still being compiled, FEMA officials
said 305 homes were destroyed and 478 others had major damage. So far, more than
2,100 people have sought aid from the agency, and it has doled out more than
$2.4 million in assistance, most of it for temporary housing.

ZONING, MAPPING

While many of the flooded communities are small, some sizeable metro-area cities
don't participate in the FEMA program. Among them are Forest Lake and Oak Park
Heights in Washington County.

In Forest Lake, a town of 14,440 people 23 miles northeast of St. Paul, the City
Council has yet to join the program because of zoning issues. City Administrator
Chip Robinson said the City Council considered enrolling in the program several
years ago, decided against it and has not revisited the issue.

"They didn't want to institute the regulations that FEMA required, adopt a
flood-zone ordinance," he said. "We would've had to designate certain areas in
the city that would have flood potential, and then there'd be certain
regulations about where you could build and not build. That's the long and short
of it."

Asked if that approach made sense in light of the recent flooding elsewhere in
the state, Robinson said, "I'm not the policymaker here."

Oak Park Heights, 16 miles northeast of St. Paul, is home to 4,000 people. City
Administrator Eric Johnson said the city didn't enroll in the program because
there was no need to.

"Most if not all of the city of Oak Park Heights lies outside of the 100-year
flood plain," he explained. "It doesn't mean people aren't buying their own
flood insurance."

Actually, it does mean people aren't buying their own flood insurance. Unless
the city participates in the program, homeowners aren't eligible to buy the
coverage, which is backed by FEMA but sold by local agents.

As residents in southeastern Minnesota discovered, even if you live outside the
flood plain shown on a FEMA map, you can still get flooded. Because of a variety
of factors -- ranging from changing weather patterns to community growth to
outdated drainage systems -- areas once thought safe from flooding can find
themselves inundated.

"The FEMA maps really focus on streams and really big lakes," said Strauss, of
the DNR. "A lot of areas at the top of the drainage area aren't going to be
shown."

Stockton, in Winona County, was among the towns hit hardest in the flood. The
map used to determine its flood-prone areas was drawn in 1982; the map for
Rushford, a Fillmore County town that sustained extensive damage, is even older.

"We've got some communities still using maps from the '70s," Strauss said.
Congress appropriated $1 billion for a five-year program to draw new maps, but
authorities are finding it isn't enough money.

"The counties that have the most population and the greatest flood risk are the
priorities," Strauss said. "Smaller communities won't be getting as-new maps in
the near future."

BAD INFORMATION

But even updated maps are of little use if homeowners don't know they can buy
flood insurance. On trips to the flood-stricken area last week, Gov. Tim
Pawlenty got an earful from people who said they'd tried to buy insurance but
were told they couldn't.

Pawlenty has since proposed that insurance companies be required to tell
customers buying homeowners' policies about the availability of the flood
coverage.

"We need to ensure that people have good information when they buy insurance, so
they can make the best decision about what's right for them and their families,"
the governor said in announcing his proposal.

Mark Kulda, a spokesman for the Insurance Federation of Minnesota, which lobbies
on behalf of the industry, said the misconception about not being able to get
coverage if you live outside a flood plain is common.

"I think the phrase has been repeated over and over so much that people think
it's true, and it's not," he said. "And some experts think it's true, and it's
not."

He said the confusion wasn't always the fault of uninformed insurance salesmen,
though.

"There may have been some cases where some agents said you didn't need it
because you don't live in a flood plain, and that got misconstrued as, 'You
can't get it because you don't live in a flood plain.' But the advice that you
don't need it isn't necessarily the best advice, either," he said.

If homeowners buy a home through a federally insured lending institution, they
are required to have flood insurance. Jim Gromek, an agent with American Family
Insurance in Winona, said that is generally the only time the subject is raised.

"The only time flood insurance usually comes up in a conversation is when it's
required by a lender," he said. "Occasionally, people will ask about it."

He said that, while some agents may have told customers they couldn't get the
insurance because they lived outside a flood plain, "They never got that story
from me."

"I know that it's available. I know you can get flood insurance if you live on
top of a mountain, as long as that community is part of a FEMA program," he
said.

Insurance companies and agents are regulated by the Minnesota Department of
Commerce. Bill Walsh, a spokesman for the department, said it was important for
agents to make customers aware of flood insurance.

He also said that, if the agency got a report that an agent had misinformed a
customer about flood insurance eligibility, the complaint would be investigated.

"That's the type of investigation we do all the time at the department --
misrepresenting, misleading, deceptive sales practices," he said.

So far, there haven't been any complaints involving flood insurance, Walsh said.

David Hanners can be reached at dhanners@pioneerpress.com or 651-228-5551.

Landslide survivor Sharon Partington sees for the first time the home she lived
in for 17 years in Brownsville, Minn. Brother-in-law Larry Partington, right,
was taking photographs and helping to recover property from the home Aug. 22.

If an insurance agent says you don't qualify for flood insurance, check again:

Most Minnesotans live in communities participating in the National Flood
Insurance Program.

If your city or county participates, any home or business within it is eligible
for flood insurance.

The insurance is backed by FEMA but sold by local agents.

To see if your community takes part, go to www.fema.gov/cis/MN.pdf or search our
database at twincities.com.

To see more of the Pioneer Press, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.twincities.com. Copyright (c) 2007, Pioneer Press, St. Paul, Minn.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20070903-SP-Nearly-everyone-can-get-flood-insurance-0903

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SP


                          Copyright 2007 Pioneer Press


                          FOCUS - 84 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 3, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Assessing Your Need For Flood Insurance

BYLINE: By JAY ROMANO

SECTION: Section 11; Column 5; Real Estate Desk; YOUR HOME; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 578 words


ACCORDING to the Insurance Information Institute in Manhattan, about 11 million
homes in the United States are in areas highly susceptible to flooding. And
while homeowners' insurance does not cover losses caused by floods, such
coverage is available through the National Flood Insurance Program. But only one
in four homeowners in flood-prone areas buys flood insurance.

''People tend to think that the risk of flooding for structures in a flood zone
is about the same as the risk of fire,'' said Jeanne Salvatore, a spokeswoman
for the institute. But according to a Federal Emergency Management Agency
analysis, Ms. Salvatore said, over the life of a 30-year mortgage, a property in
an area with a high risk of flooding would have a 26 percent chance of being
flooded, compared with a 1 percent chance of being involved in a fire.

''Ninety percent of all natural disasters in this country involve flooding,''
Ms. Salvatore said.

Butch Kinerney, a spokesman for the federal agency, said that ''everyone lives
in a flood zone -- it's just a question of whether you live in a low-, moderate-
or high-risk area.''

Areas that have the highest risk, Mr. Kinerney said, are designated Special
Flood Hazard Areas. Those with a low to moderate risk of flooding are called
Non-Special Flood Hazard Areas. Usually, he said, when someone buys a home in a
Special Flood Hazard Area, the mortgage lender will require flood insurance.

But just because a house is in a Non-Special Flood Hazard area does not mean
flood insurance is unnecessary. About 25 percent of floods occur in low and
moderate flood hazard zones, Mr. Kinerney said.

''You don't have to live near water to be at risk for flooding,'' he said,
explaining that unusually heavy rainfall can cause flash floods and mud slides
just about anywhere.

He said that homeowners can determine their zone by checking the federal
government's flood insurance rate maps, which are available on the agency's Web
site, www.floodsmart.gov.

Mr. Kinerney said that if a community participates in the National Flood
Insurance Program -- about 20,000 communities do -- homeowners and renters there
can buy flood insurance from agents representing about 90 companies. (If a
community is not in the program, residents cannot buy flood insurance.)

Jack DeCicco, a property and casualty underwriting consultant for State Farm
Insurance in Bloomington, Ill., said that flood insurance premiums are based on
the zone, with the highest rates for homes in coastal areas and along rivers,
lakes and streams.

''The annual premium for homes in a Special Flood Hazard Area can range from
$500 to $5,000,'' he said, depending on the zone. He added that lower premiums
are available for homes in other areas. The annual premium for a $200,000 policy
with $25,000 in contents coverage for a home in a low- to moderate flood risk
area would be about $300, he said. The maximum dwelling policy anywhere is
$250,000. Owners and renters can insure personal property for up to $100,000.

Mr. DeCicco noted that insurance for the structure is ''replacement cost'' --
covering the cost of replacing the original structure with a similar one.
Coverage for contents is provided on an ''actual cash value'' basis, counting
depreciation.

There is one catch for homeowners who decide to buy flood insurance only after
hearing that a particularly bad storm is headed their way. ''There is a 30-day
waiting period before the policy takes effect,'' Mr. DeCicco said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Tom Bloom)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 85 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       The Financial Express (Bangladesh)

                              July 24, 2015 Friday

Regional cooperation for flood risk management in S. Asia

LENGTH: 777 words

DATELINE: Bangladesh


Bangladesh, July 24 -- Floods are a regular phenomenon in South Asia, the most
populous region in the world. The south-western summer monsoons occur from June
through September. Nepal, Bangladesh and certain regions of India and Pakistan
frequently experience heavy floods during this season. These countries are
washed by a huge network of rivers and their tributaries. Given the hydrology,
climatic factors, the geology and chronic vulnerabilities, they are prone to
floods.

Heavy rain in mid-August of 2014 caused massive floods and several landslides in
Nepal. A total of 173,800 people were affected and 53 of them died. The floods
and landslides damaged infrastructures, livestock and crops.

Floods that hit Jammu and Kashmir in India in the first week of September 2014
were the worst of the century which ran through more than 2,500 villages and
affected hundreds of thousands of people. Nearly 250 people died and 700 were
injured. Floods in 2014 in the mountainous areas of Gilgit-Balitstan and
Pakistani-administered Kashmir, swept away thousands of villages. Almost 312
people died, with 2,275,000 being affected and crops of nearly 1.7 million acres
lost. Punjab province declared a state of emergency as the flood spread through
its central areas.

In the months of August and September 2014, continuous heavy rains caused
flooding in northern and north-eastern districts of Bangladesh. Almost three
million people were affected in seventeen districts. Some 33,893 houses were
completely and 236,409 houses were partially damaged. Road network of 64 km was
completely and 1688 km partially destroyed. Besides, 659 km of embankment was
damaged.

The causes of floods in the region are both natural and man-made.

In South Asia, many aspects of vulnerability arising from physical, social,
economic, political and environmental factors are observed. These may include
poor design and construction of infrastructure, lack of resources, poor health,
inadequate protection of assets, lack of public information and awareness
education, limited official recognition of risks and preparedness measures.
Vulnerability varies significantly within a community, location and over time.
Some 540 million poor and disadvantaged people live in South Asia. Floods affect
the most impoverished who live on the fringes. Many of the floods of the region
have trans-boundary dimensions and effect.

A regional approach to flood management based on previous experience and current
limitations and gaps is required to retain the development gains and protect the
most vulnerable communities. South Asian countries have developed some
capacities in flood management and achieved enough success in this regard. But
there are still gaps, limitations and challenges to overcome.

Replication of tested flood preparedness interventions could reduce the
vulnerability of the most flood-prone communities across the region. The media
can play a more effective role in highlighting the vulnerabilities and potential
risks of poor and flood stricken areas and tested flood risk reduction
initiatives for appropriate attention of the policy makers and implementers.

It would be a smart step to promote more durable and flood resistant livelihood
opportunities in most risk-prone areas of the region to enhance socio-economic
and political status of the communities. Combination of environment-friendly
structural and non-structural measures based on regional cooperation and trust
is the most important part of a regional approach in reducing flood risks.
Protecting lives, livelihoods, properties and assets of the people are the
constitutional obligations of the governments of the South Asian countries. A
people-centric political, administrative and economic commitment and dynamism of
the governments and politicians across the region is essential for a successful
regional approach to flood risk management and addressing the causes of flood
devastation. Regional approach to Flood Risk Management could directly
contribute to sustainable poverty reduction and negative consequences of climate
change. In this regard, an organized pressure from the conscious citizen groups
across South Asia will be useful to influence governments and related
international agencies to help make lives of the people less risky, more
resilient and secured.

The writer is a Disaster Risk Reduction /Climate Change Adaptation Expert and
Lawyer and a fellow of EPFL, Switzerland.

farid.hasan2008@gmail.com

Published by HT Syndication with permission from The Financial Express. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 The Financial Express
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 86 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            The Statesman (Pakistan)

                             July 21, 2015 Tuesday

Flood emergency imposed in Chitral

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: PESHAWAR


PESHAWAR, July 21 -- In Chitral, a flood emergency has been imposed in the area
as torrential rains have resulted in floods in local rivers and nullahs. The
rainwater washed away several bridges and inundated many villages.

Army and Chitral Scouts personnel are taking part in relief and rescue
operations. Several areas in the district have been cut off because of the
floods and damages to communication systems.

Meanwhile, according to the Flood Warning Division Lahore, River Indus is in
medium flood at Chashma and Kalabagh, and in low flood at Terbella and Taunsa.
Similarly, River Chenab is in low flood at Balloki and Marala and below low
flood at Khanki, Qadiriabad and Tarimon barrages.

River Jehlum is in low flood at Mangla and below low at head Rasul. River Ravi
is in low flood at Shahdara and below low flood at Nullah Bansar. Low flood has
also been reported in River Sutlaj at Suleimanki. All other rivers and nullahs
in the province are flowing normal.

In Rajanpur, rescue operations are in full swing in areas hit by flood in "Hill
Torrent Kaha Sultan." The local administration has also warned the people in the
riverine areas of Bumblee, Harhand and Chandia to shift to safer places.

Meanwhile, Punjab Chief Minister Shahbaz Sharif has directed the authorities
concerned to take immediate relief and rescue measures to help people affected
by floods in torrential nullahs in Koh-e-Suleman in Rajanpur district. He also
told all those concerned to monitor the floods situation round the clock, across
the province.

Authorities of Layyah, Dera Ghazi Khan, Rajanpur and Muzaffargarh districts,
while issuing flood warning, have asked the people of the riverine areas to
shift to safer places.

In Layyah, over 100 villages have been inundated. Similarly, dozens of villages
have been submerged in Kot Addu. The administrations of these districts have
directed the concerned departments to make all arrangements to help the affected
people.

In Muzaffargarh, 18 relief camps have been set up and all spurs and safety studs
are being monitored.

The Indus River is in low flood at Guddu and Sukkur barrages where the water
level is increasing.

Meanwhile, a high level flood recorded in Indus River at the location of Chachra
in Rahim Yar Khan, officials said on Monday.

The Indus and Chenab River meet at the point of Chachra where the gauge level in
10.60.

According to District Flood Control Room, a stream of 2, 60,000 cusecs water is
passing through the river with a flood warning issued in Indus River.

The villages located at Indus River have been directed to transfer to a safe
zone.

On the other hand in Rasulpur, at least five villages namely Rasulpur, Kacha
Mahazi, Kacha Chauhan, Muslim Abad, Kacha Darkan and hundreds of acres of lands
and fields have been inundated due to heavy floods.

Moreover, rescue efforts have not yet been initiated in the affected areas.

SINDH FARES NO BETTER

Official sources in Karachi reported that the inflow of water at Guddu barrage
was 353,000 cusecs while water discharge was 326,000 cusecs on Monday morning.
Similarly, at Sukkur barrage, the influx of water was 269,000 and discharge was
214,000 cusecs.

Sindh irrigation department has reported medium level flood at Guddu Barrage.
Flood control rooms have been established at Guddu and Sukkur Barrages to
monitor the situation.

Sindh Chief Minister Syed Qaim Ali Shah has directed the Deputy Commissioners to
evacuate people from the Katcha area of river Indus.

The CM stressed upon the people of Katcha areas of Larkana and Sukkur divisions
to evacuate the Katcha areas for their own safety.

He has also directed concerned authorities to set up a control room in the Sindh
Secretariat, Karachi, to monitor the situation on an hourly basis.

SITUATION ELSEWHERE

In Zhob district of Balochistan, Frontier Corps Balochistan has started rescue
and relief activities in the flood affected areas of Mir Ali Khel. It rescued
twelve people including women and children, stranded in flood tides. Nine
vehicles were also rescued.

According to details several people and vehicles were stranded on Mir Ali Khel
road in Zhob due to increase in flow of flood tide.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from The Statesman. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 MASHRIQ GROUP OF NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 87 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                           Hong Kong Government News

                     August 29, 2012 Wednesday 6:30 AM EST

People's Government of Jilin Province: Jilin Province has Activated Grade ?
Emergency Response to Flood Control

LENGTH: 698  words


Hong Kong, Aug. 29 -- Considering the impact of typhoon "Bolaven" on the
province, on August 27, the Provincial Flood Control and Drought Relief
Headquarters made an urgent decision to activate Grade  emergency response to
flood control at 14 pm on August 27, 2011. The provincial government leaders
made instructions, calling on all localities to attach great importance and pay
close attention to the typhoon movement, deploy the defense work in advance, and
strengthen on-duty on-guard, to ensure no risk at all.



According to the latest information about typhoon Bolaven released by Flood
Control and Drought Relief Headquarters and the Provincial Meteorological
Bureau, this year's No. 15 super typhoon "Bolaven will affect the province from
the afternoon of August 28. From the night of 28th to 29th, the province's
Songyuan, Changchun, Siping, Liaoyuan, Jilin, Tonghua and west of Baishan will
have heavy rain, with isolated downpour, accompanied by strong wind on sixth
scale.

Facing the coming of "Bolaven", the Provincial Flood Control and Drought Relief
Headquarters held an emergency consultation meeting, analyzed the anti-typhoon
situation, the rain condition and the water regiment, studied and deployed the
typhoon defense work, and urgently activated Grade  emergency response to flood
control.

Vice Governor and Commander-in-chief of the Provincial Flood Control and Drought
Relief Headquarters Wang Shouchen required all localities and relevant
departments to strictly implement the flood control responsibilities, and the
relevant responsible persons to go deep into the front line to make forward
command; to highlight prevention in the key parts, implement preventive measures
at the torrential flood disaster prone areas, low-lying waterlogged areas and
areas threatened by flood, closely observe and guard the risky projects and
sections, and strictly keep watching small and medium-sized rivers, small and
medium-sized reservoirs; all localities must set up rescue teams as early as
possible, so that they can immediately rush to the scene and carry out rescue
and relief work in the event of danger and disaster; and must ensure the safety
of people's lives and property, promptly transfer the masses threatened by
flood, and minimize disaster losses.

Subsequently, the Provincial Flood Control and Drought Relief Headquarters
issued an emergency notice, requiring all localities and departments and units
concerned to attach great importance, implement the responsibility, and take
strict precautions, to ensure the safety of people's lives. The flood control
and drought relief headquarters of all the cities (prefectures), counties
(cities, districts) must activate the appropriate flood emergency response
according to their respective flood control plans, and the flood control and
drought relief headquarters of the cities (prefecture) must send work teams to
the front line inspect the anti-typhoon work of the counties (cities, districts)
under jurisdiction, and ensure all the preparations for typhoon prevention,
flood prevention and waterlogging prevention be well done.

At the same time, the Provincial Flood Control and Drought Relief Office
activated Grade  emergency on-duty response to flood control, and required all
the flood control and drought relief offices in all the cities (counties) to
strengthen on-duty for flood control. During the anti-typhoon period, it is
necessary to have leaders lead the work team, closely monitor the flood changes,
and timely and accurately master flood conditions, disaster conditions and
engineering conditions. In the event of a large flood, it is necessary to report
to the relevant governments' flood control and drought relief headquarters in
accordance with the flood reporting system. In addition, the Provincial Flood
Control and Drought Relief Headquarters has sent eight expert groups to assist
the localities to accomplish the work of anti-typhoon; the meteorological and
hydrological departments have strengthened forecasting and early warning as well
as hydrological analysis, closely monitored the typhoon movement; the 3 rescue
teams directly governed by the province have got ready for emergency rescue.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


      Copyright 2012 Hong Kong Government News, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 88 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                          September 11, 2010 Saturday
                                 First Edition

Flood victims may be left high and dry

BYLINE: Report Katja BÃ¼hrer

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 526 words


More than half of all homes in Victoria, which was hit by severe floods during
the week, are not insured for flood damage because wrangling between insurers,
local governments and consumer groups has prevented Australia from creating a
framework to adequately cater for flood damage.

Most home and contents insurance policies in Australia exclude cover for flood
damage, despite floods accounting for nearly one-third of natural hazard damage.
Floods are also the most expensive of natural perils and cost the industry
around $300 million a year. The blame for limited flood insurance is routinely
put on insurers, who are accused of not clearly warning consumers that they are
not covered for this risk.

There is no industry definition for flooding and many people do not understand
the distinction between storm and flood damage.

Some insurers say a key reason they do not cover floods is because of poor
information about where floods occur, which is usually the responsibility of
local councils or a flood-plain management authority.

Without adequate data, insurers say they can't price for the risk of flooding
and offer insurance.

The issue became a problem for thousands of people this past week, when the
heaviest floods in more than 15 years swept through Victoria and caused $10
million worth of damage.

Consumers insured with Insurance Australia Group appear unlikely to receive
compensation because the company is yet to introduce flood insurance in Victoria
and Queensland. IAG has received around 3000 claims from the Victorian floods.
The company declined to comment.

AAMI is Suncorp's main brand in Victoria. While flood insurance is not
automatically included in home insurance, the company said it would assess
claims on a case-by-case basis. Suncorp found that the data from local councils
was inadequate and set about doing its own flood mapping to supplement the data.
Consequently, flood insurance has been automatically included in most of its
home insurance policies since mid-2008.

IAG and Suncorp control 80 per cent of the market for home and motor insurance.

Insurers have been trying for three years to create a framework to create flood
products. The industry applied in early 2008 to the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission to adopt a common definition for flooding. The move was
abandoned after consumer legal groups objected.

Maurice Blackburn principal John Berrill said insurers should more clearly
highlight the exclusion of flood insurance.

The distinction between storms and floods was often blurred, particularly in
mixed events, where a downpour is followed by run-off from an inundated river.
Flood damage and damage resulting from an inundated river, creek or dam were
often excluded from insurance contracts, while storm damage was mostly included.

"It's an artificial distinction and you get into this blue over what the
sequence of events was and what caused the flooding," he said.

Suncorp head of personal insurance Mark Milliner said it was the responsibility
of customers to read the fine print. "My sense is product disclosure statements
are there for that reason, to explain what people are buying," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPH: Fire and rain - Proportional costs of natural disasters by type
1967-1999 (%) SOURCE: INSURANCE COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2010 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 89 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                           February 9, 2011 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

Debate needed on disaster funding solution

BYLINE: PETER McCARTHY . Peter McCarthy is the convenor of the Institute of
Actuaries of Australia's general insurance practice committee

SECTION: NEWS; Opinion; Pg. 63

LENGTH: 983 words


Devising a national program for funding disaster recovery is very complex,
writes Peter McCarthy.

The scale of the recent flooding and cyclone catastrophes has led to calls for a
national funding solution to manage disaster recovery.

One positive outcome is that flooding may finally become a serious subject of
debate. For many years, it has been "out of sight, out of mind" or "too hard"
for public policymakers and the insurance industry.

A funding solution for floods may also have benefits for other natural disasters
- think cyclone Yasi or the Victorian bushfires - but for various reasons,
flooding will probably remain in a class of its own.

The Institute of Actuaries of Australia believes all public and private
solutions should be examined through the lens of economic and social policy
considerations.

Despite the relatively high frequency of flooding and severe rain events
(compared with, say, cyclones or earthquakes), obtaining insurance can be very
difficult or prohibitively expensive. A distinction is often drawn between flood
types like riverine versus storm, the fine detail of which often eludes
consumers. And while insurers routinely cover natural disasters including
cyclones, hailstorms, earthquakes and bushfires, many don't cover floods.

Why? Unlike in other disasters, the same properties flood again and again. Many
high-risk areas are also well known by residents, business owners, governments
and insurers.

Flood premiums that insurers must charge in return for providing full flood
cover for these properties are extremely expensive. As a simple illustration, a
$500,000 property that floods every 30 years may require a premium for flood of
up to tens of thousands of dollars.

If insurers adopted a premium structure that resulted in low-flood- risk
customers cross-subsidising high-flood-risk customers, their low- flood-risk
customers would seek cheaper cover elsewhere, insurers' portfolios would become
overweight with high-risk customers, and premiums would rise in a vicious cycle
known as anti-selection.

The scale of flood disasters is also greater than for other disasters. The
Victorian bushfires affected a large area and cost many lives, but the damage in
dollar terms was small compared with the Queensland floods. Many bushfires
affect very thinly populated areas while floods often affect more densely
populated towns and cities built near rivers.

The suggested solutions following the Queensland floods have ranged from fully
privatised insurance solutions to fully public solutions such as a national
disaster fund with a post-event levy.

The Institute of Actuaries of Australia believes several issues must be examined
to create a future funding solution, starting with an agreed policy goal. The
issues are broader than insurance. For example, is the objective to fully
compensate everyone affected for their losses or to partly compensate some of
those affected? There's also a need to decide what property will be covered and
to what limits.

Will there be compulsory cover? Will private homes and commercial properties be
covered? Will government infrastructure be covered?

Defining what "flood" events are covered is also key. It's difficult to have a
black-and-white flood definition. There are also complexities regarding the
interaction of floods with other natural hazard covers. For example, flood
damage that occurs when rain is still falling creates an overlap between "storm"
and "flood" covers. Or, in the case of cyclone Yasi, damage caused by wind is
probably covered but damage from river flooding caused by rain from a cyclone
may not be covered, and storm surge is normally not covered.

The funding solution must define roles for commercial insurance and government
and a realistic assessment made about whether it's affordable to implement an
agreed funding solution on an ongoing basis. The collection mechanism (tax, levy
or premium), the level of compulsion to contribute and the amount required to
reinstate damaged assets may limit options.

To manage affordability, options must address the level of cross-subsidies from
owners of properties that are not in flood-prone areas to owners of properties
that are.

To estimate costs and address issues associated with a funding solution,
modelling of flood impacts is required. This is usually a combination of
prior-event observations and hydrological modelling.

However, there are uncertainties, including the likelihood of a particular rain
event occurring, with only a short period of observed data to refer to. Floods
referred to as a one-in-100-year or similar event may be more like one-in-25
levels.

And changes in land use (for example, increased urbanisation leading to concrete
covering land that was formerly grassland or forest) changes future flood
effects, making previously observed flood boundaries less relevant. Any solution
must factor these uncertainties into the cost impact.

It's also important that a solution does not discourage research into flood
prevention and mitigation. Changes may reduce the likelihood of flood damage,
through changes to building codes or zoning, or reduce the incidence or severity
of damage through levees, dams or other structures.

While areas with a very high risk of flooding are well known, areas with a less
frequent chance of flooding may not be recognised as being at risk. This means
affected parties don't adequately prepare or protect themselves. More effective
communication is needed.

Governance and oversight will also be important and include legislation, public
reporting and dispute resolution. Whose responsibility will it be to ensure
property at risk is covered - individuals, government or a mix?

Any debate on a funding solution should also address what relief should be
provided to those with no insurance or those who are underinsured.

When the next disaster occurs, the recovery will depend on a viable solution
being found.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2011 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 90 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            Waterloo Courier (Iowa)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 17, 2011 Saturday

CFU shoring up flood wall

BYLINE: Jon Ericson, Waterloo-Cedar Falls Courier, Iowa

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 467 words


Sept. 17--CEDAR FALLS -- Mother Nature is going to have to work a lot harder to
flood Cedar Falls Utilities a second time.

Work has begun to raise flood protection at the utility by an additional 3 1/2
feet above the record flood level of 2008.

Back in 2008, CFU thought it was prepared. A concrete flood wall was expected to
keep out the Cedar River and Dry Run Creek, and rubber bladders were put up to
fill gaps in the flood protection. But the monster flood topped all early
forecasts and, eventually, the flood wall.

The flood was devastating for CFU, filling its offices with water and requiring
heroic efforts from employees to get in through high water to maintain services
for customers. Damages from the flood exceeded $20 million.

Peterson Contractors Inc. of Reinbeck is busy pouring cement, raising the wall
that faces Washington Park and the Cedar River. The 1,300 feet of existing flood
wall will gain some elevation and link to an additional 2,000 feet of protection
to surround the entire property.

The project will cost $4.9 million and is funded by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.

"When you think about the fact we had $20 million in damage, it seems like an
easy decision," said CFU spokeswomanBetty Zeman.

The south end of the property at Waterloo Road contributes a significant flood
danger to the CFU plant as the Cedar River backs up into Dry Run Creek. The new
flood protection will include a wall on that end of the property and a flood
gate across Utility Parkway.

CFU General Manager Jim Krieg said the utility is working to make the
very-visible Waterloo Road part of the wall attractive. They plan to incorporate
a landscaped berm in conjunction with a wall. CFU has been working with the
city's public art committee to give the wall an artistic flair.

"This is a gateway to downtown, it sees a lot of traffic, and we want it to be
attractive," Krieg said.

The timetable for the project has completion slated for next May. CFU won't be
fully protected, though, until the city raises its flood levee as well. The two
systems are interconnected, and the city is currently in the design phase. In
both systems, the goal is to raise the flood levels to protect against a
500-year flood and have extra freeboard.

The flood of 2008 was somewhere between a 250- and 500-year flood.

Two pumps are being installed to get water back out of the property if heavy
rainfall comes during a flood event.

The Washington Park access via Utility Parkway has been permanently closed. The
bike trail that runs along CFU property will be rerouted during construction and
also have a minor permanent change to the route as well.

___ (c)2011 Waterloo-Cedar Falls Courier (Waterloo, Iowa) Visit Waterloo-Cedar
Falls Courier (Waterloo, Iowa) at www.wcfcourier.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110917-OO-HLT-CFU-shoring-up-flood-wall-0917-20110917

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: OO


                        Copyright 2011 Waterloo Courier


                          FOCUS - 91 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                             Assam Tribune (India)

                              July 19, 2013 Friday

Flood and its management

LENGTH: 1288 words

DATELINE: Guwahati


Guwahati, July 19 -- The dynamic nature of various flood parameters calls for
evolving suitable flood management methodologies in order to save lives,
properties and agricultural production. Floods have become not only an unfailing
annual event in most of the river basins all over the world, but also they have
encroached new areas and in new hydrological models, causing great havoc and
extensive losses by damaging agricultural crops and properties in addition to
loss of lives. Many of the rivers that traverse India, cause floods during the
monsoon period. We have in our recent memory the colossal damage caused by the
floods in Uttarakhand. Several thousands of people including pilgrims suspected
to be killed in the devastating floods with landslides.

In spite of the study on the nature of floods and the efforts so far put forth
for the control of floods, the damage caused due to floods has been increasing
due to the increase in the flood plain occupancy either for development
activities or encroachments on agricultural areas, deforestation, climate change
and other environmental changes. The Holy Ganga is no longer holy. All the
rivers ' big and small ' have become contaminated and even the sea has become a
marine slum. Environmental degradation is the order of the day. We talked of
global warming with the uncontrolled emission of greenhouse gases and
industries, the sea level threatens to rise and might sooner than the later pull
the islands and the coastal belts into a watery grave.

Out of the many causes of floods, five main reasons are ' i) very heavy rain,
ii) synchronization of the peak of floods of the main river and the tributaries,
iii) inadequate and inefficient drainage of low-lying and flat areas, iv) snow
melt run-off along with heavy rains causing overflow of river banks and v)
typhoons and cyclones. The fall in the infiltration rate and the percolation
area due to the rapid silting of rivers and reservoirs, urban and industrial
expansion and construction of embankments contributed a lot to the flood
problem. Low water retention and increased run-off over land due to heavy
erosion, over-exploitation and misuse of catchments cause flood inundation in
countries like India.

There is a need to make effective laws to prevent the existing activities
causing environmental degradation to the possible extent. The idea of building
dams, ropeways and other disturbing activities in reference to the North-east
region for hydrogeneration of power, creation of entertainment facilities and
other developmental programmes may enhance the chances of facing natural
calamities. There are other alternatives for obtaining the required power from
gas, thermal and non-conventional energy sources such as solar and wind energy,
biogas and biotechnology, etc., which can provide sufficient energy if such
alternative energy sources are trapped.

An appropriate flood management programme includes a good number of measures to
be undertaken and policies that need to be pursued. The National Commission on
Floods, 1980, submitted a study report alongwith the programmes and policies for
modifying the susceptibility to flood damage and modification of the loss
burden. The report delineated the technological feasibilities as well as
policies need to be pursued for substantially reducing the susceptibility to
flood damage. Altogether, four methods of flood management, i.e., modifying the
flood, modifying susceptibility to flood damage, modification of the loss burden
and bearing the loss (living with flood), are listed in the report and induced
that ground water recharge, storage, kharif channels and bankment rainfall
conservation at the field level by bunding planned integrally can lead to flood
mitigation. Selective aforestation and efficient agronomic measures can be
supplemented to enhance the effectiveness of the programme. Dr UR Rao, former
chairman, Space Commission, wrote a paper on Space and Flood Management. In his
paper, a variety of structural as well as non-structural measures have been
suggested and discussed. The structural measures typically included i) channel
improvements, ii) levees (embankments, dykes, bunds) and flood walls, iii)
diversions and by-passes, iv) reservoirs detention and retarding basins. The
non-structural measures were based on i) flood plain management including
zoning, ii) flood forecasting and warning, flood fighting and temporary
evacuation and iii) flood relief and rehabilitation. These measures have been
successful to a large extent in controlling floods in most of the developed
countries, but there is still a wide gap between the gigantic efforts needed and
the measures undertaken so far in all the developing countries.

In the recent Uttarakhand disaster, any sort of retrieval operation become
impossible because its magnitude crossed the limits of possible rescue and
evacuation of the victims.

This unprecedented tragedy clearly indicates that the level of preparedness for
disaster management at the Centre and in the States is extremely insufficient
and requires considerable strengthening. Now the time has come to use space
technology extensively in the flood management programmes. An overview of the
presently available hydrological models highlighting the advantage of utilizing
the space-based remotely-sensed data along with ground-based data for flood
management studies may help in deriving appropriate quantitative and qualitative
methodologies. The flood management technologies and measures are not capable to
the extent needed. So, the use of satellites, with unique capabilities to
provide comprehensive synoptic and multitemporal coverage of very large areas at
regular intervals and with quick turn-around times, has been very valuable in
monitoring and managing flood dynamics. A systematically planned flood
management scheme in the areas of heavy rainfall in India needs to use space
imageries and digital data, that could provide valuable information for carrying
out flood management measures. The conventional ground survey methods are
arduous, time consuming and beset with various limitations, especially while
studying the floods of large river basins. It is in this context one find the
use of space technology, by virtue of their remote sensing and data transmission
capabilities found much suitable in flood inundated and drainage congested
areas, measuring the extent of damages to crops, structures, etc., in river
configuration, silt deposits, shoals, etc., watershed characteristics and land
use, and in hydrologic and meteorologic data transmission.

The National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad is dealing with the supply of
remote sensing data on hydrology, physiography, forestry, soil resources, etc.,
to the States as per requisition from the respective state governments. In this
respect, the initiative taken by the state government concerned is required with
realistic plans. Relief and rehabilitation works during and after flood is an
emergency service for the affected people. But this is not a permanent solution.
An effective disaster management programme as per the Disaster Management Act,
using the latest technologies, is an emergent need in India. The need of the
hour is to prepare flood affected and drainage congested area mapping, flood
forecasting, identification of erosion-prone areas, flood damage assessment and
relief and others by using the remote sensing satellite data. All these works
are to be performed by the State under the National Disaster Management
Authority.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Assam Tribune. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 Assam Tribune (P) Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 92 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                             Assam Tribune (India)

                             August 11, 2017 Friday

Controlling floods: proactive steps needed

LENGTH: 1093 words

DATELINE: Guwahati


Guwahati, Aug. 11 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi during his visit to Assam on
August1 last announced a flood package for NE and steps to undertake a permanent
solution to the flood problem with several crores of rupees of financial
assistance by the Centre. Looking back, it can be said that this is the first
time that a Prime Minister has visited Assam and NE at a crucial moment during a
natural disaster and providing a considerable fund for relief.

The dynamic nature of various flood parameters call for evolving suitable flood
management methodologies in order to save lives, properties and agricultural
production. Floods have become not only an unfailing annual event in most of the
river basins all over the world, but are also encompassing new areas and in new
hydrological models, causing great havoc and extensive losses. Many of the
rivers that traverse India, cause floods during the monsoon period. The colossal
damages caused by the recent floods in Assam is a threat to the existence of
human habitat. The study on the nature of floods along with landslides so far
put forward for their control and management seems to have not been effective,
rather the damages caused by repeated deluges have been steeply increasing due
to increase in flood plain occupancy either for developmental activities or
encroachments, deforestation, climate change and other environmental
degradation. Environmental degradation is the order of the day.

Out of many causes of floods, the five primary reasons are (1) heavy rains (2)
synchronising of the peak of floods of the main river and the tributaries (3)
inadequate and inefficient drainage of low-lying and flat areas (4) snow-melt
run-off along with heavy rains causing overflow of riverbanks and (5) typhoons
and cyclones. Fall in infiltration rate and percolation area due to rapid
sitting of rivers and reservoirs, urban and industrial expansion and
construction of embankments have contributed a lot to the flood problem. Low
water retention and increase runoff overland due to heavy erosion,
over-exploitation and misuse of catchments causes flood inundation in countries
like India. As a part of flood control measures, the first and foremost
responsibility of the Government is to create and implement effective laws to
prevent ongoing activities causing environmental degradation. The idea of
building dams, ropeways and other disturbing activities in the NE region for
hydrogeneration of power, creation of entertainment facilities and the
developmental programmes may enhance the chances of natural calamities. There
are other alternatives for obtaining the required power ' from gas, thermal and
non-conventional energy sources such as solar and wind energy, biogas and
biotechnology etc. which can provide sufficient energy if trapped as done in
some other parts of the country.

An appropriate flood management programme includes a good number of measures to
be undertaken and policies that need to be pursued. The National Commission on
Floods, 1980 submitted a study report along with the programmes and policies for
modifying the susceptibility to flood damage and modification of the loss
burden. The report delineated the technological feasibilities as well as
policies need to be pursued for substantial reduction of the susceptibility to
flood damage. Altogether four methods of flood management' (1) modifying the
flood (2) modifying susceptibility to flood damage (3) modification of the loss
burden and (4) bearing the loss i.e., living with flood are listed in the
report. Rainfall conservation at field level by bunding and induced ground water
recharge, storage, kharif channels and embankments planned integrally can help
in flood mitigation. Selective afforestation and efficient agronomic measures
can be supplemented to enhance the effectiveness of the programme. At the time
of severe floods, any sort of retrieval operation becomes impossible. So the
level of preparedness for flood management at the Centre and in the states
requires considerable strengthening.

Repeated experience of failure in mitigating flood hazards in States clearly
indicates that the plan and policies for flood management is extremely
insufficient. Both short-time and long-time strategies with the use of modern
technology are required for an effective flood management system. An overview of
the presently available hydrological models and highlighting the advantage of
utilising the space-based remotely sensed data along with the ground based data
for flood management studies may help in deriving appropriate, quantitative and
qualitative methodologies. Use of satellites bearing unique capabilities to
provide comprehensive, synoptic and multitemporal coverage of very large areas
at regular intervals and with quick turnaround times have been very valuable in
monitoring and studying (i) flood-inundated and drainage-congested areas (ii)
extent of damages to crops, structures etc. (iii) river configuration, silt
deposits, shoals etc., and vulnerable areas of bank erosion (iv) watershed
characteristics and land cover/land use in command areas and (v) hydrological
and meteorological data transmission from data collection platform.

The National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), Hyderabad is dealing with supply of
remote sensing data on hydrology, physiography, forestry, soil resources etc.,
to the states as per requisition. The Remote Sensing Application Centre, Assam
may take initiative for the State Government to begin the programme for flood
management in Assam. Relief and rehabilitation works during and after floods is
an emergency service for the affected people. But this is not a permanent
solution. The remote sensing satellite data can be used effectively in (i)
mapping flood-affected and drainage-congested areas (ii) flood forecasting (iii)
identification of erosion-prone areas (iv) flood damage assessment and relief.
All these works are to be performed under the National Disaster Management
Authority as per the Act.

Apart from the measures for flood control suggested in the discussion above, the
Government of India as well as of Assam should take stringent measures to evict
the foreign nationals living in areas like chars where habitation is not
permissible on scientific grounds in the interest of ecological balance leaving
aside motivated political interests.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Assam Tribune. For
any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Assam Tribune (P) Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 93 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               The Frontier Post

                             October 2, 2011 Sunday

It's no use crying over spilt milk

BYLINE:  Samina Ghilman

SECTION: Vol. II No. 651

LENGTH: 1040  words


Natural disasters are common nowadays in today's world. They are result of
sudden change in state of natural elements due to natural forces. Most of the
natural disasters are beyond control of human beings and cannot be predicted
accurately when it will occur. Major natural disasters like floods, earthquakes,
landslides and droughts when they happen, it results in threat to human life,
loss of property; affect infrastructure, agriculture and environment. The impact
of disaster is different due to its intensity and coverage area. Wolf Dombrowsky
said"Disasters do not cause effects; the effects are what we call a disaster".

Above quotation conveys a message that the disaster is an effect of an event
that brings vulnerability in environment. Floods are the most common occurring
natural disasters that affect human and its surrounding environment (Hewitt
1997). It is more vulnerable to Asia and the Pacific regions. It affects social
and economic stability of a country. There are many occurrence of flood in
China, the worst flood in China in 1998 affected 223 million people, 3004 people
were reported dead, 15 million were rendered homeless and the economic loss was
over US$ 23 billion for that year.

Due to heavy floods in Cambodia and Vietnam during year 2000, 428 people died
and estimated economic loss was over US$250 million. In 1991, 140,000 people
across the world were reported dead and in 1998, it affected 25 million lives.
For the last 10 years due to frequent occurring of floods thousands of people
have been affected in India, Pakistan, Korea, China, and Bangladesh with their
agricultural fields, residential areas i.e. livelihood and food. The effect of
floods in less-developed countries is more vulnerable. It has a lot of problems
with emergency response and early warning preparation.

It occurs when a river or stream breaks out through their natural or artificial
bank due to heavy rainfall, melting of snow and dam failure, etc. Monsoon rains
have flooded large parts of Pakistan particularly the southern Sindh province
over the last six weeks, leaving more than 80,00,000 people homeless. Local
authorities, the UNO, and foreign and local aid groups are distributing water,
medicines and food, while the army is rescuing people from communities trapped
by the water and providing them all out assistance in shape of food, shelter and
medical camps.

It is a positive sign that our army always come for rescue but where are the
politicians and disaster management institutions? Thousands have received little
or no help and are living under rainy skies or scorching sun. There have been
widespread accusations of diversion of flood water by influential figures during
the 2010 floods, as reported widely in the national and international media.
Children are the major victims in such situations.

Lack of proper nutrition has been a problem in Sindh for some time and the
situation was exacerbated by the floods as stored food, standing crops and
agricultural inputs like seed and fertilizer were destroyed. Pakistan gained
independence 64 years ago but we are still poor and can't handle heavy rains
year after year. Although floods were already predicted, yet we failed to take
safety measures resulting in heavy loss of lives and property. People are angry
that the authorities have not done more in the wake of last year's disaster.

They say flood prevention projects and proper drainage systems could have saved
homes and lives and a lot of misery. As Pakistan marks the one-year anniversary
of the worst floods in living memory, the aid agency, Oxfam, has warned that the
country is still unprepared for the monsoon season. In a new report "Ready or
not, Pakistan's resilience to disasters, one year on from the floods", Oxfam
said that families had not fully recovered from last year's disaster and were
likely to fall even deeper into poverty if hit by floods again.

Oxfam is calling on the Pakistan government and donors to invest more and more
in measures to reduce the impact of disasters. This could include flood
resistant housing, and effective early warning systems especially at the village
level. The cost of reconstruction for last year's floods is estimated at more
than ten billion dollars; but investing an initial 27 million dollars, backed up
with yearly top ups, to improve disaster management would make a huge difference
in making Pakistan better-prepared for future emergencies. In order to control
floods, we should take necessary steps and flood management department or
national disaster management authorities should be made more potent.

Flood management means an effective plan towards occurrence of flood event to
reduce extreme flow along the identified extent of river. Flood management helps
to reduce interruption of flow or destruction of crops and agriculture field.
Flood management needs to have a clear understanding of maximum extent of
floodplain area in order to avoid the people from further encroachment. A proper
flood management can keep people away from flood. The flood management can be
estimated by two ways. First by identifying different causes of obstruction of
floodwater in floodplain and affecting the human settlements and its
environment.

This cause must be identified, ranked and aggregated. Secondly studying future
projection made for flood damage based on the past records. There are two
measures for flood management viz. structural and non-structural measures.
Structural measures concern physical work like construction of dams, reservoirs,
bridges, channel improvement, river diversion and other embankments to keep
floods away from people and the non-structural measures is concerned with
planning, analyzing the flooding situation, flood plain zoning, flood proofing
for reducing risk of flood damage to keep people away from floods.

Furthermore, in this hour of need if we collect one rupee from each individual,
then 18 crore rupees will be collected in a day. We made it before in the last
earthquake and flood and we will make now. We should not forget that these are
not flash floods but were warned floods. Politicians should gather under one
platform, leave their petty issues and work collectively for the betterment of
Pakistan.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 The Frontier Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 94 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                Himalayan Times

                            February 22, 2013 Friday

Eight rivers prone to flash floods says ICIMOD report

BYLINE: HIMALAYAN NEWS SERVICE

LENGTH: 403  words


KATHMANDU: Flash floods would severely affect thousands of people along the
eight rivers of the Hindu Kush Himalayan Region if effective measures are not
initiated said a report published by the International Centre for Integrated
Mountain Development (ICIMOD) today.

The 'Case Studies on Flash Flood Risk Management in the Himalayas' covers
glacial lake outburst flood (GLOF) and its risks in the Bhotekoshi and Sunkoshi
Rivers near Barabise. Similarly flash floods by the outburst of Lumu Chimi Lake
of Tibet floods in the Lalbakaiya River of Rautahat and Madi River of Tanahu are
also included in the studies.

Jiadhal River of Assam India Niujuangou Gully and Xichang Rivers of China and
Chitral River of Pakistan are other rivers covered in the case studies.

The Lalbakaiya River poses serious flood threats to Bara and Rautahat districts
while Madi River of Tanahu is both susceptible to landslides and floods. Senior
Climate Change Expert at ICIMOD Arun Bhakta Shrestha said "Prevention is the
only way to respond to the devastating flash floods that often occur
unexpectedly" adding "We have recommended specific policies and programmes in
order to mitigate human and property loss and other necessary mechanism to deal
with them effectively" he said.

Such devastating flash floods can be triggered by intense rainfall outburst of
landslides failure of a natural or artificial dam or a glacial lake outburst.
The frequent occurrence of flash floods in the Hindu Kush Himalayan region poses
a severe threat to lives livelihoods and infrastructure of both mountains and
downstream population. The report also provides evidence in support of a number
of recommendations including developing policies and strategies specific to
flash flood risk management integrating flash flood management in watershed and
water resource management improving preparedness at all levels and promoting
effective early warning systems. It also recommends empowering communities to
play a central role in flash flood management and collaborate with other
countries for trans-boundary management of flash floods.

ICIMOD has already published a set of resource manuals on flash flood risk
management through community based management covering structural and
non-structural measures. Based on these materials it has further published a
trainer's manual. A catastrophic flooding in Seti River had claimed at least 31
lives in Nepal last year.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2013 Himalayan Times, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 95 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)

                           December 13, 2005 Tuesday
                                  City Edition

Flood plain maps redrawn

BYLINE: ALGIS J. LAUKAITIS, Lincoln Journal Star

SECTION: B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 835 words

DATELINE: Lincoln, NE


Proposed ordinance would limit amount of fill soil allowed in designated flood
storage areas.

Lincoln has battled big floods in the past, but they were nothing compared to
the storm surges of Hurricane Katrina.

Around here, severe rainstorms are the enemy.

When it pours, Salt Creek swells like a sponge. Floodwaters rise. And the city's
levee system from Calvert to Superior streets is supposed to help keep the water
inside the creek channel.

But the earthen levees, built during the 1960s, only protect the city from a
50-year flood.

If there's a 100-year flood, the levees won't hold all of the water, officials
say.   Most of it will flow into low areas that make up the 100-year flood
plain. That's kind of the city's back-up system.

As part of a nationwide effort, the Federal Emergency Management Agency has been
working with the city and the Lower Platte South Natural Resources  District to
redraw 100-year flood plain maps for creeks and tributaries in the Lincoln area.

Officials say the information will help protect existing homes and businesses
from floods and provide guidance for growth.

The FEMA flood plain maps are at least 20 years old. New mapping techniques,
including the use of global positioning satellites, make it possible to get more
detailed information about floodways, land elevations and flood plains.

Revised FEMA maps for Stevens Creek, Beal Slough, Southeast Upper Salt Creek and
Cardwell Branch already were completed. Others are in the works, but Salt Creek
is the biggest and maybe the most controversial.

The reason: Salt Creek cuts through the heart of the city and is lined with
residential neighborhoods, shopping malls, streets, bridges, railroads and
everything else that makes up an urban landscape.

Salt Creek has designated "flood storage areas" where floodwaters can flow,  but
the boundaries are no longer accurate because of the changes that have taken
place over the years, said Nicole Fleck-Tooze, special projects administrator
for the Public Works and Utilities Department.

The new maps, unveiled to the public tonight, will show 20 flood storage areas
along the levee system between Calvert and Superior.

Glenn Johnson, general manager of the Lower Platte South NRD, said the maps
identified the new 100-year flood plain for Salt Creek along that 30-mile
stretch. Some residents and business owners, who were out of the 100-year flood
plain before, may find themselves included this time. And others may find
themselves excluded because they could be on high ground.

To meet minimum FEMA standards, officials are proposing a companion ordinance
that would restrict the percentage of allowable fill - or displacement of the
flood storage volume - in flood storage areas. The goal is to maintain the
100-year flood plain as it exists today.

Here's how it would work:

A developer who wants to build houses in a 40 percent flood storage area can
only displace 40 percent of the flood storage volume with dirt or structures.

If the developer wants to go above that number, he or she must find some way to
mitigate the potential damage caused by the development. It also would affect
people who want to expand their homes or businesses.

Danny Walker, president of the South Salt Creek community organization, isn't
satisfied with the ordinance.

"There's so much fill in place in the flood plain that the best thing they could
do is to allow no fill in the flood plain," he said.

But Patrick O'Neill, with the consulting firm Camp Dresser & McKee Inc. in
Kansas City, Mo., says if the ordinance is not passed, FEMA will require a more
traditional approach - which could require a much wider floodway and other
restrictions.

The City Council and the Planning Commission have to approve the new flood plain
maps and ordinance. Total cost of the Salt Creek mapping project is about
$570,000.

The new flood plain maps could require some people to obtain flood insurance if
they use federal financing in a project. Others may find they no longer need
flood insurance because they are out of the 100-year flood plain.   However,
officials say, the city has no requirement for flood insurance for people or
businesses in a flood plain.

If the City Council approves the maps and ordinances, they could take effect by
summer.

Reach Algis J. Laukaitis at 473-7243 or alaukaitis@journalstar.com.

View new Salt Creek flood plain maps

* Revised flood plain maps for Salt Creek will be presented to the public
tonight during two open house sessions at the Lincoln Firefighters Reception
Hall, 241 Victory Lane. The sessions are at 5:30 p.m. and 7 p.m.

* The maps cover a 30-mile stretch of Salt Creek from south of Saltillo Road to
North 98th Street. Representatives from the city of Lincoln and Lower Platte
South Natural Resources District and consultants will discuss the draft maps and
answer questions.

* If you can't attend, the maps will be available Wednesday at lincoln.ne.gov.
Enter the keyword: watershed. Then click "Salt Creek mapping."

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: color locator map of Salt Creek flood storage areas, MATT VAN DRIEST
Lincoln Journal Star, Source: Public Works and Utilities

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2005 Lincoln Journal Star,
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 96 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              March 2, 2018 Friday

It's time to consider flood insurance

LENGTH: 609  words



Volusia: Volusia County, The state of Florida has issued the following news
release:


With hurricane season just three months away, now is the time for residents to
review their flood insurance policies. According to county emergency planners,
having flood insurance before it's needed is one preparedness step that's too
important to ignore. Most policies don't take effect until 30 days after
signing, so it's a good idea to consider purchasing coverage before the storm
season.


"Many people erroneously believe that because they don't live in a high-risk
flood area, they don't need flood insurance," said Larry LaHue, a senior planner
with Volusia County Emergency Management. "We all saw, though, that last year
hurricanes Harvey and Irma caused catastrophic flooding well outside of mapped
high-risk flood areas. It is important to remember there are high- and low-risk
areas, but there are no - no-risk flood areas. In unincorporated Volusia County
alone, over 100 homes flooded due to Hurricane Irma. And according to reports,
nationally 25 percent of flood insurance claims are from areas that are
considered low risk for flooding."
LaHue is very familiar with floods that have caused significant damage in
Volusia County.
"In 2008, Tropical Storm Fay dropped more than 30 inches of rain on the west
side of the county, and in 2009, the "No-Name" rain storm flooded hundreds of
homes on the east side of the county, with both storms having devastating
results," he said. "Many homes that flooded did not have flood insurance, so the
homeowners had to pay for repairs out-of-pocket. Just a few inches of water in a
home can cost more than $40,000 to repair."
According to LaHue, most important is the fact that a standard homeowners'
insurance policy typically doesn't cover flood damage. Because floods can occur
anywhere, homeowners should consider purchasing a separate National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) flood policy through an insurance agent. The NFIP is
managed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). While flood insurance
is offered through the NFIP, policies are sold and administered by private
insurance companies. Residents are encouraged to find an insurance agent to
discuss their flood insurance needs. Visit https://floodinsuranceagency.com  for
more information.
"Not everyone understands the need for a separate flood policy," said LaHue.
Research shows there's a common misconception that homeowners insurance covers
flood damage when, in fact, it typically doesn't. In a March 2013 survey
commissioned by Allstate, 44 percent of Americans said they believed they were
covered for weather-related floods when, in fact, only 15 percent reported
having purchased a flood insurance policy through the NFIP.
Costs for flood insurance vary depending on how much coverage you buy, what the
policy covers and your property's flood risk. The NFIP offers flood risk maps to
help you identify your community's level of risk.
If your home falls in a high-risk flood area and you carry a mortgage from a
federally regulated or insured lender, your lender is legally mandated to
require flood insurance on your property. Typically, that's not the case if your
home falls in a moderate- to low-risk area. However, a lender may require you to
hold flood insurance at any time -- even if the company is not legally mandated
to do so, according to www.FloodSmart.gov.
To learn more about how to prepare for flooding, Volusia County Emergency
Management has many resources online at www.volusia.org/floods.

 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 97 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                    BBC Monitoring Asia Pacific - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                            March 19, 2009 Thursday

Chinese minister urges effective management of water infrastructure

LENGTH: 845 words


Text of report in English by official Chinese news agency Xinhua (New China News
Agency)

[Xinhua "Roundup" by Xinhua writers Li Weijie, Zheng Jinfa: "China Minister
Urges Effective Management of Water Infrastructure To Fight Flood, Drought"]

Istanbul, Turkey, March 19 (Xinhua) - China urged during the World Water Forum
(WWF) in Turkey on Thursday effective management and utilization of water
infrastructure to address flood prevention, drought relief and disaster
reduction.

"Floods and droughts are the most severe natural disasters confronted by human
being," said Chinese Minister of Water Resources Chen Lei at the Special Session
on Extraordinary Natural Disasters and Risk Management of Water of the WWF,
which is on the fourth day of schedule.

Asia has become one of the regions in the world that are "most affected" by
these disasters, he said in a keynote speech.

Asia overtakes other continents in the number of floods and droughts and the
size of affected population and severity of economic losses, which all amount to
nearly 40 per cent of the world's total.

"Effective management and utilization of water infrastructures, safeguarding
people' lives and sustaining socioeconomic development are not only key issues
attracting world attention but also pressing tasks faced by most countries," the
Chinese minister added.

China is also vulnerable to severe floods and droughts. Since the founding of
the People's Republic of China in 1949, more than 50 extraordinary floods and 17
wide-spreading severe droughts have hit the country.

Chen introduced China's successful experience of flood prevention, drought
relief and disaster reduction in his speech.

He said China has taken effective measures in recent years, including
transforming from flood control to flood management and from single-purpose
drought relief to a comprehensive approach of integrating the urban, rural and
ecological needs all into consideration, implementing structural and
nonstructural measures and improving capacity building.

"The Chinese government has paid great attention to flood prevention and drought
relief," he said, adding China regards these as important and emergency matters
for the improvement of people' livelihood.

China has established an institutional framework, including the flood control
and drought relief commanding systems at national, river basin and local levels.

Structural facilities are improved. China has completed 280,000 km of embankment
for flood defence, 860,000 reservoirs and 97 key flood retention areas,
according to official statistics.

China has set up the national flood control and drought relief emergency
planning system. Now, all provinces (autonomous regions and municipalities) and
four-fifths of the counties and cities have drought relief emergency response
plans.

The country has also strengthened flood warning and forecasting. There are about
34,000 hydrological or precipitation stations and more than 8,600 flood
reporting stations built all over the country.

Meanwhile, a series of laws and regulations have been enacted and implemented,
such as Water Law, Flood Control Law, Flood Control Regulations, Drought Relief
Regulations and Temporary Regulations for Compensation of Flood Retention Areas.

China also enhanced emergency management. Each year before the flood season,
flood control and drought relief headquarters at each level makes emergency
plans for prevention of floods and droughts in accordance with their specific
conditions. During the flood season, the headquarters strictly execute the
24-hour-on-duty system and the daily consultation system.

Since 1949, the direct economic benefit obtained from flood control has reached
3.69 trillion yuan (about 540 billion US dollars), with 160 million hectares of
farmland protected from flooding and a 2.71-million-hectare yearly average
reduction of inundated farmland, according to the Chinese minister.

Water supply is also secured. Since 1991, 471 million mu (31.4 million hectares)
of drought-affected farmland has been irrigated annually on average, which saved
39.41 million tons of grain, and enabled 24.36 million people and 19.08 million
livestock access to drinking water each year.

The Chinese minister also said China shall take relevant flood control and
drought relief measures that are tailored to the country's national conditions,
as global climatic changes increase the possibility of frequent and sudden
occurrence of extreme weather events, and fast development of the Chinese
economy and society also gives rise to new problems, tasks and challenges in
flood control and drought relief.

Chen headed a Chinese delegation to the 5th WWF, the largest water-related event
in the world, which attracted 25,000 participants from all over the world,
including governments, nonprofit groups, institutions and individuals.

The forum kicked off on Monday in the largest Turkish city of Istanbul with the
theme of "Bridging Divides for Water" to promote ideas about conserving,
managing and supplying water.

Source: Xinhua news agency, Beijing, in English 1529 gmt 19 Mar 09

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2009 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 98 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                     BBC Monitoring South Asia - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                          September 21, 2011 Wednesday

Pakistan banned charity chief asks religious groups to help in flood relief work

LENGTH: 510 words


Text of unattributed report headlined "Entire nation will have to come forward
to help flood-hit brethren: Hafiz Saeed" published by Pakistani newspaper Ausaf
on 19 September

Lahore -- Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, chief of the Jamaat-ud-Dawaa [JUD], has said
that political, religious, and social organizations should actively participate
in relief activities for flood victims.

"The flood-hit people need food, clean drinking water, medicines, and tents
immediately. The JUD has spent millions of rupees on relief activities being
carried out in the flood-hit areas. The Pakistani nation should offer prayers
for protection against natural calamities and actively participate in flood
relief activities so that God may take away the problems and difficulties
confronting them," he said.

In his statement, he further said: "The entire nation will have to come forward
with the spirit of altruism and sacrifice to help their flood-stricken brethren
in Sindh. The JUD activists should further organize relief activities and make
every possible effort to revive the routine life for flood-hit people.
Torrential rains and floods have destroyed standing crops in millions of acres
of land. It is a big test for the Pakistani nation to provide their flood-hit
brethrens food, shelter, and other facilities in a timely fashion. The
devastation caused by floods is a test of God. Torrential rains, after floods,
in different parts of Sindh have caused immense human and material loss to the
people, to the extent that millions have been forced to live under the open sky.
In such conditions nobody should lag behind in helping the flood-hit people
under any circumstance; rather, everyone should come forward to help his
flood-stricken brethrens."

Hafiz Saeed further said: "The JUD activists are running a campaign across the
country for flood victims of Sindh. Millions of people have fallen victim to
epidemics in the flood-hit areas. There is a dire need of doctors and medicines
just as the need for food and clean drinking water in flood-stricken areas."

On the directives of Hafiz Saeed, the JUD federal leaders reached the flood-hit
areas and reviewed flood relief activities. Volunteers were directed to expedite
relief and rescue operation. Hafiz Abur Rauf, chief of the Falah-e-Insaniyat
[welfare of humanity] Foundation, and Muhammad Yahya Mujahid are camping in the
flood-hit areas for the past one week.

According to details available, following Hafiz Saeed's directives, Hafiz
Muhammad Masud, federal secretary information of the JUD; Hafiz Abur Rauf, chief
of the Falah-e-Insaniyat Foundation; Muhammad Yahya Mujahid, JUD spokesman; and
other leaders supervised flood relief activities during their visits to the
flood-hit areas.

Hafiz Muhammad Masud recently returned while Hafiz Abur Rauf and Muhammad Yahya
Mujahid have constantly been supervising the flood relief activities in Badin,
Khoski, Golarchi, Jhadu, Kalwoi, Mirpurkhas, Sanghar, Nawab Shah, Nokot, Shaid
Laraj, and other cities for the past one week.

Source: Ausaf, Islamabad, in Urdu 19 Sep 11, pp 3, 6

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2011 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 99 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Trust (Abuja)

                                  May 29, 2013

Impending Floods - Any Lessons From Last Year?

BYLINE: Alex Abutu

LENGTH: 1301 words


The Nigerian Hydrological Services Agency in April predicted that the country
would witness massive flood in over 156 communities across 31 states of the
federation with Kogi, Delta and Bayesla expected to suffer the most.

This prediction is coming on the heels of a similar prediction by the Nigeria
Meteorological Agency (NIMET) in its 2013 Seasonal Rainfall Prediction for the
country in which it warned that the country would witness heavy rainfall
resulting in serious floods, and those areas and communities that had no history
of flooding would not be spared.

But the warning as it is the case with most long term forecast for the country
is being treated with kid gloves. It has become business as usual for various
government agencies to organise fanfare, read speeches and go back to their
shells waiting for next year to present another prediction.

But the implication of the 2013 forecast is that, the coming floods would be
greater than what was experienced in 2012, so the prediction said. Meaning that
more deaths will be recorded and more properties will be lost, more
infrastructures would be damaged while the vulnerable Nigerians would be left at
the mercy of the scourge.

Though different figures have been given on the death toll from the 2012
incident and how much Nigeria may have lost from it, there have not been any
official figure from government. However, the Nigerian Academy of Science said
that the country lost N570 billion while the National Emergency Management
Agency said the country lost N2.6 trillion to last year's flood that affected
several states of the federation.

The 2013 flood which is expected to be greater in magnitude than that of 2012
would definitely attract more human casualties and infrastructure destruction.

In the heat of last year's flood, the Nigerian Medical Association raised
concern on the need for government to urgently address the health and sanitary
issues related to the flood. Though there was no statistics to show, the
association was of the view that most of the mortality from the flood was health
induced.

The lackadaisical approach adopted by states have led observers to asking
whether there would be any difference in tackling the flood when houses and
other infrastructures blocking the water ways that aggravated the 2012 flood
have not been removed.

This question may be answered at the end of the raining season as no state of
has undertaken any concrete action or development in response to the prediction
by various government agencies.

So far, it is only the Kwara state government that has erected makeshift camps
in anticipation of the flood to evacuate its citizens should the prediction come
to pass.

In 2012 the far north where issues of desertification has remained a big
challenge in the last decade to eastern Nigeria where erosion has removed
communities from their origins to the west and the south-south where pollution
has been a lingering issue, the flood never spared anyone or any region.

The Director General of NIMET, Prof. Anthony Anuforom at the heat of the 2012
flood regretted that the incident had caught the nation off guards, a situation
he said was unfortunate as NIMET had circulated to governors of the affected
places detail information about what to expect, and possible actions to take to
reduce the casualty.

The Ministry of Environment in early 2012 also established an early warning
centre which was issuing weekly alerts to various states and authorities on the
expected rainfall within the week and the possible impact it would have in
specific areas or communities.

The June 2012 flood in Jos and its environs that killed over forty persons
remained a classical example of a situation where local authorities abandoned
the alerts issued by the centre.

Records have it that the appropriate authorities in Plateau state were informed
of the impending doom but why they failed to alert the community or make any
arrangement to evacuate those living in the areas is still not known.

According to health experts, the houses submerged by 2012 flood are no longer
conducive for habitation but in all states of the federation, the victims have
returned to their houses.

In Benue state where thousands were displaced after their houses were submerged
by the flood, all the victims have returned to their houses after the state had
fumigated the areas. In Kogi, one of the worst hit by the flood, the victims
have since returned to their houses after the waters had receded.

In Edo, all the camps established to provide accommodation to the victims whose
houses were overrun by the flood have been closed. The victims have returned to
their houses while in Jos most of the victims have rebuilt their houses on the
same plain where the flood destroyed them.

In Bayesla where more than half of the state went under as a result of the
flood, all the victims evacuated during the peak period of the flood are back to
their homes.

The implication of this development according to Prof. Nwachukwu Ezeigbo, a
public health specialist, is that more mortality should be expected months after
they moved in as the houses were already contaminated with various kinds of
bacteria.

The Federal Government on its part released N17.6billion what is now known as
the Federal Flood Windfall as an intervention to states to enable them undertake
urgent measures that would cushion the impact of the flood on those affected.

But in most states, the windfall has left behind tears as flood victims in some
cases were given very meagre amounts while other states are yet to disburse the
fund and some have used it to repair infrastructures destroyed by the flood.

Mrs Sarah Reng Ochekpe, Minister of Water Resources, acknowledged recently that
the impact of last year's flood on the nation's economy was much and that
efforts were on to avoid a reoccurrence.

But a senior government official noted recently that it is the duty of state
governments to relocate victims of last year's flood from the N17.6 billion
disbursed to them according to the degree of the flood.

"States are to be on top of the situation having collected various sums from the
federal government to tackle the situation. That they have not done anything is
a different matter entirely," the official said.

Prof. Tunde Akin, a climatologist and coordinator, Safe Environment Nigeria said
that the situation is dangerous as the flood was caused mainly by blockage of
the water ways through the erection of buildings and other infrastructures that
obstructed free flow of water.

"Most of the houses affected by the last flood are no longer habitable but
surprisingly, people have gone back to those places and are living there.
Government need to do something fast," he said.

Engr. Adekunle Oshikoya, Director Flood, Erosion and Coastal Zone Management at
the Ministry of Environment said recently that there was a need for an
integrated study on the flood to enable effective planning and adoption of
strategies to forestall future occurrence.

Oshikoya's position was recently re-echoed by the Nigerian Academy of Science
(NAS) who urged the Federal Government to seek scientific-oriented solutions to
national problems especially flood.

NIMET Director General said it was imperative for government to strengthen
institutional capacities and facilitate dissemination of early-warning
meteorological information for disaster-risk reduction.

As rain begins, the recent warning by Mr John Shamonda, Director General,
Nigerian Hydrological Services Agency, that states like Kogi, Delta and Bayesla
would experience devastating flood this year should be a thing of concern.

For now, the information generated in the last few weeks may amount to nothing
if the major issues of relocation of victims affected by the last flood and
removal of houses on the flood plain are not carried out.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 100 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Irish Daily Mail

                            January 9, 2016 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

50,000 without flood insurance;
Dilemma of householders in 'at risk' areas

BYLINE: Nora-Ide McAuliffe

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 467 words


AN estimated 50,000 homes are without flood insurance in Ireland.

A member survey carried out by the Irish Brokers Association showed that up to
50,000 homeowners are without flooding insurance.

Separately, Insurance Ireland has said that 98% of homeowners can obtain flood
insurance.

Working of the most recent official figures showing that there are 1.6million
households in Ireland, that would translate into a net figure of 32,000 homes
without flood cover.

Insurance Ireland has said it was the job of the Government, not insurance
companies, to protect homes against flooding by installing flood protection
mechanisms.

However many of the estimated 50,000 are living in areas that already have flood
barriers in place.

These include Clonmel, Fermoy and Mallow which no longer experience flooding.
But many people in these areas, even those directly behind the flood barrier,
still can't insure their homes and businesses.

Paul Kavanagh of the Irish Brokers Association said: 'There are some people in
Fermoy, Mallow and Clonmel who have flood insurance, but that's because they've
always had flood insurance.

'They're people that are away from the river, they live up on the hill: they're
not the people beside the river.' Taoiseach Enda Kenny is expected to press
insurance companies over the matter of uninsured households in flood-prone areas
in a crunch meeting next Tuesday. Fianna Fáil has published a Bill that would
require insurance companies to provide flood cover to houses and businesses in
areas where the OPW have finished flood relief schemes.

The party's finance spokesman Michael McGrath said: 'In essence, the Bill
provides that where the OPW has completed a flood-relief scheme to the required
European standard (resulting in the flood risk being reduced to a one in a 100
year event) or where the flooding risk has been deemed to be extremely low by
the OPW, an insurance company must offer insurance at a price that can be
reasonably justified by the current risk profile.

'Insurance Ireland would say in areas where flood schemes have been completed,
they would argue that 86% of the properties have cover.

'But the evidence from brokers in those areas is very different, so that's
really the rationale behind the Bill.' Around 250 houses were flooded during the
latest heavy rainfall.

Flood-hit areas of the country are in for respite after forecasters predicted
the rain will ease off over the next week. Conditions won't be ideal however, as
the weather will remain cold over the next few days.

Showers of sleet and snow will fall in some areas in Munster and Leinster by
dawn, and will move into other areas as the morning progresses.

Top temperatures will range from 3C to 8C today while Sunday and Monday will be
mostly cold and dry.

news@dailymail.ie

250 houses affected in latest storms

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sweet science: Nicky Byrne and Jenny Green at the RDS yesterday

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DML


          Copyright 2016 Irish Daily Mail - Associated Newspapers Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 101 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Austin American-Statesman (Texas)

                          September 24, 2005 Saturday

If flood's a-comin', are you insured?;
Of all states, Texas sees the most federal money for flood damage

BYLINE: Katie Humphrey, AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

SECTION: METRO/STATE; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1412 words


Texas leads the nation in flood-related insurance payments, with more than $2.7
billion for losses from 1978 to 2004, according to the federal government.

Though officials can't say how many live in 100-year flood plains and don't have
insurance, figures show that the number of Texas policyholders declined 1.3
percent, to 455,078, from 2003 to 2004.

Florida, with $2.2 billion in losses, and Louisiana, with more than $1.7
billion, round out the top three states, according to National Flood Insurance
Program data. Only one other state, North Carolina, had more than $600,000 in
flood insurance losses.

Homeowners who live in a 100-year flood plain, an area with a 1 in 100 chance of
a flood each year, are required to buy flood insurance to qualify for a federal
or federally backed mortgage. People who don't live in the 100-year flood plain
can choose to purchase the insurance.

Many flood-related claims nationwide come from coastal areas hit by hurricanes,
but inland flooding is an equally large problem. And Central Texas, with its
rolling hills, winding rivers and penchant for record-setting rainfall rates is
known among weather buffs as "Flash Flood Alley."

"You have some very steep slopes, and combined with that you have some very thin
soil," LCRA meteorologist Bob Rose said. "This area can go from drought to flood
in a matter of hours."

Few know that better than Nawasa Eads and her neighbors, Melvin and Sandy McBee.

When waters from Williamson Creek and an overwhelmed sewer system flooded the
north side of Radam Circle in October 1998, Eads and the McBees watched swirling
muck fill their homes.

The pressure from the floodwaters punched a hole in Eads' living room wall,
creating an eddy that flowed through her home from the street to the creek. The
McBees had more than two feet of water in their home, soaking the carpet,
furniture and walls.

After the water receded, Eads' flood insurance covered all of her $50,000 in
repairs.

The McBees, who had canceled their flood insurance policy when they paid off
their house, had to start over on their own. They knew that their house was in a
100-year flood plain, but in their minds, the price of the insurance outweighed
the chance of a serious flood.

"There are so many things that happen in a natural disaster that you don't think
of until after it happens," Melvin McBee said, estimating that he and his wife
spent more than $15,000 repairing their home themselves. It would have cost more
than $40,000 to use contractors, he said.

But living next to a creek bed isn't a prerequisite for household flooding.
According to FEMA's National Flood Insurance Program Web site, roughly 25
percent of claims come from low- to moderate-risk policyholders.

Though insurance agents alert clients that their house insurance doesn't cover
flood damage, many people don't buy adequate coverage, said Tiffany O'Shea,
director of public affairs for the American Insurance Association, an advocacy
organization for property and casualty insurance companies.

An average of more than 30 percent of flood loss payments from the federal
insurance program go to just 1 percent of the nation's policyholders annually --
repeatedly flooded properties whose owners didn't move to higher ground or make
the appropriate modifications to prevent extensive damage, according to a June
congressional report.

In 2004, Congress passed the Flood Insurance Reform Act to address that issue.
The law allows communities to use federal money to buy out owners and move homes
that are repeatedly flooded. City engineers decided, for example, that the best
option was to buy out 470 homeowners in three subdivisions along Onion and
Williamson creeks in South Austin.

A glance at recent Central Texas history reveals a waterlogged past. Water rose
above the creekbeds in July 2002, flooding hundreds of homes, most south of
Austin. Tornadoes and rising waters also chased people from their homes in
November 2001. Onion and Williamson creeks spilled over in 1998, damaging
hundreds of homes in South Austin. In December 1991, about 200 homes in Travis
and Bastrop counties were completely under water. And 13 people drowned in the
Memorial Day Flood of 1981.

Working with the Army Corps of Engineers, local government agencies are updating
flood plain maps. Twenty-one of Travis County's 56 flood plain maps will be
presented for public comment in February.

"You certainly want to know you're in a flood plain and have a plan about what
you're going to do if the water starts to rise," said Gary Kosut, Austin's flood
plain office manager. Though most people won't see big changes, he said the maps
will reflect better mapping techniques and increased development.

"Flood plains change because land usage changes," he said. "When we increase
impervious cover, we increase the amount and speed of runoff."

And that results in higher flood plains. Yet, like the McBees, some people let
their flood insurance lapse, thinking that a flood won't reach their houses.
After all, Williamson Creek trickles peacefully along when it hasn't rained.

But Melvin McBee has advice for people who say the floodwaters will never affect
them:

"Sooner or later it's going to hit them. Come look at my house, and you see that
it can."

khumphrey@statesman.com

(box)

About flood insurance

Q: How can I tell if I live in a 100-year flood plain?

A: Flood plain maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps are available online through
FEMA's Flood Map Store. In Austin, you can submit a request to the Floodplain
Information Office or set up an appointment to view the maps by calling
974-3399.

Q: What is a 100-year flood?

A: It is a flood that has a 1 in 100 chance of occurring each year. Structures
in the flood plain have a significant chance -- 26 percent -- of suffering flood
damage during the term of a 30-year mortgage. For these reasons, flood insurance
is required as a condition for receiving federal or federally backed financial
assistance.

Q: Doesn't my homeowner's insurance cover flooding?

A: No. Damage from excessive water or mud on land that is normally dry, the
government's definition of a flood, isn't covered. If the damage is wind-related
-- for example, if a storm tears the roof off a house and it rains in -- it is
usually covered by homeowner's insurance. But if the water rises into the house,
it is not covered.

Q: Who has to have flood insurance?

A: Flood insurance is required of people who live in 100-year flood plains and
receive federal or federally backed mortgages to pay for the house. Homeowners
can allow the policy to lapse after the house is paid for. Flood insurance can
also be purchased voluntarily.

Q: How do I get it?

A: You can buy flood insurance through local insurance agents. The federal
government sets the price, collects the money and makes payments for losses. The
policy normally goes into effect 30 days after purchase. If a policy is
purchased as part of qualifying for a mortgage, however, it goes into effect
immediately.

Q: How much does it cost?

A: Flood insurance premiums vary according to the amount and type of coverage
purchased, the location and flood zone, and the design and age of the building.
A policy for a low-risk homeowner, with $20,000 of building and $8,000 of
contents covered, costs about $112 a year. But in high-risk areas, flood
insurance can cost more than $1,000 annually.

Sources: National Flood Insurance Program, City of Austin

ON THE WEB: For flood maps and other disaster information, visit www.fema.gov
and www.ci.austin.tx.us/watershed/floodplain.htm.

(box)

Billions washed away

Texas leads the nation in payments to holders of federally backed flood
insurance policies, according to the National Flood Insurance Program.
Statewide, 167,549 losses from 1978 to 2004 totaled more than $2.7 billion.

Top 15 cities  Losses    Payments

Houston          32,836   $796 million

Friendswood   3,016    $82.9 million

Pasadena        4,682    $71.5 million

Pearland          2,250    $42.4 million

Beaumont        3,818    $41.6 million

Galveston        5,179    $29.8 million

Jersey Village    577    $29.2 million

New Braunfels   354     $26.5 million

Baytown          1,837     $25.8 million

La Porte          1,420     $24.5 million

League City    2,038     $20.9 million

Deer Park       1,000     $18.5 million

Austin              1,611     $17.5 million

Bellaire               678     $16.5 million

Corpus Christi 2,491    $16.5 million

Source: National Flood Insurance Program

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Melvin and Sandy McBee, above, had canceled their flood insurance
before two feet of water rose in their house when Williamson Creek and a sewer
flooded in October 1998. They repaired the damage themselves, for about $15,000.
Nawasa Eads, right, had flood insurance, which covered $50,000 in repairs after
her creekside house was damaged in the same flood.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2005 The Austin American Statesman


                          FOCUS - 102 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                  Oman Tribune

                           September 2, 2014 Tuesday

Constructions continue in wadis despite warnings

LENGTH: 421  words


JETA PILLAI

MUSCAT

Houses and buildings have been built in wadi channels which face a high risk of
floods, even after the adverse weather conditions of 2007 and its aftermath,
said Advisor, Directorate General of Water Resources Assessment, Ministry of
Regional Municipalities and Water Resources (MRMWR) Dr Aisha Al Qurashi.



Al Qurashi, who was speaking at the Drainage Rehabilitation and Flood Control
2014 conference here on Monday said permission should not be given to build in
high flood risk zones. She told Oman Tribune that the flood zone maps were made
in the 1990s and there is a need to update them.

Al Qurashi said the flood control measure builders take may increase the risk to
neighbouring constructions.

It is difficult to convince them that a flood that is expected only once in 100
years can happen any time, she added.

It was therefore important to develop plans for flood prone areas and implement
flood control and mitigation measures.

MRMWR's role is to carry out such studies and give advice. Al Qurashi said
analysis of flood data is done to assess peaks, drought and wet periods and for
rainfall-runoff analysis. For flood management will be dealt with by a
nationwide flood study programme.

She said dams, flood protection dams and surface storage dams can provide
protection from floods. Dams are primarily for increasing groundwater storage
and surface storage dams provide water to villagers. But flood protection dams
of which there are 14 in Muscat and Musandam protect residents downstream.

She said, Oman is 82 per cent desert, 15 per cent mountains and 3 per cent
plains and its sparse vegetation, steep mountains make it prone to flash floods.
Rainfall here is difficult to predict and is intense.

In the plains, floods are spread by channels and impermeable rocks.

Assistant Professor Civil and Architecture Engineering Sultan Qaboos University
Ghazi Al Rawas, who was chairman of the conference organised by GEC Conferences,
said that in Salalah one can see the damage caused by floods following rain and
the absence of drainage system.

Over 90 international and regional drainage, sewage flood control and dam
construction experts will join representatives from MRMWR, Muscat Municipality,
Haya Water, National Survey Authority - Ministry of Defence, Oman Water Society
during the conference which will conclude on Tuesday. The theme of the
conference is "overcoming the flood waters across the Sultanate through
efficient drainage networks".


Oman Tribune  Oman Tribune 2014 Oman Tribune.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1257


                          Copyright 2014 Oman Tribune
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 103 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                           August 28, 2013 Wednesday

Floods a recurrent phenomenon in state

BYLINE: Binay Singh

SECTION: VARANASI

LENGTH: 633 words


VARANASI: Different parts of the country are witnessing flood fury with the loss
of lives and property. In Uttar Pradesh, the swollen Ganga had flooded many
districts of eastern region, including Varanasi, Allahabad, Mirzapur, Ghazipur
and Ballia.

The report of the ministry of water resources admits that the approach to flood
management presently exercised in India need to get a re-look and have an
integrated strategy. Floods have been recurrent phenomenon in many parts of
India, causing loss of lives and property and bringing untold misery to the
people, especially those in the rural areas.

According to the Preliminary Consolidated Report on Effect of Climate Change on
Water Resources, UP has 73.4 lakh hectares flood-prone area, the highest in the
country, of which only 17.03 lakh hectare area is protected (as reported up to
March 2006). The report says that as the flood events and intensity are likely
to increase due to climate change phenomenon, the flood prone-area is further
likely to increase. The likely increased sediment flow may affect the morphology
of rivers.

The report further says that it is necessary to review flood-prone areas by
using modern technologies like remote sensing, satellite data and air-borne
laser terrain mapping. It also suggests that flood plain zoning bill should be
adopted and enforced, flood hazard zonation maps should be prepared and widely
publicized, flood forecasting and warning network should be strengthened and
modernized. The instrumentation for monitoring of glacial lakes and warning for
outburst flood should be mandated to appropriate organization and necessary
institutional arrangement should be setup with Nepal for this purpose. Special
studies and mitigation measures for landslides due to changing weather
conditions in the fragile and youngest mountain range of Himalayas should be
taken up.

Regarding flood management strategies, the report says that structural and
non-structural measures are normally adopted for flood management. The change in
climate may result in change in the flood characteristics of the rivers. Hence
the long-term flood management strategies should be re-examined and actions
taken accordingly. All the methodologies involved for the computations of flood
characteristics need to be modified, considering various factors affecting the
floods in the basin due to the impact of the climate change, in addition to
various other factors responsible for floods.

According to the report of Water Resource Information System (WRIS), Ganga and
its tributaries, of which important ones are Yamuna, Sone, Ghaghra, Gandak, Kosi
and Mahananda, constitute Ganga River Region. It covers 10 states of
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkand, Bihar, south and central parts of West
Bengal, parts of Haryana , Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Delhi
in its basin. The normal annual rainfall in the region varies from 60 cm to 190
cm, of which more than 80% occurs during the south west monsoon. The rainfall
increases from West to east and from south to north.

The flood problem is mostly confined to the areas on the northern bank of Ganga.
The damage is caused by the northern tributaries of the Ganga by spilling over
the banks and changing the courses. Even though the Ganga is a mighty river, the
inundation and erosion problems are confined to relatively few places. In
general, the flood problem increases from the west to east and from south to
north. In the north western parts of the region and some eastern parts, there is
the problem of drainage congestion. The flooding and erosion problem is serious
in the states located in the downstream. In recent years, some states, which
were not traditionally flood-prone have also experienced incidents of heavy
floods.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 104 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                             January 7, 2011 Friday
                                 First Edition

Warnings on the forgotten lessons of 1955;
NSW

BYLINE: Kelsey Munro

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 395 words


THE lessons of disastrous floods in 1955 have been forgotten, and the drought
has made people complacent about the risks of flooding in the state, expert say.
The La Nina weather pattern this summer is similar to the La Nina episode in
1955, when floods hit the Hunter Valley. "Droughts and periods of wet are part
of cycles, and they haven't gone away, said Chas Keys, a retired deputy
director-general of the State Emergency Service.

"It's a lesson of nature, these things always come back." Government resources
had been directed away from flood mitigation towards bushfire and salination
management, he said. Federal funding for flood management had declined since the
1990s, and the burden had shifted to cash-strapped councils. Complacency over
flood risks meant development was returning to flood-prone land. "It's just
madness that we keep making these problems. We need to recognise that floods are
inevitable and we have to live with them." Most of the worst floods in northern
and eastern NSW have occurred in late summer, and the La Nina pattern, which is
associated with high rainfalls, is set to run through to April. It does not mean
that a severe flood in NSW this summer is inevitable "but the omens look fair
for that sort of scenario", said Mr Keys, who has written four books on floods
and emergency management. Fiona Marshall, the general manager of the
Hunter-Central Rivers Catchment Management Authority, backed his views. "We're
not saying that '55 is around the corner again, but we learnt a lot from that
and we've put things together to help people cope." The levees at Maitland are
built for a moderate or 20-year flood event and could not withstand a flood as
big as 1955's. "Levees have kept the floods out so people say the flood
problem's been fixed," Mr Keys said. "But we haven't seen anything like the '55
flood since." Those floods, which claimed the lives of 14 people in Maitland,
led to the creation of the SES and decades of government investment in flood
mitigation. A spokeswoman for the Department of the Environment, Climate Change
and Water said a review had "refocused" NSW flood plain and coastal management
programs, transferring responsibility to councils that had received $130 million
in state funding for flood plain management over the past decade. MULTIMEDIA
Latest news and video from the disaster zones smh.com.au

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Disaster ... High Street, Maitland, in 1955. Photo: Courtesy Jim
Lucey

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2011 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 105 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                Hull Daily Mail

                           November 30, 2013 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

'The Government's flood insurance plans fail to meet the needs of Hull homes and
firms';
As plans for a new flood insurance scheme move forward, Hull North MP Diana
Johnson shares her concerns about what it means for households and businesses in
Hull

BYLINE: Diana Johnson

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18,19

LENGTH: 1042 words


THE 2007 floods in Hull were a once-in-a-250-year event, although climate change
looks like making such volatile weather less rare in the future.

One in five Hull properties flooded, including 7,208 homes and 1,300 businesses.

There was one tragic fatality.

Many had to live in caravans for months afterwards, while their homes dried out
and were refurbished.

Flooding caused misery lasting for months, long after the dehumidifiers and
dryers had gone.

Reasonable protection from such an ordeal seems a fair expectation in a modern
society, with investment in flood defences and robust planning and building
regulations.

Running alongside this has been a campaign to ensure areas prone to flooding,
such as Hull, can obtain flood insurance at a reasonable cost and without huge
excesses.

This June, the Government announced plans for the future of flood insurance, but
I am concerned that they fail to meet the needs of households and businesses in
Hull.

It's important to recognise the special geography of Hull, 90 per cent of which
is below sea level and vulnerable in the past to flooding from the River Hull
and the Humber estuary. In June 2007 the long period of torrential rainfall saw
surface water overwhelming the drainage and pumping infrastructure in swathes of
Hull.

Back in June last year, the then Secretary of State for the Department for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) told me that she was "proud that we
have found a way forward with the insurance industry that, above all, guarantees
that universal and affordable insurance remains available to all".

This "way forward" then took another year to emerge, as the "Flood Re" scheme,
and is still not finalised.

The Government's Flood Re scheme replaces the Statement of Principles, which was
first agreed in 2000, renewed in 2008, and ran until this Summer. Under this,
the insurance industry agreed to provide insurance in flood risk areas so long
as the Government continued to invest in flood defences. People whose flood
insurance was safeguarded by the Statement of Principles would, however, find
that they had little choice over which insurance company they could use and,
from 2007, even less so. After the 2007 flood premiums and excesses went up for
many Hull households.

There are five problems with Flood Re for Hull residents and businesses.
Firstly, small businesses are totally excluded from Flood Re. As if problems
such as rising energy costs and business rates aren't bad enough, they'll now
face a struggle getting affordable flood insurance. Secondly, Flood Re is a
transitional arrangement. The Government plans to move to a full open market
approach after 25 years. If this happened, we would be the only developed
country where the state accepted no role in ensuring that flood insurance is
available.

Whatever house-builders, businesses and householders did to improve the flood
resilience of their properties, I believe that in a free market Hull will be
seen as too risky and many will be unable to get flood insurance. This is
extremely unfair. Aren't residents and businesses in Hull tax-payers like anyone
else? Shouldn't the state protect areas like Hull? Thirdly, under Flood Re
householders could still find themselves paying up to £560 annually for the
flood insurance element of house insurance alone. Many in Hull will not regard
that as affordable.

Fourthly, in the event of another major flood like Hull's 2007 one, it is
unclear whether the scheme would be able to cope. The Government itself admits
that there's a 58 per cent chance that Flood Re will fail.

Fifthly, and most importantly, homes completed from January 2009 are excluded
from the Flood Re scheme. 444,300 private homes had been built nationally
between 2009 and last year. In Hull, for the same period 1,720 private homes
were built. All of them will be excluded from the Flood Re scheme. The
Government say that properties built since 2009 should have been built to
stricter planning and building regulations, in terms of flood resilience.
Kingswood is a major housing regeneration area for Hull and outline planning
permission was first given in 1994 for the area. Like many other parts of the
UK, some Kingswood properties were given planning permission before 2009 to the
earlier specifications, but any property built since January 1, 2009, will not
be covered by the Flood Re scheme. In many areas of the country homes built
since 2009 have flooded or caused other properties to flood.

This Government is proposing this retrospective date of 2009 as the cut-off for
insurance cover and I think this is unfair to people who bought their properties
in good faith between 2009 and now. If there must be a cut-off date, it would be
much fairer to set it in the future and I would suggest 2015. When the previous
Statement of Principles was first established, the cut-off date for houses not
to be covered was set for the future, at least giving people and developers some
time to plan.

Earlier this week, when I asked the Secretary of State responsible for housing,
Eric Pickles, what discussions he has had within the Government about Flood Re,
he seemed unaware of the problem. In the past week, two ministers have told me
that the 2009 cut-off date is intended to send "a very clear message" that homes
should not be built and sold in flood risk areas - like Kingswood and 90 per
cent of Hull.

The Government is currently promoting its "Help to Buy" scheme heavily in
Kingswood, helping people to buy new homes. But the same Government has also
excluded these same new homes from their Flood Re scheme. In effect, people are
being encouraged by some parts of the Government to buy and move into homes that
other parts of the Government believe should not have been built!

We've already had the recent Economist article advocating the abandonment of
Hull for economic reasons. The subsequent City of Culture 2017 victory provided
the perfect answer to that.

Now many parts of the country, not just Hull and the North, could discover how
it feels to be abandoned on this important issue, if the Government does not
alter course on flood insurance.

After the 2007 flood premiums went up for many households Diana Johnson,
pictured

Hull could be abandoned on this important issue Diana Johnson

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: SWAMPED: Some of the devastation caused by the 2007 floods.
UNDER WATER: Views of flooded Wold Road, Bristol Road and Willerby Road.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HDM


                         Copyright 2013 Hull Daily Mail
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 106 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                    BBC Monitoring Asia Pacific - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                              July 25, 2010 Sunday

Chinese premier inspects flood situation in Hubei, urges scientific prevention

LENGTH: 1618 words


Text of report by official Chinese news agency Xinhua (New China News Agency)

[By Xinhua reporters Zhao Cheng and Yang Xiwei: "Control and Combat Flood
According to Scientific Law - On-the-Spot Report on Premier Wen Jiabao's
Inspection of the Work of Controlling and Combating Flood in Hubei"]

Wuhan, 24 Jul (Xinhua) -Wen Jiabao, member of the Standing Committee of the CPC
Central Committee Political Bureau and premier of the State Council, recently
inspected the work of controlling and combating flood in Hubei. He pointed out:
As the whole country is in a critical moment of flood prevention, we must
maintain high vigilance; adhere to the scientific law in controlling and
combating flood; and make preparations in earnest for preventing worse flood and
dealing with more serious disaster. We must map out overall plans for economic
and social development and the work of combating flood and delivering disaster
relief, striving to achieve all economic and social development targets for this
year.

Regions along the Yangtze River, where water systems have developed into
numerous rivers, lakes, and reservoirs, are always the focal areas of
controlling and combating flood in the country. Since the beginning of flood
season, torrential rains have poured continuously down the Yangtze River
valleys, with the precipitation 20 per cent more than the average year. The main
rivers in the upper reaches have registered the largest flood crest since 1987,
while the water in the middle and lower reaches has risen to the warning level
for the first time since 2003. Due to the heavy rains and water coming down from
the upper reaches, the water level of rivers, lakes, and reservoirs in Hubei has
risen sharply; and two big flood crests of the Yangtze River and Han Jiang
arrived almost at the same time in Hubei, which has seen the situation of "being
attacked by two rivers."

At the critical moment of controlling and combating flood, Wen Jiabao arrived in
Wuhan, Hubei, on 23 July to inspect and offer guidance for the work of
controlling and combating flood. At around 1500 [local time], no sooner had he
deplaned then he visited the dangerous section at Longwangmiao in Hankou on the
spot. Located at the joint of the Yangtze River and Han Jiang, the river channel
is narrow and the current is swift at the section. It is one of the Yangtze
River's well-known dangerous sections and a thorn of flood prevention in Wuhan.
After a large-scale comprehensive overhaul in 1998, the section's flood
prevention capacity was improved considerably. The river observation stand
outside the flood prevention wall is already submerged in water. Wen Jiabao
waded a foot deep water to inspect the Longwangmiao overhaul project. "What is
the Yangtze River's water level at the section in Wuhan now?" he asked with
concerns. "It is at 27.13 meters, the highest level since the flood season," a
local official replied. "How about the rate of flow?" "It is 51,200 cubic meters
per second." Wen Jiabao inquired in details, from the rain to water situation,
the flood to disaster situation, and flood control and combating to arrangements
for the masses' livelihood. Upon learning that due to the latest torrential
rains, the water is again rising in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River and
Han Jiang, Wen Jiabao urged local officials and people to redouble efforts and
make ample preparations for fighting a new round of floods.

Sighting some people at the river observation stand, Wen Jiabao waded across the
water and went among them. He asked them whether they worried about the flood.
They said: After the overhaul project, plus the Three Gorges project on holding
back floodwater and adjusting flood crests, Longwangmiao is safer than before
and they are not worried. Upon learning all of these, Wen Jiabao said:
Construction of the Three Gorges project and reinforcement of the levees along
the Yangtze River have played an important role in controlling and combating
flood on the Yangtze River.

Later, Wen Jiabao arrived at Yueliangwan, a dangerous section at the Wuchang
riverside, where surging water is approaching the banks; there is no shoal
beyond the embankment; scouring is serious; and the slop of underwater banks is
steep. This place has always been a focal point of flood prevention in Wuhan
City. After the flood season in 1996, th e Wuhan city government built 800-plus
meter long flood control walls; dumped 30,000 cubic meters of stones into the
water; and built underground anti-penetration walls. A local official told the
Premier: "Judging from the underwater terrain monitor, the dangerous situation
has somehow escalated because of serious clear water scouring and increasingly
steep shore slope."

After listening to the official's briefing, Wen Jiabao said: "It is necessary to
comprehensively tackle the problem of collapsed embankments caused by the
discharge of clear water and reinforce the dikes in order to relieve the people
of worries."

Wen Jiabao paid a courtesy visit to the Yangtze River Water Conservancy
Commission, where he extended warm regards to water conservancy experts as well
as officials and workers. In the conference room, Wen Jiabao, sitting in front
of the Yangtze River flood control map, observed the water and flood situation
through a large screen and listened to the Commission's work report. Fully
affirming the Commission's work, Wen Jiabao said: By fighting at the forefront
of Yangtze River flood prevention, the Commission has played an important role
in controlling flood water scientifically, thereby alleviating the comparatively
serious flood this year and avoiding grave losses caused by flood to production
and life of the masses along the river valleys. He emphasized: The practice of
irrigation construction and flood control and combating on numerous occasions
since the founding of new China tells us: The improvement, protection, and
utilization of water resources should be handled according to the scientific
law, in order to ensure harmony between man and nature and between people and
water. This is the guiding principle for our irrigation construction and flood
prevention and drought control.

On the evening of 23 July, Wen Jiabao chaired a meeting in Wuhan to listen to
reports on the work of controlling and combating floods in the Yangtze River
valleys. He also gave an important speech. He put forward six requirements for
the work of controlling and combating flood in the next phase: (1) Ensure the
safety of major dikes and reservoirs during the flood season: It is necessary to
step up emergency duty and inspection work to remove dangers in rivers, dikes,
and reservoirs. Once a danger is discovered, it is necessary to take action
immediately to eliminate the danger to ensure flood prevention and safety of
major rivers, large and key medium-sized reservoirs, and important
infrastructure. (2) Pay close attention to the scientific management of the
Three Gorges and Danjiangkou Dams and other key flood prevention projects: It is
necessary to persist in mapping out plans for both retaining and discharging
water; promoting the benefits of both rivers and lakes; coordinating the upper
and lower reaches; giving consideration to both banks of rivers; harmonizing
major and branch rivers; and arranging the volume of discharge scientifically
according to the condition of water coming down from the upper reaches and
changes in the water level in the lower reaches. (3) Strengthen the prevention
of mountain torrents, landslides, mud-rock flows, cave-ins, and other disasters:
It is necessary to pay particular attention to strengthening monitoring and
prevention; and conscientiously implement measures for resettling people out of
dangerous areas to reduce the casualties to the minimum. It is necessary to
accelerate implementation of the plan to prevent and control disastrous mountain
torrents and improve the capability to prevent disasters. (4) Properly arrange
the basic livelihood and rehabilitation of production of disaster victims: It is
necessary to step up disaster relief and supply of daily necessities for
disaster areas to ensure the masses' daily needs. It is necessary to pay
attention to heatstroke prevention and anti-epidemic work. It is necessary to
repair facilities damaged by flood in a timely manner; organize disaster victims
to support themselves through work relief; and rush to plant and re-plant r ice
paddy, in order to restore production as soon as possible. (5) Speed up the
construction of dikes for medium-sized and small rivers and the elimination of
dangers and reinforcement of embankments of small defective dams: It is
necessary to implement the decision of the State Council executive meeting on
rationally readjusting the direction of investment, focused on the improvement
of medium-sized and small rivers and the elimination of dangers and
reinforcement of embankments of small defective dams, in order to build up the
capability to prevent floods and minimize disasters expeditiously. (6) Put the
responsibility system into practice in flood control and combating: Local party
committees and governments should implement the responsibility system in the
work of combating flood, rushing to deal with emergency, and delivering disaster
relief at each level. Provinces along the rivers should foster a strong
mentality of considering the situation comprehensively; and ensure that the
lives and safety of the masses are always put in the most important place, and
that the work of combating flood, rushing to deal with emergency, and delivering
disaster relieve proceeds in an effective and orderly way.

Source: Xinhua news agency domestic service, Beijing, in Chinese 0923 gmt 24 Jul
10

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2010 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 107 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                    Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Massachesetts)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 4, 2013 Sunday

New flood zones reveal costly risk for Cape homeowners

BYLINE: Christine Legere, Cape Cod Times, Hyannis, Mass.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1107 words


Aug. 04--Cape homeowners are facing the possibility of paying thousands of
dollars in increased insurance costs following the release of new federal flood
maps that indicate a greater risk for coastal properties.

Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps were recently released by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and show Cape towns will see their flood hazard
zones significantly expand once the maps are formalized.

The new maps are slated to take effect next June, after they are accepted by
town meeting voters, but local officials are warning property owners the time to
pay attention is now.

The 90-day period to appeal a property's inclusion in a flood hazard zone has
already begun in Barnstable County, and it is set to close Oct. 17. Only appeals
backed by scientific or technical data will be considered by FEMA.

"We're trying to get the word out on this through the newspapers and cable
television," said Charleen Greenhalgh, Truro's assistant town administrator and
planner. "It's important for residents to look at the flood maps and talk to
their insurers."

Some communities, like Provincetown and Chatham, have sent written notices out
to property owners being added to the hazard zones, and most towns now have
FEMA's preliminary flood maps posted on their websites.

Determining where your property falls in the various flood zones can be tricky.

Don Robitaille, who owns a home on Beaten Road in Dennisport, said he checked
out the map but couldn't decide whether his property lies in or outside of the
flood hazard zone.

"I didn't think it would be that hard to figure out," Robitaille said. His
property has not previously been in the flood hazard zone even though it is
located about 300 yards from the ocean. Whatever the designation, Robitaille
says he feels safe.

"The last time this area was flooded was 1944," he said.

Property owners with federally insured mortgages will be required by lenders to
purchase special flood insurance, if the new maps place them within the flood
risk zone. Shopping around for the best price won't help, because flood
insurance rates are set by the federal government.

"Everybody has the same rates and plays by the same rules," said Paul Silva, a
principal with Benson, Young & Downs Insurance Agency in Provincetown. "The
insurance companies are only the paper handlers."

Greenhalgh said those without mortgages, while not required to buy flood
insurance, should do so if their properties have been added to the hazard zone.
Otherwise, they won't be covered for storm damage.

But Kathy Woodward, who has long paid off the mortgage on her Glendon Road home
in Dennisport, doesn't plan to buy flood insurance even though her property has
been included in the new flood risk zone.

"I'm not going to pay for something that may never happen," Woodward said last
week. "I'll take my chances with a flood."

Dennis' flood maps changed more than any other Cape community's. Currently, less
than 10 percent of the town's properties fall into flood risk areas. The new map
boosts the percentage to 30.

"It's going from 1,200 properties to over 5,000," said Town Planner Daniel
Fortier. "That's 4,000 new properties being added."

Harwich will have 1,000 new properties in the flood hazard zone.

In most cases, community flood maps haven't been revised in 30 years. FEMA's
effort is aimed at making the hazard zones more accurately reflect the actual
risk of flooding, according to the FEMA website.

Special flood hazard zones are areas considered to have a 1 percent chance of
flooding in a given year.

Sean O'Brien, coordinator of the Barnstable County Regional Emergency Planning
Committee, said updated maps will provide emergency planning organizations and
homeowners with valuable information.

"The maps are an important planning tool," O'Brien said. "They allow us to know
the low-lying areas that we may have to evacuate in a storm event and what
routes we can take. They also provide people with information they need when
they own a property or are looking into owning a property."

The flood hazard maps can also guide towns tweaking building requirements. For
example, a new home in an area prone to flood and wave damage may have to be
built on pilings. Such requirements would also affect major renovations.

Coastal areas are in the "V" or velocity zone, which is most at risk for both
flooding, wave and wind-related damage. The other hazard zone is the "A" zone,
which is prone to flooding. The preliminary maps include properties around
rivers and ponds, and places with particularly high groundwater in the "A" zone.

In Mashpee, for example, the area surrounding Mashpee Pond, formerly outside the
flood risk zone, has been placed in the "A" zone on preliminary maps.

Standard homeowners' policies don't provide coverage for flooding. In 1968,
Congress created the National Flood Insurance Program to help provide property
owners a means of protecting themselves. But several severe weather events, such
as Hurricane Katrina and, more recently, Sandy, put the federally subsidized
program in a $17 billion to $20 billion deficit.

Last year, Congress passed the Biggert-Waters Act of 2012 aimed at stabilizing
the flood insurance fund. Provisions will cause flood insurance rates to
significantly rise.

"If you're in the A zone and your building is 4 feet below base flood elevation,
your premiums could be as high as $10,700," Silva said.

For those newly placed in the hazard zones, the increases will be phased in at
20 percent per year for the next five years.

"Everything homeowners do to protect their homes can reduce what they'll pay in
flood insurance," Fortier said. "You can move a furnace, electrical panel and
hot water heater out of the basement and above the flood elevation and install a
foundation that allows water to flow through. It would take two or three years
to recover, but it's better than paying $10,000 a year for insurance."

How the changes to the flood maps and increases in flood insurance rates will
affect home sales remains unknown.

"I think so far there's not a lot of public awareness of this, and there's not a
lot of agent knowledge of it either," said Annie Blatz, a real estate broker
with Kinlin Grover and secretary/treasurer of the Massachusetts Association of
Realtors.

Blatz said she remains upbeat. Owners of the bulk of the oceanfront properties
can afford to pay the insurance increases, she said.

In any case, Blatz said, such properties are historically in demand because
"people want to be close to the ocean."

___ (c)2013 the Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Mass.) Visit the Cape Cod Times
(Hyannis, Mass.) at www.capecodonline.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20130804-CA-New-flood-zones-reveal-costly-risk-for-Cape-homeowners-0804-20130804

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CA


                         Copyright 2013 Cape Code Times


                          FOCUS - 108 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                 EKantipur.com

                             July 21, 2015 Tuesday

Flood emergency imposed in Chitral

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: PESHAWAR


PESHAWAR, July 21 -- In Chitral, a flood emergency has been imposed in the area
as torrential rains have resulted in floods in local rivers and nullahs. The
rainwater washed away several bridges and inundated many villages.

Army and Chitral Scouts personnel are taking part in relief and rescue
operations. Several areas in the district have been cut off because of the
floods and damages to communication systems.

Meanwhile, according to the Flood Warning Division Lahore, River Indus is in
medium flood at Chashma and Kalabagh, and in low flood at Terbella and Taunsa.
Similarly, River Chenab is in low flood at Balloki and Marala and below low
flood at Khanki, Qadiriabad and Tarimon barrages.

River Jehlum is in low flood at Mangla and below low at head Rasul. River Ravi
is in low flood at Shahdara and below low flood at Nullah Bansar. Low flood has
also been reported in River Sutlaj at Suleimanki. All other rivers and nullahs
in the province are flowing normal.

In Rajanpur, rescue operations are in full swing in areas hit by flood in "Hill
Torrent Kaha Sultan." The local administration has also warned the people in the
riverine areas of Bumblee, Harhand and Chandia to shift to safer places.

Meanwhile, Punjab Chief Minister Shahbaz Sharif has directed the authorities
concerned to take immediate relief and rescue measures to help people affected
by floods in torrential nullahs in Koh-e-Suleman in Rajanpur district. He also
told all those concerned to monitor the floods situation round the clock, across
the province.

Authorities of Layyah, Dera Ghazi Khan, Rajanpur and Muzaffargarh districts,
while issuing flood warning, have asked the people of the riverine areas to
shift to safer places.

In Layyah, over 100 villages have been inundated. Similarly, dozens of villages
have been submerged in Kot Addu. The administrations of these districts have
directed the concerned departments to make all arrangements to help the affected
people.

In Muzaffargarh, 18 relief camps have been set up and all spurs and safety studs
are being monitored.

The Indus River is in low flood at Guddu and Sukkur barrages where the water
level is increasing.

Meanwhile, a high level flood recorded in Indus River at the location of Chachra
in Rahim Yar Khan, officials said on Monday.

The Indus and Chenab River meet at the point of Chachra where the gauge level in
10.60.

According to District Flood Control Room, a stream of 2, 60,000 cusecs water is
passing through the river with a flood warning issued in Indus River.

The villages located at Indus River have been directed to transfer to a safe
zone.

On the other hand in Rasulpur, at least five villages namely Rasulpur, Kacha
Mahazi, Kacha Chauhan, Muslim Abad, Kacha Darkan and hundreds of acres of lands
and fields have been inundated due to heavy floods.

Moreover, rescue efforts have not yet been initiated in the affected areas.

SINDH FARES NO BETTER

Official sources in Karachi reported that the inflow of water at Guddu barrage
was 353,000 cusecs while water discharge was 326,000 cusecs on Monday morning.
Similarly, at Sukkur barrage, the influx of water was 269,000 and discharge was
214,000 cusecs.

Sindh irrigation department has reported medium level flood at Guddu Barrage.
Flood control rooms have been established at Guddu and Sukkur Barrages to
monitor the situation.

Sindh Chief Minister Syed Qaim Ali Shah has directed the Deputy Commissioners to
evacuate people from the Katcha area of river Indus.

The CM stressed upon the people of Katcha areas of Larkana and Sukkur divisions
to evacuate the Katcha areas for their own safety.

He has also directed concerned authorities to set up a control room in the Sindh
Secretariat, Karachi, to monitor the situation on an hourly basis.

SITUATION ELSEWHERE

In Zhob district of Balochistan, Frontier Corps Balochistan has started rescue
and relief activities in the flood affected areas of Mir Ali Khel. It rescued
twelve people including women and children, stranded in flood tides. Nine
vehicles were also rescued.

According to details several people and vehicles were stranded on Mir Ali Khel
road in Zhob due to increase in flow of flood tide.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from The Statesman. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 Kantipur Publications Pvt. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 109 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                             June 14, 2007 Thursday
                                 First Edition

Prepare for more troubled waters

BYLINE: Chas Keys Chas Keys was the deputy director-general of the NSW State
Emergency Services from 1997 to 2004.

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Opinion; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 730 words


After years of drought, a significant flood at last. It took place in the Hunter
Valley and for a time looked as if it could be catastrophic. It raises the
question: how well prepared is NSW for severe flooding?

Consider first the costs associated with the flood threat. It is a
little-appreciated fact that flooding has been the costliest natural hazard
which we have had to face.

No other natural hazard - not bushfires, storms, earthquakes or droughts - has
killed so many people in NSW over the past two centuries. On the score of dollar
damage over the long term, flooding may be rivalled by drought but not by any of
the other hazards.

So costly has flooding been that we have spent large sums of public money to
protect ourselves from it. No other Australian state has invested so heavily in
anti-flood devices - including drains and levees to protect farm productivity
and levees to keep floodwaters out of dozens of towns.

The floodplain management effort has flagged lately and the investment
(particularly by way of federal input) is well down on what it once was, but NSW
has a good record in protecting its citizens from floods.

And it pioneered the effort to minimise flood-incompatible development on
floodplains, putting a brake on the escalation of the damage done by flooding to
infrastructure and other assets.

There has also been considerable investment in flood forecasting. The Weather
Bureau's forecasts of the onset and severity of floods give people near rivers
the chance to move their belongings and to evacuate to safety before floodwaters
overwhelm them. Despite periodic criticism about the accuracy of some of the
predictions, by world standards we are served well in this area.

NSW also has a strong flood response capability vested by law in the State
Emergency Service, a largely volunteer agency whose members train in flood
rescue, co-ordinate the resupply of isolated communities and the evacuation of
people who are placed in danger. But there are gaps in our protection, too - in
the provision of flood insurance, for example, and in the creation of genuinely
flood-aware and flood-ready communities.

It is difficult to get affordable insurance against the damage done by floods.
The problem is that only a minority of the state's dwellings and businesses are
on floodplains, and to insure against their flood risk without subsidies from
people whose properties are not flood-liable has been deemed untenable by most
insurers. Fire, by contrast, can affect all buildings and all property owners
can easily be charged a premium.

The most difficult problem of all, though, is to ensure that people who live in
flood-liable areas understand the threat they face and are prepared to act
positively to minimise the damage and maximise their personal safety when
flooding happens.

Efforts are being made by agencies such as the SES, a few local councils and
some of the newly created catchment management authorities, but the work is in
its infancy.

The events of the weekend show why some education is needed. At Maitland there
was much focus on the flood as a curiosity, but arguably less on its potential
for harm.

Many evacuated when asked but likewise many refused, arguing that it was
unnecessary and an over-reaction. Some indicated fatalistically that there was
little they could do to protect themselves.

Yet the truth is different: with warnings and effort, one can protect one's
valuables and precious sentimental items by raising them out of flood reach.

Commercial stock can be made safe, and lives can be protected by evacuation and
by people not driving on flooded roads and across causeways.

The flood threat is not greatly respected. People don't fear floods as they do
bushfires, and most believe floods are a nuisance, not a danger. Ironically our
floodplain management endeavours may have added to the complacency.

To increase our resilience against the flood threat we must convince people not
to deny the flood problem or treat it as being trivial.

To fail here will mean that communities will continue to lose more than they
should to floodwaters. This will become more apparent when the drought breaks,
as it inevitably will, and floods happen frequently again.

It's worth noting the majority view of climate change scientists: both floods
and droughts will increase in frequency and severity in Australia. The flood
threat is still with us.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2007 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 110 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                             June 14, 2007 Thursday
                                 First Edition

Prepare for more troubled waters

BYLINE: Chas Keys Chas Keys was the deputy director-general of the NSW State
Emergency Services from 1997 to 2004.

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Opinion; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 730 words


After years of drought, a significant flood at last. It took place in the Hunter
Valley and for a time looked as if it could be catastrophic. It raises the
question: how well prepared is NSW for severe flooding?

Consider first the costs associated with the flood threat. It is a
little-appreciated fact that flooding has been the costliest natural hazard
which we have had to face.

No other natural hazard - not bushfires, storms, earthquakes or droughts - has
killed so many people in NSW over the past two centuries. On the score of dollar
damage over the long term, flooding may be rivalled by drought but not by any of
the other hazards.

So costly has flooding been that we have spent large sums of public money to
protect ourselves from it. No other Australian state has invested so heavily in
anti-flood devices - including drains and levees to protect farm productivity
and levees to keep floodwaters out of dozens of towns.

The floodplain management effort has flagged lately and the investment
(particularly by way of federal input) is well down on what it once was, but NSW
has a good record in protecting its citizens from floods.

And it pioneered the effort to minimise flood-incompatible development on
floodplains, putting a brake on the escalation of the damage done by flooding to
infrastructure and other assets.

There has also been considerable investment in flood forecasting. The Weather
Bureau's forecasts of the onset and severity of floods give people near rivers
the chance to move their belongings and to evacuate to safety before floodwaters
overwhelm them. Despite periodic criticism about the accuracy of some of the
predictions, by world standards we are served well in this area.

NSW also has a strong flood response capability vested by law in the State
Emergency Service, a largely volunteer agency whose members train in flood
rescue, co-ordinate the resupply of isolated communities and the evacuation of
people who are placed in danger. But there are gaps in our protection, too - in
the provision of flood insurance, for example, and in the creation of genuinely
flood-aware and flood-ready communities.

It is difficult to get affordable insurance against the damage done by floods.
The problem is that only a minority of the state's dwellings and businesses are
on floodplains, and to insure against their flood risk without subsidies from
people whose properties are not flood-liable has been deemed untenable by most
insurers. Fire, by contrast, can affect all buildings and all property owners
can easily be charged a premium.

The most difficult problem of all, though, is to ensure that people who live in
flood-liable areas understand the threat they face and are prepared to act
positively to minimise the damage and maximise their personal safety when
flooding happens.

Efforts are being made by agencies such as the SES, a few local councils and
some of the newly created catchment management authorities, but the work is in
its infancy.

The events of the weekend show why some education is needed. At Maitland there
was much focus on the flood as a curiosity, but arguably less on its potential
for harm.

Many evacuated when asked but likewise many refused, arguing that it was
unnecessary and an over-reaction. Some indicated fatalistically that there was
little they could do to protect themselves.

Yet the truth is different: with warnings and effort, one can protect one's
valuables and precious sentimental items by raising them out of flood reach.

Commercial stock can be made safe, and lives can be protected by evacuation and
by people not driving on flooded roads and across causeways.

The flood threat is not greatly respected. People don't fear floods as they do
bushfires, and most believe floods are a nuisance, not a danger. Ironically our
floodplain management endeavours may have added to the complacency.

To increase our resilience against the flood threat we must convince people not
to deny the flood problem or treat it as being trivial.

To fail here will mean that communities will continue to lose more than they
should to floodwaters. This will become more apparent when the drought breaks,
as it inevitably will, and floods happen frequently again.

It's worth noting the majority view of climate change scientists: both floods
and droughts will increase in frequency and severity in Australia. The flood
threat is still with us.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2007 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 111 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                             June 14, 2007 Thursday
                                 First Edition

Prepare for more troubled waters

BYLINE: Chas Keys Chas Keys was the deputy director-general of the NSW State
Emergency Services from 1997 to 2004.

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Opinion; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 730 words


After years of drought, a significant flood at last. It took place in the Hunter
Valley and for a time looked as if it could be catastrophic. It raises the
question: how well prepared is NSW for severe flooding?

Consider first the costs associated with the flood threat. It is a
little-appreciated fact that flooding has been the costliest natural hazard
which we have had to face.

No other natural hazard - not bushfires, storms, earthquakes or droughts - has
killed so many people in NSW over the past two centuries. On the score of dollar
damage over the long term, flooding may be rivalled by drought but not by any of
the other hazards.

So costly has flooding been that we have spent large sums of public money to
protect ourselves from it. No other Australian state has invested so heavily in
anti-flood devices - including drains and levees to protect farm productivity
and levees to keep floodwaters out of dozens of towns.

The floodplain management effort has flagged lately and the investment
(particularly by way of federal input) is well down on what it once was, but NSW
has a good record in protecting its citizens from floods.

And it pioneered the effort to minimise flood-incompatible development on
floodplains, putting a brake on the escalation of the damage done by flooding to
infrastructure and other assets.

There has also been considerable investment in flood forecasting. The Weather
Bureau's forecasts of the onset and severity of floods give people near rivers
the chance to move their belongings and to evacuate to safety before floodwaters
overwhelm them. Despite periodic criticism about the accuracy of some of the
predictions, by world standards we are served well in this area.

NSW also has a strong flood response capability vested by law in the State
Emergency Service, a largely volunteer agency whose members train in flood
rescue, co-ordinate the resupply of isolated communities and the evacuation of
people who are placed in danger. But there are gaps in our protection, too - in
the provision of flood insurance, for example, and in the creation of genuinely
flood-aware and flood-ready communities.

It is difficult to get affordable insurance against the damage done by floods.
The problem is that only a minority of the state's dwellings and businesses are
on floodplains, and to insure against their flood risk without subsidies from
people whose properties are not flood-liable has been deemed untenable by most
insurers. Fire, by contrast, can affect all buildings and all property owners
can easily be charged a premium.

The most difficult problem of all, though, is to ensure that people who live in
flood-liable areas understand the threat they face and are prepared to act
positively to minimise the damage and maximise their personal safety when
flooding happens.

Efforts are being made by agencies such as the SES, a few local councils and
some of the newly created catchment management authorities, but the work is in
its infancy.

The events of the weekend show why some education is needed. At Maitland there
was much focus on the flood as a curiosity, but arguably less on its potential
for harm.

Many evacuated when asked but likewise many refused, arguing that it was
unnecessary and an over-reaction. Some indicated fatalistically that there was
little they could do to protect themselves.

Yet the truth is different: with warnings and effort, one can protect one's
valuables and precious sentimental items by raising them out of flood reach.

Commercial stock can be made safe, and lives can be protected by evacuation and
by people not driving on flooded roads and across causeways.

The flood threat is not greatly respected. People don't fear floods as they do
bushfires, and most believe floods are a nuisance, not a danger. Ironically our
floodplain management endeavours may have added to the complacency.

To increase our resilience against the flood threat we must convince people not
to deny the flood problem or treat it as being trivial.

To fail here will mean that communities will continue to lose more than they
should to floodwaters. This will become more apparent when the drought breaks,
as it inevitably will, and floods happen frequently again.

It's worth noting the majority view of climate change scientists: both floods
and droughts will increase in frequency and severity in Australia. The flood
threat is still with us.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2007 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 112 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                  Long Island Business News (Long Island, NY)

                                 April 6, 2007

Long Island Financial Briefs: April 6, 2007

BYLINE: LIBN Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 759  words


As weather warms, flood worries build momentum

Warmer temperatures signal the arrival of spring, but also contribute to
snowmelts and the risk of flooding.

There is no better time for consumers to assess whether they are adequately
covered for flood-related losses, according to the New York Insurance
Association.

More than 20 percent of all flood insurance claims are filed in low- to moderate
flood-risk areas, and too few consumers realize affordable flood insurance is
available through the Federal Emergency Management Agency's National Flood
Insurance Program.

According to Federal Emergency Management Agency, floods - including inland
flooding, flash floods and seasonal storms - occur in every region of the United
States.

"Ninety percent of all natural disasters in the U.S. involve some type of
flooding," said Bernard N. Bourdeau, president of NYIA. "There is also a 30-day
waiting period for flood insurance policies to go into effect, so don't wait
until the flood water is rising to call your insurance agent or insurance
company representative. "

The NYIA reminds you to consider the following facts about flood insurance:

Standard homeowners and renters insurance does not cover flood damage: Flood
damage is excluded under standard homeowner's policies, although it is covered
under the comprehensive section of a standard auto insurance policy. Only a
flood insurance policy, available to homeowners and renters through the federal
government, will cover flood-related losses.

Flood insurance is easy to purchase: Federal flood insurance policies can be
purchased directly from an insurance agent or a company representative, and are
available to communities that participate in the National Flood Insurance
Program. Nearly 100 insurance companies write and service NFIP policies. In
order to find an agent or company servicing your area, visit www.floodsmart.gov
or call (888) 379-9531. Flood insurance is available on a replacement cost basis
for the structure of the home and on an actual cash value basis for personal
property.

Flood insurance is affordable: The annual premium for a residential NFIP policy
starts at $112 per year, according to FEMA, and increases according to the level
of flood risk and amount of coverage needed. The maximum coverage amount is
$250,000 for the structure of the home and $100,000 for the contents of the
home.

It is easy to assess your flood risk: More than 20,000 communities in the United
States voluntarily participate in the NFIP, encompassing nearly all properties
in the nation's high-risk flood zones.

Excess flood insurance policies add an extra layer of coverage: A growing number
of private insurers have begun offering excess flood policies, intended to
provide water damage protection to homeowners over and above the coverage
provided by the NFIP policies.

Without insurance, relief from floods primarily comes in the form of loans: If
your community is declared a disaster area, no-interest or low-interest loans
are usually made available by the federal government as part of the recovery
effort. These loans are just that - loans - and must be paid back.

Cell of a refund

Many cell-phone users appear to be overlooking the telephone tax refund in the
mistaken belief that this one-time refund only applies to land-line customers.

According to the Internal Revenue Service, most cell-phone users qualify for the
federal telephone excise tax refund. In most cases, the refund is also available
to land-line, fax and Internet phone customers as well. The method of phone
signal transmission does not affect the refund. The telephone-tax refund can add
$30 to $60 - or more - onto a taxpayer's refund.

"Many taxpayers are overlooking this special refund and the chance to get a
bigger refund," said IRS Commissioner Mark W. Everson in a press release. "We
encourage taxpayers to spend a few extra minutes reviewing their tax return to
make sure they are making an accurate request. A little extra time can mean a
bigger refund check. "

The government stopped collecting the long-distance excise tax last August after
several federal court decisions held that the tax does not apply to
long-distance service as it is billed today. The tax continues to apply to
local-only phone service.

Federal officials also authorized a one-time refund of the three-percent tax
collected on long-distance or bundled service billed after Feb. 28, 2003, and
before Aug. 1, 2006. Bundled service is local and long-distance service provided
under a plan that does not separately list the charge for local service.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Financing

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 113 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                            March 7, 2018 Wednesday

COMMUNITY VOICES;
Be prepared: Look into flood insurance now

SECTION: FL OPINION; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 531  words


It's time to consider flood insurance

With hurricane season less than three months away, now is the time for residents
to review their flood insurance policies. Having flood insurance before it's
needed is one preparedness step that's too important to ignore. Most policies
don't take effect until 30 days after signing, so it's a good idea to consider
purchasing coverage before the storm season.

Unfortunately, many people erroneously believe that because they don't live in a
high-risk flood area, they don't need flood insurance. We all saw, though, that
last year hurricanes Harvey and Irma caused catastrophic flooding well outside
of mapped high-risk flood areas. It is important to remember there are high- and
low-risk areas, but there are no no-risk flood areas. In unincorporated Volusia
County alone, over 100 homes flooded due to Hurricane Irma. And according to
reports, nationally 25 percent of flood insurance claims are from areas that are
considered low risk for flooding.

In other instances in Volusia County, Tropical Storm Fay in 2008 dropped more
than 30 inches of rain on the west side of the county. We also had the "No-Name"
rain storm in 2009 that flooded hundreds of homes on the east side of the
county. Both storms had devastating results. Many homes that flooded did not
have flood insurance, so the homeowners had to pay for repairs out-of-pocket.
Just a few inches of water in a home can cost more than $40,000 to repair.

It's important to know that a standard homeowners' insurance policy typically
doesn't cover flood damage. Not everyone understands the need for a separate
flood policy. There's a common misconception that homeowners insurance covers
flood damage when, in fact, it typically doesn't. In a March 2013 survey
commissioned by Allstate, 44 percent of Americans said they believed they were
covered for weather-related floods when, in fact, only 15 percent reported
having purchased a flood insurance policy through the National Flood Insurance
Program. The NFIP is managed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. While
flood insurance is offered through the NFIP, policies are sold and administered
by private insurance companies. Residents are encouraged to find an insurance
agent to discuss their flood insurance needs, and can visit
floodinsuranceagency.com for more information.

Costs for flood insurance vary depending on how much coverage you buy, what the
policy covers and your property's flood risk. The NFIP offers flood risk maps to
help you identify your community's level of risk. If your home falls in a
high-risk flood area and you carry a mortgage from a federally regulated or
insured lender, your lender is legally mandated to require flood insurance on
your property. Typically, that's not the case if your home falls in a moderate-
to low-risk area. However, a lender may require you to hold flood insurance at
any time -- even if the company is not legally mandated to do so, according to
www.FloodSmart.gov. To learn more about how to prepare for flooding, Volusia
County Emergency Management has many resources online at www.volusia.org/floods.

LaHue is a senior planner with Volusia County Emergency Management.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2018 News-Journal Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 114 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                   New Orleans CityBusiness (New Orleans, LA)

                              June 28, 2004 Monday

Insurance agencies and Louisiana state officials urge homeowners to buy flood
insurance

BYLINE: Tommy Santora

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 873 words


In a high-risk area like New Orleans, a home has a 26 percent chance of being
damaged by a flood during the course of a 30-year mortgage, according to the
National Flood Insurance Program.

Every year, flooding causes more than $2 billion in property damage in the
United States. Louisiana's homeowners' insurance rates have increased 50 percent
since Hurricane Andrew in 1992. The state ranks third with 6.8 percent of the
total insurance losses due to hurricanes in the 20th century.

This year, national hurricane forecasters predict an above-normal hurricane
season with 12 to 15 tropical storms and six to eight hurricanes.

Insurance agencies and state officials are urging homeowners to make sure they
have flood insurance.

"A lot of people buy flood insurance strictly because of the hurricane season,
while others just take their chances and roll the dice," said J. Robert Wooley,
Louisiana Department of Insurance commissioner. "But if a storm does come,
people have to realize they can't just go out and get flood insurance right
away. There typically is a 30-day waiting period."

Wooley said a common misconception is flood insurance is provided by homeowners'
policies. But it's not.

Flood insurance is governed by the National Flood Insurance Program under the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. Homeowners can buy flood insurance from
local insurance agencies who use their names in writing flood insurance policies
under the NFIP.

"One of the most important things we're concerned about is that our
policyholders who are in hurricane/flood areas are able to differentiate between
the homeowners policy and the flood policy," said Morris Anderson, public
affairs specialist for State Farm. "Everyday homeowners' insurance covers just
wind damage. The general rule of thumb is when water comes from the roof up, the
homeowners' policy covers it. If ground up, then you need flood insurance
because it's a situation of rising flood waters."

Flood insurance prices depend on a variety of home characteristics such as flood
zone location, number of floors and age of the building and the amount of
insurance deductible.

Major flood zone categories consist of V and A, which have the highest risk of
flooding. Older flood zone maps list B and C as minimal-risk zones but those
characters are phased out and relabeled as X zones on new flood maps.

For example, the annual premium for a single-family, one-story, no-basement
building with coverage of $35,000 and $10,000 in building and contents would
cost $333 in a B, C or X flood zone. In an A flood zone, the premium would cost
$467 for a home or building with the same characteristics.

New Orleans flood maps are now being digitally updated. The project, last done
in 1984, involves a partnership between the Army Corps of Engineers, FEMA and
New Orleans city officials. The maps are so out of date they do not reflect the
$545 million in drainage improvements over the 20-year period.

"It looks pretty good that a number of people may see a decrease in the cost of
their flood insurance policies because of the digitized maps," said Ron
Castleman, director of FEMA's regional office in Denton, Texas. "It's going to
improve things in New Orleans and that is because other things have been
improved like pumping stations and flood levees in the city. Digitized maps are
also easier to update as time goes on."

The maps will be drafted in 2005 and go into effect as early as 2006.

In the meantime, New Orleans agencies such as Eustis Insurance and Dan Burghardt
Insurance warn homeowners to check their policies and flood risk zones to be
safe.

"Anybody who is on the first or second floor needs flood insurance in New
Orleans," said Don Beery, vice president and director of Eustis. "It's that
simple. It's not worth the risk."

Burghardt said his policyholders sign a form even if they reject flood insurance
just to say they received information on the policy option.

Every year before the five-month hurricane season begins in June, Wooley said
the state department office works with NFIP to push the flood insurance message
via press releases, seminars, speeches and mailings.

According to the NFIP Web site, about 4.5 million people hold flood insurance
policies in more than 20,000 communities across the United States. In 2003, the
NFP awarded more than $601 million in flood claims - 7,000 of the 17,781 flood
claims resulted from damage done by Hurricane Isabel.

In 1992, Hurricane Andrew caused $31 billion in damage, still the costliest
natural disaster in U.S. history.

Scientists say this hurricane season will be worse because of warmer-than-normal
ocean temperatures across the tropical Atlantic. The wind sheer is also
conducive to encouraging hurricane formations.

"The conditions are in place for about six to eight hurricane systems," said
Frank Revitte, warning coordination meteorologist for the New Orleans/Baton
Rouge Weather Forecast Office in Slidell. "Numbers don't mean much though; we
only had seven storms in 1992, but one of those had the name of Andrew. You just
never know how devastating one hurricane can be. You just have to head into
hurricane season prepared for anything."

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: General news

                      Copyright 2004 Dolan Media Newswires
                                All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 115 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           February 13, 2003 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Homes Taken Off Flood Plain Maps;
Insurance No Longer Required

BYLINE: David Snyder, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: MONTGOMERY EXTRA; Pg. T31

LENGTH: 662 words


Nearly 30 years after a flood devastated much of downtown Frederick, city
officials last week announced that more than 180 properties have been removed
from federal flood plain maps.

That means that many of the homes and businesses in downtown Frederick are no
longer required to pay flood insurance, which has cost some residents as much as
$ 1,000 a year, said Richard Lind, assistant city engineer.

Much of the area has been protected from massive flooding since the construction
in the 1980s of four underground culverts designed to contain Carroll Creek in
the event of catastrophic rains.

But businesses and homeowners have been required to continue paying flood
insurance because the city's flood-control measures were not up to federal
specifications. Continued changes in the network of levees and underground
channels designed to protect Frederick from the flooding of Carroll Creek
finally met federal approval last year.

In October, Federal Emergency Management Agency officials told city leaders that
much of the downtown area could be removed from flood plain maps unless property
owners appealed the newly drawn flood plain boundaries.

On Jan. 24, the city received final confirmation that there were no appeals from
landowners, and the area has been removed from the flood plain.

"We're tying up loose ends," Mayor Jennifer Dougherty said. "This was the
promise of the flood-control plan, and now these residents can take the benefit
of it finally."

It has been a long and tangled process to get downtown Frederick off the flood
plain map, which designates areas that are likely to be damaged by serious
flooding.

Carroll Creek has flooded Frederick many times, but a 1976 flood prompted the
city to build a flood-control system. In November 1985, the city began work on
four large concrete culverts that channel Carroll Creek underground. The work
continued until October 1995, according to city records.

But the city did not check with FEMA officials about what the agency required to
change the flood plain map, Lind said, so much of the 1990s were spent bringing
the flood-control project up to FEMA requirements.

Complaints from homeowners and businesses starting rolling in.

"The city was in a bad spot, because they had invested all of this money in the
project and people were still having to pay flood insurance," Lind said.

The 1976 flood, the worst in city history, came after several days of heavy
rain. More than seven inches of rain fell in 16 hours, according to news reports
from the time. Winchester Hall, the seat of Frederick County government, was
flooded, as were hundreds of other buildings across the city.

Photographs taken at the time show that the city's main intersection, Patrick
and Market streets, turned into a small lake, with water reaching near the tops
of some stranded cars. Damage estimates were as high as $ 25 million.

At the time, federal law did not require flood insurance in the area, Lind said.
New federal laws in the 1970s and 1980s began requiring insurance for areas,
such as much of downtown Frederick, that were deemed vulnerable to floods.

The city applied to FEMA in 1994 to have parts of the city taken off the FEMA's
flood plain maps -- 10 years after work had begun on the Carroll Creek flood
control project, according to city records.

FEMA asked for more information about the project in 1996, then asked for
additional work before they would alter the flood plain maps. The process
dragged on through the late 1990s, with the city missing a deadline for
submitting information to FEMA, then the agency asking for more information. The
process finally began wrapping up last year.

"There was a such a push to get [the Carroll Creek flood-control project] done,"
Dougherty said of the work in the 1980s, "that sometimes [the city] rushed
through, and all for the greater good, but we still have to play by the rules to
get the federal designation, so we are glad to get it cleaned up now."

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 116 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        Las Cruces Sun-News (New Mexico)

                            November 2, 2015 Monday
                                   1 Edition

Owners urged to buy flood insurance

SECTION: Z; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 642 words


LAS CRUCES - At an Oct. 23 press conference, Federal Emergency Management Agency
deputy associate administrator for insurance and mitigation, Roy Wright, said
that "If there was ever a time to buy flood insurance, this is the time." While
Wright's message was chiefly directed at California residents, local flood
officials are of the opinion that some Las Cruces area homeowners and renters
should also take note of the advice.

The big to-do has to do with the anticipated arrival of this year's near-record
El Niño. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration describes El Niño
as "changes in the patterns of trade winds across the Pacific Ocean, which can
cause unusual warming in ocean temperatures and all sorts of drastic weather
changes in specific regions of the United States." NOAA projects that the event
has a 95 percent chance of bringing above average precipitation to Arizona and
New Mexico through the winter, and an 80 percent chance of continuing into the
spring of 2016. Closer to home, Mike Hardiman, meteorologist with NOAA in Santa
Teresa, confirmed that "there's a strong correlation between El Nino years and
above-average winter precipitation in our area."

FEMA's concern revolves around the risk to homeowners who do not currently have
flood insurance. Homeowners who financed their properties using federally-backed
mortgages already have flood policies because they are required in order to
obtain the loan. Loans are considered to be federally-backed when they are owned
by government sponsored enterprises such as Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae and others,
who own around half of all U.S. mortgages. Flood insurance is optional for the
remaining owners, whose loans were made by lenders who sold their mortgages to
non-GSE entities. Owners who have no mortgages, as well as renters, are also
included in the mix.

So why should homeowners and renters, who live outside a floodplain, consider
purchasing flood coverage? The simple answer is that flooding is not limited to
just flood-prone areas, and homeowners' and renters' policies do not cover
flooding. According to the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) website,
www.floodsmart.gov, "People outside of mapped high-risk flood areas file over
20-percent of all National Flood Insurance Program flood insurance claims and
receive one-third of Federal Disaster Assistance for flooding." City of Las
Cruces Flood Plain Administrator, J.D. Padilla, agrees, saying that "anyone who
lives within 50 feet of a FEMA designated flood zone should consider obtaining
flood insurance."

Doña Ana County Flood Commission Director, Paul Dugie, also thinks flood
insurance may be appropriate for some residents. According to Dugie, "55 percent
to 65% percent of all flood damage occurs in areas immediately adjacent to flood
zones." Dugie, along with Flood Commission Engineer Supervisor John Gwynne,
cited the example of a homeowner who may live across the street from a flood
zone where the flood depth is projected to be 12 inches. Even though the
adjacent neighbor is not required to be covered, the water depth could still be
significant enough to cause damage. What if the water level rises only six
inches? Or 11.9 inches? The probability of damage is anybody's guess.

To provide a means for property owners and renters to financially protect
themselves in the event of a flood, Congress created the NFIP in 1968.
Communities that participate in the program are rewarded with discounted
premiums. Both the city and the county are participants and have done an
excellent job of adopting procedures that meet or exceed FEMA requirements to
reduce the risk of flooding.

In 2014, the average flood insurance policy premium was about $700 per year.

Gary Sandler is  the owner of Gary Sandler Inc., Realtors, and can be reached at
Gary@GarySandler.com

Gary Sandler Inc., Realtor

Gary Sandler

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: lru


                       Copyright 2015 Las Cruces Sun-News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 117 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            March 31, 2007 Saturday
                                  All Editions

A flood of information

SECTION: Pg. A8

LENGTH: 190 words


Maine communities can take a number of steps to reduce the effects of
catastrophic floods:

.  Practice responsible flood plain management.

.  Prepare and practice realistic emergency plans to respond to floods.

.  Think ahead and plan for what it would take to recover economically from a
major flood.


Maine residents and business owners can:

.  Learn about their flood risk.

.  Make sure they have adequate flood insurance (homeowners and business
insurance does not cover flood damage).

.  Make sure they have emergency plans for their families and businesses.

.  Stay tuned to weather forecasts and warnings at all times.


For more information:


Current conditions: www.maine.gov/rfac/riverwatch.shtml

Flood plain management: www.maine.gov/spo/flood

Flood preparedness: Maine Prepares: www.maineprepares.com

Flood of April 1987 in Maine (USGS Water Supply Paper 2424):
pubs.er.usgs.gov/usgspubs/wsp/wsp2424

University of Maine report, "The Flood of April 1987":
www.maine.gov/spo/flood/docs/april1987flood.pdf

Photo galleries of 1987 and other floods in Maine:
www.maine.gov/mema/prepare/prepgallery.shtml

River Flow Advisory Commission: www.maine.gov/rfac

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2007 Bangor Daily News


                          FOCUS - 118 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                Cornish Guardian

                               November 16, 2011
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Work to reduce risk is continuing

BYLINE: Richard Whitehouse

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 814 words


A YEAR on from the floods work is continuing to help improve flood defences and
protect communities against large-scale damage. While the threat of flooding can
never be completely removed the Environment Agency (EA) and Cornwall Council
havebeen working together to try to reduce the risk of problems in the future.

Working with the local community and asking people what they believe could help
their areas has been a key part of the work done by the EA. A series of flood
surgeries were held after the floods and many areas have now drawn up community
flood plans. Two community flood recovery groups and a steering group have been
established which deal with policy and the direction of resources and two
community groups based on community network areas.

"A lot of work has been undertaken since the floods and more is planned to
reduce risk of flooding.

This really has been a partnership with everyone, including people who were
flooded, working together to improve community resilience," said Gordon Trapmore
for the EA.

"Community-led flood plan groups started work on writing community plans to deal
with the immediate effects of a flood and have recruited dozens of flood wardens
to help identify vulnerable people and manage local issues."

Installation of property protection will soon start on properties to reduce
flood risk. More than 180 homes will have protection measures installed in the
coming months. This scheme aims to provide flood resistance measures to
properties in communities where a traditional flood alleviation scheme is not
economically viable, but where there is still a need for flood protection.

Recruited Community flood plans for Mevagissey, Lostwithiel, St Blazey/Par,
Tregrehan and Polmassick are nearing completion.

Dozens of flood wardens have been recruited and the flood plans were tested
during the heavy rainfall last month when the Environment Agency provided flood
alerts to wardens in Mevagissey and St Blazey, and the plans were tested.

A successful bid by Cornwall Council to the EA for funding to help householders
protect their homes against future flooding means that £586,000 was made
available and work is about to start on individual property protection (IPP)
measures. Cornwall Council has recently secured further funding of £4,250 per
house to better protect some 40 additional properties in the Charlestown,
Coverack, Lerryn, Millpool, Portloe, St Austell Urban Village, Holmbush,
Pentewan, Tregony and Luxulyan communities from flood damage. Eligible homes in
these communities can also receive individual property protection measures and
this scheme will run in conjunction with the existing scheme currently being
undertaken in Lostwithiel, Mevagissey, Tregrehan, Polmassick and St Blazey.

"To make the properties more resistant to flooding IPP measures, including door
guards, airbrick covers, non-return valves and pumps are about to be installed.
Where necessary further work to repoint and/or render stonework will also be
carried out. The properties have been assessed and works have then been
recommended by an independent suryeyor," said Cornwall Council's principal
environment projects and technical officer, Martin Clemo.

In Mevagissey and St Blazey, the EA is piloting a service to provide early
warnings of flash flooding, share weather and flood forecast information with
flood wardens, and provide automatic messages from rain and river gauges.

The EA and Cornwall Council teams cleared streams, culverts and screens of flood
debris, and carried out post-flood surveys and repairs. Cornwall Council Cabinet
member for the environment, Julian German, said: "One year on a huge amount of
work has been done, not least by the affected communities themselves." SINCE the
floods of November last year a number of improvements havebeen carried out,
including:? Improvement on the Prideaux Stream in St Blazey ? Pump station
improvements at Tredenham Close in Par ? Repairs to the White River near
Pentewan (by South West Water) ? In Lostwithiel, replacing 150 metres of the
Tanhouse stream culvert which was badly damaged during the flooding ? Installing
debris-catching fences on the Pentewan stream, upstream of the village ?
Upgrading the trash screen at the culvert entrance in Pentewan to reduce the
chance of blockage.

In addition the Environment Agency and Cornwall Council has a number of other
projects which are being looked at, including:? Improvements on the Tanhouse
stream in Lostwithiel, including improved drainage through the River Fowey flood
wall in Quay Street ? Repairs to the privately-owned sections of culvert at
Station Road, St Blazey ? Installation of a new flood warning river gauge on the
Mevagissey stream and repairs to the culvert trash screen upstream of the
playing fields ? Working with South West Water to see whether the sewer can be
removed from the Mevagissey stream, to increase capacity.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: COG


                        Copyright 2011 Cornish Guardian
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 119 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                 Yorkshire Post

                           February 21, 2015 Saturday

Act now to avert further floods of misery in future

LENGTH: 853  words


YORK, Hull, Selby, Scarborough, Whitby and Goole to name but a few. The roll
call of towns across Yorkshire hit by flooding in recent years makes for
depressing reading.

Last winter, areas across the country were hit by heavy rainfall and in
particular, the biggest tidal surge since 1953 battered the East Coast.

In Yorkshire and the Humber alone, around 1,100 properties and 7,000 hectares of
agricultural land suffered from the 2013 tidal surge.

"Flood water is a silent, indiscriminate burglar that takes no prisoners, and
doesn't care whether its victims are the young, old, disabled, rich or poor. It
seems to malevolently wreck the lives of thousands of people, year in, year out,
says Mary Dhonau, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk Campaign, whose
home has been flooded several times.

As many households in the region know, flooding badly damages properties, which
can wreck people's lives and leave businesses unable to trade for many months.

This is why we have launched our Flood Free Homes campaign to ensure that by
2025, no home has to go through the trauma that homes in Yorkshire and the
Humber did last year.

This campaign has wide-ranging support from the Friends of the Earth, Know your
Flood Risk, the National Flood Forum, BRE Centre for Resilience, and the
Property Care Association's Flood Protection Group.

With around a 10 per cent chance of a catastrophic flood happening in England
within the next two decades, causing in excess of £10bn in damage, we need to
act now to prevent the worst from  happening.

Such a flood would cause 10 times more flood damage the combined impact of the
tidal surge and storms across the winter of 2013/14, whose effects we are still
suffering. This cannot be ignored.

Flooding is the greatest natural threat the UK faces, yet the severity is not
recognised. The Government needs to act to protect businesses and communities,
but real terms spending on flood defences has been declining since 2010.

In December last year, the Government promised £266m of flood defence investment
to homes in Yorkshire as part of a £2.3bn flood defence programme.

However, as  North Yorkshire MP Anne McIntosh, chairman of the Environment, Food
and Rural Affairs Select Committee, has said the amount spent on maintaining
flood defences is at a "bare minimum" to look after overworked flood defences
which just held in parts of Yorkshire last winter. There is no long term,
co-ordinated approach to flood defence spending and funding is announced
haphazardly.

The Flood Free Homes campaign recognises that the UK needs more flood defences
to be built and maintained where they are needed most; robust controls about
where we build our homes and businesses, and long-term, ambitious solutions
created that get to the heart of the problem rather than tinkering around the
edges.

Plenty of political and media attention has been given to places such as Hebden
Bridge and Todmorden when floods have hit in previous years, but this must be a
priority even when the cameras have stopped rolling.

We are calling for £1bn per year to be spent on managing flood risk by 2025, to
keep pace with climate change, and spending must be seen as a vital part of our
national interest by all future governments, regardless of limited spending
envelopes.

The need for sustained, ambitious and targeted investment in the building and
maintenance of flood defences has never been more important, as our climate is
changing and the impacts are being felt with rising sea levels rising and
increasing rainfall.

Alongside this, it is imperative that we have a sensible approach to building
new homes which is why we need a zero tolerance of inappropriate new
developments in areas at risk of flooding.

Despite existing planning laws, 20,000 new properties are built on flood risk
areas each year, 4,000 a year in areas of significant flood risk.

Development is necessary to meet the demand for housing and infrastructure on
which our economy depends, and the National Housing Federation recently argued
that there is a need for some 1,506 new affordable homes in rural Yorkshire.

However, true sustainable development means not building in areas that are at
significant risk of flooding.

The management of land and water in our country needs to become central to
government decision-making, whoever is in power. Currently, the spending on
flood defence can get caught up in politics and the long term goals for flood
risk management are not clear. There is a need to set cross-party ambitious
long-term goals, to co-ordinate national and local strategies and to consider
new solutions.

Several Yorkshire MPs representing more than 420,000 constituents, and a number
of prospective parliamentary candidates have already signed up to support the
Flood Free Homes campaign. We need to act now to protect our homes and
businesses - anything less is not enough for the people and communities
devastated by the impacts of flooding.

Louise Hanson is Director of Advocacy at the Association of British Insurers.
Visit the campaign website www.floodfreehomes.org.uk or the Twitter feed
@FloodFreeHomes

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NLYP


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 120 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        The Balochistan Times (AsiaNet)

                          September 10, 2014 Wednesday

Chronology of worst floods in Pakistan

SECTION: Vol. XXXVIII No. 250

LENGTH: 487  words


As Multanites await a flood wave expected sometime Wednesday with arrangements
ready to cope with the troubled situation, it would be appropriate to peep into
history of floods in Pakistan and how it devastated Southern Punjab rural
landscape and urban settlements.

The on-going flood 2014 is the fifth in series of floods after floods in 1973,
1988, 1992 and 2010.

July 28-29 torrential rains in 2010 in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, had enraged rivers
and flood warning was issued for the people of South Punjab on August 1 after it
left trail of destruction behind.

On August 4, 2010 flood waters hit Layyah, Dera Ghazi Khan and Muzaffargarh
districts and entered Sindh province on August 5.  Flood waters hit Khairpur on
Aug 8 and Jacobabad on Aug 13.  Independence Day celebrations were cancelled and
the President and Prime Minister spent the day with flood affected people in
2010.

Vast areas of Hyderabad, Thatha, Sajawal and Shahdad Kot came under water on Aug
20, however, the intensity of floods started reducing in early September after
causing many deaths of the people, cattle heads and destroying thousands of acre
crop area, according to a book 'Pakistan: 57 years', a description of important
events in Pakistan in chronological order, authored by Razi Ud Din Razi and
Shakir Hussain Shakir.

The 1992 floods came in September due to torrential rains.  Flood warning was
issued to people of Multan, Shujabad, Muzaffargarh, Khangarh and Sheher Sultan
on Sep 12. River Jhelum witnessed flood peak on Sep 14 and inundated many
villages. High flood situation was witnessed in rivers and water flow had to be
diverted by way of breach in an embankment to save Multan city on September 15.
Breaches were also made on Sep 18 to save Punjnad headworks.

The 1973 floods began on August 8 and deaths of people were reported from
Sialkot and Gujranwala and Army was called for rescue and relief operations.

Many villages of Lahore and Wazirabad came under water on August 11 while train
service between Lyalpur and Lahore was suspended.

New constitution of 1973 was enforced on August 14, however, celebrations were
postponed due to floods. Indus flood waters had entered Larkana on August 21,
Dadu on August 22, Khanpur on August 23, Ahmedpur East on August 25, Bhalwal on
August 29 and suburban areas of Sadiqabad came under water on September 2. The
country had also witnessed floods in 1988.

It were the floods in 1976 following which the government had set up a Federal
Flood Commission with the responsibility of preparing national flood protection
plans, flood forecasting and research to harness flood water. Meanwhile, five
units of Multan Corps of Pakistan Army, district administrations of Multan,
Muzaffargarh and Dera Ghazi Khan, Rescue 1122 and officials from all the
departments were engaged in evacuation of people from riverine belt to safer
places ahead of a flood wave 2014 expected to reach Multan sometime Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 The Balochistan Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 121 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            The Statesman (AsiaNet)

                             July 21, 2015 Tuesday

Floods incoming? Flood emergency imposed in Chitral River Indus swells after
heavy rains

BYLINE: Statesman Report

SECTION: Vol. 17 No. 199

LENGTH: 686  words


In Chitral, a flood emergency has been imposed in the area as torrential rains
have resulted in floods in local rivers and nullahs. The rainwater washed away
several bridges and inundated many villages.

Army and Chitral Scouts personnel are taking part in relief and rescue
operations. Several areas in the district have been cut off because of the
floods and damages to communication systems.

Meanwhile, according to the Flood Warning Division Lahore, River Indus is in
medium flood at Chashma and Kalabagh, and in low flood at Terbella and Taunsa.
Similarly, River Chenab is in low flood at Balloki and Marala and below low
flood at Khanki, Qadiriabad and Tarimon barrages.

River Jehlum is in low flood at Mangla and below low at head Rasul. River Ravi
is in low flood at Shahdara and below low flood at Nullah Bansar. Low flood has
also been reported in River Sutlaj at Suleimanki. All other rivers and nullahs
in the province are flowing normal.

In Rajanpur, rescue operations are in full swing in areas hit by flood in "Hill
Torrent Kaha Sultan." The local administration has also warned the people in the
riverine areas of Bumblee, Harhand and Chandia to shift to safer places.

Meanwhile, Punjab Chief Minister Shahbaz Sharif has directed the authorities
concerned to take immediate relief and rescue measures to help people affected
by floods in torrential nullahs in Koh-e-Suleman in Rajanpur district. He also
told all those concerned to monitor the floods situation round the clock, across
the province.

Authorities of Layyah, Dera Ghazi Khan, Rajanpur and Muzaffargarh districts,
while issuing flood warning, have asked the people of the riverine areas to
shift to safer places.

In Layyah, over 100 villages have been inundated. Similarly, dozens of villages
have been submerged in Kot Addu. The administrations of these districts have
directed the concerned departments to make all arrangements to help the affected
people.

In Muzaffargarh, 18 relief camps have been set up and all spurs and safety studs
are being monitored.

The Indus River is in low flood at Guddu and Sukkur barrages where the water
level is increasing.

Meanwhile, a high level flood recorded in Indus River at the location of Chachra
in Rahim Yar Khan, officials said on Monday.

The Indus and Chenab River meet at the point of Chachra where the gauge level in
10.60.

According to District Flood Control Room, a stream of 2, 60,000 cusecs water is
passing through the river with a flood warning issued in Indus River.

The villages located at Indus River have been directed to transfer to a safe
zone.

On the other hand in Rasulpur, at least five villages namely Rasulpur, Kacha
Mahazi, Kacha Chauhan, Muslim Abad, Kacha Darkan and hundreds of acres of lands
and fields have been inundated due to heavy floods.

Moreover, rescue efforts have not yet been initiated in the affected areas.

SINDH FARES NO BETTER

Official sources in Karachi reported that the inflow of water at Guddu barrage
was 353,000 cusecs while water discharge was 326,000 cusecs on Monday morning.
Similarly, at Sukkur barrage, the influx of water was 269,000 and discharge was
214,000 cusecs.

Sindh irrigation department has reported medium level flood at Guddu Barrage.
Flood control rooms have been established at Guddu and Sukkur Barrages to
monitor the situation.

Sindh Chief Minister Syed Qaim Ali Shah has directed the Deputy Commissioners to
evacuate people from the Katcha area of river Indus.

The CM stressed upon the people of Katcha areas of Larkana and Sukkur divisions
to evacuate the Katcha areas for their own safety.

He has also directed concerned authorities to set up a control room in the Sindh
Secretariat, Karachi, to monitor the situation on an hourly basis.

SITUATION ELSEWHERE

In Zhob district of Balochistan, Frontier Corps Balochistan has started rescue
and relief activities in the flood affected areas of Mir Ali Khel.  It rescued
twelve people including women and children, stranded in flood tides. Nine
vehicles were also rescued.

According to details several people and vehicles were stranded on Mir Ali Khel
road in Zhob due to increase in flow of flood tide.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Mashriq Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 122 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Pakistan Observer

                             July 21, 2015 Tuesday

Indus river swells after heavy rains, vast area inundated

BYLINE: MUZZAFAR ALI and TARIQ SAEED

SECTION: Vol. XXVI No. 199

LENGTH: 1667  words


High level flood was recorded in Indus River at the location of Chachra in Rahim
Yar Khan, officials said on Monday. Indus and Chenab River meet the point of
Chachra where the gauge level in 10.60. According to District Flood Control
Room, a stream of 2, 60,000 cusec water is passing through the river with a
flood warning issued in Indus River.

The villages located at Indus River have been directed to transfer to a safe
zone. On the other hand in Rasulpur, at least five villages namely Rasulpur,
Kacha Mahazi, Kacha Chauhan, Muslim Abad, Kacha Darkan and hundreds of acres of
lands and fields have been inundated due to heavy floods. Moreover, rescue
efforts have not yet been initiated in the affected areas. In Rajanpur, rescue
operation is in full swing in areas hit by flood in ''Hill Torrent Kaha Sultan.'

The local administration warned the people of riverine areas of Bumblee, Harhand
and Chandia to shift to safer places. Meanwhile, Chief Minister Punjab Shahbaz
Sharif has directed the authorities concerned to take immediate relief and
rescue measures to help people affected by floods in torrential Nullahs in
Koh-e-Suleman in Rajanpur district.

He also directed to monitor floods situation round the clock across the
province. Authorities of Layyah, Dera Ghazi Khan, Rajanpur and Muzaffargarh
districts, issuing flood warning, have asked the people of riverine areas to
shift to safer places as flood of over five hundred thousand cusecs in Indus
river will pass from the area during the next three to four days.

In Layyah, over one hundred villages have been inundated. Similarly, dozens of
villages have been submerged in Kot Addu. The administrations of these districts
have directed the concerned departments to make all arrangements to help the
affected people. In Muzaffargarh, 18 relief camps have been set up and all spurs
and safety studs are being monitored.

The Indus River is in low flood at Guddu and Sukkur barrages where water level
is increasing. Similarly at Sukkur barrage, the influx of water was 269,000 and
discharge was 214,000 cusecs. Frontier Corps Balochistan has started rescue and
relief activities in the flood affected areas of Mir Ali Khel in Zhob,
Balochistan. It rescued twelve people including women and children, stranded in
flood tide. Nine vehicles were also rescued.

Sindh irrigation department has reported medium level flood at Guddu Barrage. In
this regard, the flood control room has been established at Guddu and Sukkur
Barrages. Meanwhile the inflow at Sukkur Barrage is two lac sixty-nine thousand
cusec and out flow two lac fourteen thou-sands cusec.

Sindh Chief Minister Syed Qaim Ali Shah has directed the Deputy Commissioner to
evacuate people from the Katcha area of river Indus. However, he stressed upon
the people of Katcha area of Larkana and Sukkur divisions to evacuate the Katcha
area of river Indus. At Sukkur barrage, the influx of water was 269,000 and
discharge was 214,000 cusecs.

In Chitral, a flood emergency has been imposed in the area as torrential rains
have resulted in floods in local rivers and nullahs. The rainy water washed away
several bridges and inundated many villages. Army and Chitral Scouts personnel
are taking part in relief and rescue operations. Several areas in the district
have been cut off because of the floods and damages to communication system.

Frontier Corps Balochistan has started rescue and relief activities in the flood
affected areas of Mir Ali Khel in Zhob, Balochistan. It rescued twelve people
including women and children, stranded in flood tide. Nine vehicles were also
rescued. According to details several people and vehicles were stranded on Mir
Ali Khel road in Zhob due to increase in flow of flood tide.

Sindh irrigation department has reported medium level flood at Guddu Barrage. In
this regard, the flood control room has been established at Guddu and Sukkur
Barrages. According to Flood Warning Division Lahore, River Indus is in medium
flood at Chashma and Kalabagh and in low flood at Terbella and Taunsa.
Similarly, River Chenab is in low flood at Balloki and Marala and below low
flood at Khanki, Qadiriabad and Tarimon barrages.

River Jehlum is in low flood at Mangla and below low at head Rasul. River Ravi
is in low flood at Shahdarra and below low flood at Nullah Bansar. Low flood has
also been reported in River Sutlaj at Suleimanki. All other rivers and nullahs
in the province are flowing normal. In Rajanpur, rescue operation is in full
swing in areas hit by flood in ''Hill Torrent Kaha Sultan.'' The local
administration has also warned the people of riverine areas of Bumblee, Harhand
and Chandia to shift to safer places.

Meanwhile, Chief Minister Punjab Shahbaz Sharif has directed the authorities
concerned to take immediate relief and rescue measures to help people affected
by floods in torrential Nullahs in Koh-eSuleman in Rajanpur district. He also
directed to monitor floods situation round the clock across the province.
Rain-induced flash floods have hit various villages and cities across the
country, forcing local authorities to de-clare emergencies and issue alerts.
Various rivers including Jhelum, Sutlej, Kabul and Sindh have been witnessing
medium to high level floods at various points and authorities have directed
staff on duty to remain alert to cope with emergencies.

Torrential rains causing heavy floods have wreaked havoc in parts of Chitral
where the gushing waters have inun-dated large parts of the district where
several people were besides thousands of cattle were drown and millions of
ru-pees standing crops were destroyed during the last four days.

As the floods triggered by the cloudburst have affected large many parts of the
country, the mountainous Chitral valley remained hard hit where thousands of
people have been rendered homeless as the angry waters destroyed hun-dreds of
houses and other building structures including the Grids stations and mosques
etc. Many roads and buildings were also washed away by the flood waters
disconnecting many parts of the districts from each other. Monday Chitral the
flash floods washed away the main bridge linking Chitral to Mastuj sub-division
and severing road links from Chitral city to at least 10 union councils. A
rescue operation has been initiated to aid the affected population and an
emergency imposed in Chitral as rains continued to pour down with short
intervals.

The local administration and army, reports reaching here said have started
rescue and relief activities in the affected areas. Chitral Scouts commandant
Col Naeem Iqbal said that the Scouts soldiers have been put on high alert and
they have started relief activities in the affected areas. Deputy commissioner
Chitral Aminul Haq said that emer-gency has been declared in the district due to
floods.

The army and Scouts have been alerted and relief and rescue operations were
underway for the flood-affected people in the Kalash valley. Commandant Chitral
Scouts Colonel Naeem Iqbal said Monday. The Pakistan Army led rescue teams have
been shifting the affected people to the safe areas and striving to reach to the
people trapped in the flood hot areas. It was reported that the local
administration responded to the emergency quite late as owing to Eid holidays
the officials were not available to act promptly and rescue the stranded people
who had to run for their lives on self-help basis.

Locals said thousands of cattles that were the major source of their lively
hoods were drowned in the flood while standing crops worth millions of Rupees
were also washed away by the angry water that have also destroyed many grid
stations leading power outage in large areas. The Chief Minister Khyber
Pukhtunkhwa Pervez Khattak has expressed sorrow over losses caused by the floods
and has ordered immediate measures for restoration of roads, bridges and water
supply schemes that were damaged by recent torrential rains in district Chitral.

He also directed the Provincial Disaster Management Authority (PDMA) to
accelerate its relief and rehabilitation operations in close coordination with
Pakistan Army and National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA).

In view of the losses and difficulties being suffered by the rain-affected
peoples of Chitral, Chief Minister asked the Chief Engineer C and W and Chief
Engineer Public Health Engineering to reach Chitral as early as possible to
sup-port the district administration for immediate restoration of the affected
roads, bridges, water supply schemes and other basic facilities. The CM directed
them to also propose measures for permanent and durable rehabilitation of the
affected facilities.

He also ordered disbursement of one million rupees by Khyber Pukhtunkhwa
government to the district administration of Chitral for providing essential
food items to the rainaffected people.

He also directed the PDMA to undertake the relief and rehabilitation activities
in close coordination with 11 Corps and 17 Division of Pakistan Army as well as
NDMA and the district administration.

Meanwhile Chief Minister Pervez Khattak directed the divisional administration
of Malakand to conduct a comprehensive survey for ascertain the losses caused by
heavy rains and flash-floods in Chitral.

He directed that estimates of the losses inflicted to the properties of the
affected population also be ascertained so that compensation thereof could be
considered properly. He directed the administration to take the local MPAs on
board for this purpose and all relief and rehabilitation operations should also
be carried out in consultation and coordi-nation with the elected
representatives.

The Provincial Disaster Management Authority (PDMA) Khyber Pukhtunkhwa says
ithas regularly been monitor-ing river position across the province in the wake
of the on-going monsoon rains.

The authority has asked people living near rivers to remain vigilant and
exercise caution in the wake of floods danger. People have been asked to contact
PDMA on telephone Nos.091-9213959, 9213845 and 9223662.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2015 Hurmat Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 123 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                            March 9, 2011 Wednesday

USA: Insurance Department Offers Tips on Purchasing Flood Insurance

LENGTH: 472  words

DATELINE: Columbus


Columbus, March 09 -- The State Of Ohio has issued following press release:

As the flood waters begin to recede around the state, Ohioans are beginning to
assess the damage caused by the recent rains and flooding. Ohio Lt. Governor and
Ohio Department of Insurance Director Mary Taylor reminded Ohioans that
purchasing flood insurance can offset much of the cost of the damage caused by
flood waters and encouraged them to consider purchasing flood insurance before
another flood hits their area.

"This is Ohio, and as we know, we are likely to experience varying degrees of
weather related issues throughout the year, including flooding," said Taylor.
"Homeowners should assess their potential risk for flooding and speak with their
insurance company or insurance agent to determine if purchasing flood insurance
is a good choice for them."

Flood insurance is available through the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
in any Ohio community that participates in the program. People who live in
designated areas prone to flooding and have a mortgage backed by the federal
government are required to purchase flood insurance. While not mandated, it is
advisable that anyone who lives in flood-prone areas should consider purchasing
flood insurance.

Even in areas less prone to flooding, homeowners can still purchase flood
insurance if they live in a community that participates in the NFIP. Your
personal insurance agent should be able to tell you if your community
participates in the NFIP program and assist you in determining if the insurance
is appropriate and affordable.

It's also important to note that while you can purchase flood insurance at any
time, there is a 30-day waiting period for flood insurance to become effective.

Tips for purchasing flood insurance:

* Contact your insurance agent or company to inquire about flood insurance. Even
though flood insurance is a federal program, private insurance companies sell
the policies.

* The Ohio Department of Natural Resources (ODNR) can also be a source for
helping citizens and agents determine if there is a flood hazard area and how
the mandatory purchase requirements could impact consumers in those areas.

* Flood insurance is available to protect homes, condominiums, apartments and
non-residential buildings, including commercial structures and their contents.

* The NFIP offers basement flood coverage for structural elements, essential
equipment and other basic items normally located in a basement.

* The NFIP encourages people to purchase both building and contents coverage for
the broadest protection.

For more information please contact info@plusmediasolutions.c Published by HT
Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any query with respect
to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 124 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                 The Daily News of Newburyport (Massachusetts)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 12, 2009 Saturday

Flood maps changed by FEMA again: Experts urge homeowners to buy insurance
before rezoning

BYLINE: Angeljean Chiaramida, The Daily News of Newburyport, Mass.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 989 words


Sep. 12--SALISBURY -- Many more waterfront homes are being added to the list of
those that will be required to have flood insurance, and experts are advising
people to buy it now in order to qualify for lower rates.

Local residents filled Town Hall's Colchester Auditorium Thursday, eager to hear
state officials explain the second major change in the town's flood insurance
maps in a year, one that will significantly affect the cost of flood insurance
in Essex County, especially among those living in beach and riverfront
communities.

After having approved the new Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood
Insurance maps in May at Town Meeting, Salisbury residents and officials were
surprised to find that Salisbury waterfront properties are again affected by new
changes in the FEMA's update of its Essex County Flood Insurance Maps. Many of
the properties involved -- such as those on Ring's Island and along the
Merrimack River -- had never before been included in riskiest flood zones or
required to have flood insurance by banks holding mortgages to their properties.
But new maps place nearly every Salisbury Beach property in high risk flood
zones.

Through FEMA, the federal government is the primary provider of flood insurance
in the nation. Its updating of the flood maps -- some of which had not be
reviewed in decades -- was mandated by Congress in order to accurately assess
the flood risk of the properties FEMA insures and adjust insurance premiums to
meet the financial risks involved.

The new changes are scheduled to go into affect in July 2010, unless they are
successfully appealed within the next 90 days. The changes will occur only one
year after the July 2009 changes Salisbury already approved, which had a
significant affect on the cost of flood insurance premiums for Salisbury's
beachfront properties.

But successfully appealing the proposed flood velocity zone or flood elevation
changes provided on the newest Essex County maps wouldn't be easy. Such appeals
are can only be made on a scientific basis and are successful only if the new
scientific data used to update the maps is proven wrong, said FEMA's David
Mendelsohn.

Now that public notice has been posted in the newspaper, town officials and
affected property owners have 90 days to file appeals.

However, Richard Zingarelli, manager of the flood hazard management program at
the state Department of Conservation and Recreation, said the new changes came
from strong engineering data, based on new calculations on storm surges and wave
actions. The data changed the flood zones along the beach and riverfront, and
many owners now find themselves in a higher risk flood zone and at expected
higher flood elevation.

The difference will change the premiums on flood insurance rates, as the risk of
flooding due to storm damage will increase, Zingarelli said. But, both
Zingarelli and Mendelsohn said, there are ways property owners in flood risk
areas can "minimize the financial impact."

FEMA flood insurance has a "grandfathering" element in it, he said, which will
guarantee flood insurance will remain based on the flood velocity zone and flood
elevation level in effect when the policy is purchased, as long as the policy is
maintained and never allowed to lapse.

But it is the zone and elevation that is grandfathered, Mendelsohn said, not the
insurance rate FEMA charges for premiums. Rates for flood risk and insurance
rates are reviewed annually, Mendelsohn said, and premium rates for any zone can
go up by as much as 10 percent a year.

But locking in the zone is important, Zingarelli said.

"V-zone (insurance) premiums are twice as expensive as those in A-zone
policies," Zingarelli said. "And A-zone policy premiums are twice as expensive
as those for X-zone properties."

Locking in a current zone is especially important for properties with mortgages,
equity loans or equity lines of credit, the officials said, for there is a
federal flood insurance mandate for banks holding mortgages on properties in
flood zones. Home owners simply must have flood insurance in those cases or they
can lose their financing. Plus, those buying properties in flood zones will not
get financing unless they purchase flood insurance.

Grandfathered zones can even be transferred when property owners sell their
properties, but only if the policy is transferred to the new owners at the time
of sale.

Those who have no mortgages and who aren't required to purchase flood insurance,
were also advised to buy flood insurance now, before the new map is adopted and
premiums possibly double or triple in cost, because a financial circumstances
can change, Zingarelli said. Refinancing homes may be required in the future for
illness, renovations or family needs.

"If you get a home equity loan to finance your kid's college education, banks
will require flood insurance," Zingarelli said. " If you wait, the cost could be
quite high. It may behoove you to buy flood insurance now (before the Essex
County maps become official)."

Salisbury, Newbury and Newburyport are communities that belong to FEMA's Flood
Insurance Program, and to remain in the program, the communities must approve
FEMA maps once they become official, Salisbury Selectman Don Beaulieu said. Not
being in the program means local residents won't be able to buy flood insurance
and they could lose their mortgages.

"(Not being part of FEMA's flood insurance program) also means no one can
finance a house in a flood zone," added Salisbury Selectman Jerry Klima. "It's a
disaster."

To see more of The Daily News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.newburyportnews.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, The Daily News of
Newburyport, Mass. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090912-ZN-Flood-maps-changed-by-FEMA-again-0912

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZN


                                 Copyright 2009


                          FOCUS - 125 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          Columbus Telegram (Nebraska)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            January 25, 2010 Monday

Flood insurance queries on the rise

BYLINE: Eric Freeman, Columbus Telegram, Neb.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 538 words


Jan. 25--COLUMBUS -- Some Columbus area insurance agents are reporting increased
calls about flood insurance because of this year's heavy snowfall and the
potential for flooding as warmer weather develops.

"Now is the time for area homeowners to review their insurance policies and
determine whether or not they want to purchase flood insurance," said Dale
Gonka, co-owner of Hometown Insurance Agency. "It's important for everyone to
know there is a standard 30-day waiting period from the date it's purchased
before flood insurance becomes effective ."

Gonka said in some cases those purchasing a home may be able to get a flood
insurance endorsement activated sooner than 30 days, but there are many
variables that can come into play. He said those who purchase a home in a high
risk flood plain will most often be required to obtain flood insurance.

Gonka said homeowners in Columbus and Platte County are eligible for FEMA's
preferred flood insurance because Columbus and Platte County are members of
FEMA's National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and meet the agency's criteria
for best flood plain management practices.

FEMA's flood insurance program works with about 90 companies nationwide to
provide flood insurance to property owners and renters. With more than a dozen
national insurance companies participating in the state of Nebraska, property
owners and renters are encouraged to contact their local insurance agent to
determine availability and the best options for their area.

Gonka said spring seepage problems and sewer or storm water backups do not meet
the definition of a flood and are not typically covered under homeowner's
policies without a special endorsement to the policy.

"People are generally more educated about floods and flooding since hurricane
Katrina," Gonka said. "But misconceptions about seepage and homeowners' policies
are still out there. We work continuously to educate people about the facts and
the differences between seepage and a true flood."

State Farm Agent Annette Alt offered important advice to homeowners considering
the purchase of a flood insurance policy.

"Its very important when purchasing flood insurance that you don't necessarily
look just at cost," Alt said. "You want to be sure that your policy is written
correctly.

"The requirement for writing a policy is determined by your flood zone. If the
requirements are not met for your flood zone, the company may not be able to
make any payments on a claim until it is corrected.

Alt said it's also important that the company writing the policy is financially
sound and able to stand behind the policy if a claim is made.

FEMA offers information for homeowners, renters, insurance professionals,
lenders, and state and local officials. Learn more about FEMA programs online at
www.fema.gov/business/nfip.

To see more of the Columbus Telegram, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.columbustelegram.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Columbus Telegram, Neb.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100125-CU-Flood-insurance-queries-on-the-rise-0125

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CU


                        Copyright 2010 Columbus Telegram


                          FOCUS - 126 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                             March 14, 2014 Friday

Two-day workshop on `Safe Connections Connected Communications concludes

LENGTH: 347  words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD


A two-day workshop on `Safe, Connected Communities against Floods through Remote
Sensing and GIS Tools' for early flood warning and flood forecast concluded here
on Friday. The workshop, aimed to improve and strengthen the flood early warning
system and management capacity of Pakistan, was organized by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in collaboration with
Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Commission (SUPARCO). The workshop
was focussed at building the capacity of the participants from various
organizations in flood modeling, hazard mapping and web GIS based decision
support system to visualize the flood extent and its damages. During the two-day
workshop, national and international experts from China, Australia, Japan,
France, Indonesia and the panelists shared their expertise and experiences to
help strengthen flood early warning system and disaster management capacity of
Pakistan.

Speaking on the occasion they said Pakistan has witnessed devastating floods and
torrential rains particularly in monsoon between 2010 and 2013 that caused
extensive damage to lives, property and infrastructure. These floods unfolded
the institutional impediments and capacity constraints in the existing flood
forecasting and early warning system in the country. To address this issue, the
technical experts added, UNESCO with the support of Government of Japan and
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), initiated a major project for the
up-gradation of the flood forecasting, flood early warning system and the hazard
mapping of the flood plains along the Indus River in 2011. The project focused
on the capacity building of nation's flood forecasting and early warning
infrastructure using state-of-the-art Remote Sensing and GIS technologies for
the flood assessment, management and decision support system. Application of
satellite remote sensing and GIS technologies in flood hazard mapping activities
along with the application of Web GIS technologies for flood early warning
remained the focus of the workshop.

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 127 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                           September 6, 2014 Saturday

High flood in River Chenab puts Qadirabad at risk

LENGTH: 899  words

DATELINE: GUJRANWALA


High flood level in River Chenab has put the Qadirabad Headworks at Hafizabad at
high risk while the city is also facing danger of getting submerged in the flood
water.

Hundreds of villages have been badly affected, several marooned, by
exceptionally high flash floods in the rivers Chenab and Jhelum and devastating
torrential rains in the districts of Sialkot, Narowal, Gujrat, Mandi Bahauddin,
Gujranwala, Hafizabad, Sheikhupura of central Punjab.

Punjab government has declared emergency in the affected areas and launched full
scale rescue and relief operations. Pakistan army has already been called in to
assist the district administration in the flood-hit areas for evacuation and
rescue purposes.

As many as 85 far off Bajwat bordering villages remained cut off from rest of
Sialkot district due to flash floods in overflowing River Chenab, River Tavi and
River Jammu Munaawar. Reportedly hundreds of people were lying stranded there in
Bajwat villages. However, rescue and relief activities were there despite the
continued torrential rains.

The rescuers of rescue 1122 Sialkot saved as many as seven persons stranded and
trapped in the faster flow of flash flood water in River Chenab, Head Marala
Sialkot. Sialkot DCO Nadeem Sarwar told that district administration of Sialkot
has declared flood emergency in Sialkot district.

District admin on Friday made public announcements through the loudspeakers of
the local mosques urging people of Bajwat villages to remain alert. According to
senior officials of the Sialkot Irrigation Department, the flood water splashed
over the banks of flash flooded River Chenab near Sambrial Sialkot district due
to which the hundreds of the acres of land was inundated.

They said that Chenab flood water also inundated as many as 12 villages of two
union councils Randheer UC and Habeebabad UC in Sambrial tehsil. The officials
confirmed that as many as 60 cattle including buffaloes cows and goats were also
drowned in faster flow of Chenab flood water there.

They said that rescue and relief activities were on in flood hit Sambrial
villages. Assistant Commissioner Sambrial Munawar Hussain Malik told that Rescue
1122 rescuers were shifting the local stranded people in villages Chak Ikhtiyaar
Randheer in Sambrial tehsil to the safer places through two boats River Chenab
was in flash flood at Head Marala barrage near Sialkot as a peak of 485,000
cusecs in River Chenab was passing through the Head Marala barrage near Sialkot
at that moment.

The flash flood peak was moving towards Wazirabad, Gujrat and Head Khanki. As
many as 12 villages near Qila Ahmedabad, Zafarwal, Narowal were also inundated
due to flash flood in Naullah Dek as the flow of flood water was 35,000 cusecs
there. These villages were cut of the rest of the both Sialkot and Narowal
districts.

River Chenab was in flash flood at Head Marala barrage near Sialkot as a peak of
485,000 cusecs in River Chenab was passing through the Head Marala barrage near
Sialkot at that moment.

The flash flood peak was moving towards Wazirabad, Gujrat and Head Khanki. There
was a flash flood in River Chenab at Head Marala near Sialkot as the water level
today soured up to 660,271 cusecs in River Chenab as the flood water was
continuously souring up in Chenab here due to the ongoing fresh spell of
torrential rains in Sialkot region.

Flood Forecasting Division has issued the high flood warning to Sialkot district
administration saying that there could be very high flood in River Chenab at
Head Marala barrage near Sialkot on Sep 06 and 07, 2014.

Focal Person Malik Abid Hussain Awan, District Officer Coordination DOC Sialkot
told after the high level flood warning in River Chenab River Tavi and Naullahs
Aik Dek and Palkhu here in Sialkot district issued by the Flood Forecasting
Division all the concerned government departments had been put on red alert and
asked to make all the necessary arrangements on emergency grounds to avert the
recurring flood disasters in Sialkot district.

Focal Person Malik Abid Hussain Awan told all the concerned departments have
been put on red alert as they were continuously monitoring the flood situation
in River Chenab at Head Marala Barrage near Sialkot here. He added that the
water level also soured up to 12,834 cusecs in River Tavi and 2,300 cusecs in
River Jammu Munaawar near Bajwat Sialkot which also flow along the River Chenab
here as all of these Chenab Tavi and Jammu Munaawar originate from neighbouring
Occupied Jammu and Kashmir and enter into Pakistan near Sialkot.

DOC added that though the water level was souring up in these rivers and
seasonal Naullahs Dek with 24600 cusecs Aik with 22856 cusecs Palkhu with 2270
cusecs and Bhed due to the fresh spell of ongoing flash rains however the whole
flood situation was total under control saying that all the concerned government
departments were monitoring the flood situation round the clock here.

Sialkot DCO Nadeem Sarwar added that Sialkot district has already been divided
into 22 sectors to avert the recurring flood threats under a foolproof flood
protection plan besides establishing as many as 33 flood relief centers in
Sialkot district s all the four Sialkot Daska Sambrial and Pasrur tehsils.

He revealed that all the concerned departments had been put on red alert. He
said that the special vigilance teams were monitoring the flood situation in
River Chenab round the clock.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 128 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                           September 9, 2014 Tuesday

Chronology of worst floods in Pakistan

LENGTH: 486  words

DATELINE: MULTAN


As Multanites await a flood wave
expected sometime Wednesday with arrangements ready to cope
with the troubled situation, it would be appropriate to peep
into history of floods in Pakistan and how it devastated
Southern Punjab rural landscape and urban settlements.


 The on-going flood 2014 is the fifth in series of floods
after floods in 1973, 1988, 1992 and 2010.
    July 28-29 torrential rains in 2010 in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
had enraged rivers and flood warning was issued for the people
of South Punjab on August 1 after it left trail of destruction
behind.
    On August 4, 2010 flood waters hit Layyah, Dera Ghazi Khan
and Muzaffargarh districts and entered Sindh province on August 5.
Flood waters hit Khairpur on Aug 8 and Jacobabad on Aug 13.
Independence Day celebrations were cancelled and the President
and Prime Minister spent the day with flood affected people in
2010.
   Vast areas of Hyderabad, Thatha, Sajawal and Shahdad Kot
came under water on Aug 20, however, the intensity of floods
started reducing in early September after causing many deaths
of the people, cattle heads and destroying thousands of acre
crop area, according to a book 'Pakistan: 57 years', a description
of important events in Pakistan in chronological order, authored
by Razi Ud Din Razi and Shakir Hussain Shakir.
 The 1992 floods came in September due to torrential rains.
Flood warning was issued to people of Multan, Shujabad,
Muzaffargarh, Khangarh and Sheher Sultan on Sep 12. River Jhelum
witnessed flood peak on Sep 14 and inundated many villages. High
flood situation was witnessed in rivers and water flow had to be
diverted by way of breach in an embankment to save Multan city
on September 15. Breaches were also made on Sep 18 to save Punjnad
headworks.
 The 1973 floods began on August 8 and deaths of people were
reported from Sialkot and Gujranwala and Army was called for rescue
and relief operations.
    Many villages of Lahore and Wazirabad came under water on
August 11 while train service between Lyalpur and Lahore was suspended.
New constitution of 1973 was enforced on August 14, however,
celebrations were postponed due to floods. Indus flood waters had
entered Larkana on August 21, Dadu on August 22, Khanpur on August 23, Ahmedpur
East on August 25, Bhalwal on August 29 and suburban areas
of Sadiqabad came under water on September 2. The country had also
witnessed floods in 1988.
 It were the floods in 1976 following which the government
had set up a Federal Flood Commission with the responsibility of
preparing national flood protection plans, flood forecasting and
research to harness flood water.
    Meanwhile, five units of Multan Corps of Pakistan Army,
district administrations of Multan, Muzaffargarh and Dera Ghazi
Khan, Rescue 1122 and officials from all the departments were
engaged in evacuation of people from riverine belt to safer
places ahead of a flood wave 2014 expected to reach Multan
sometime Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 129 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                             August 26, 2013 Monday

Floods kill 178, affect 1.5 million

SECTION: Vol. XXVII No. 179

LENGTH: 702  words


Floods and heavy monsoon rains have now killed 178 people and affected 1.5
million across Pakistan in the last three weeks, disaster management officials
said Sunday in updated figures.

"At least 178 people have died and 1,503,492 others affected by recent monsoon
rains and floods across Pakistan," a senior National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMA) official told media. On Wednesday the figures stood at nearly
one million people affected and 139 dead.

The official said that the rains had wounded 855 people, affected 5,615 villages
and destroyed 20,312 houses all over the country. Nearly 350 relief camps have
been set up to help people, mostly in the central province of Punjab, the
southern province of Sindh and the southwestern province of Balochistan, he
said.

Further heavy monsoon rains are expected in Pakistan next month, but the NDMA is
fully prepared, the official said. Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif had asked the
NDMA and all provincial governments to be prepared for more rains forecast for
coming weeks, besides providing relief to those already affected.

Pakistan, which has suffered from monsoon floods for the last three years, has
been criticised for not doing more to mitigate against the dangers posed by
seasonal rains washing away homes and farmland. Streets in all major cities
including Karachi, Lahore and Islamabad suffer intermittent flooding due to
downpours, damaging roads and homes. In 2010, the worst floods in the country's
history killed almost 1,800 people and affected 21 million.

Flooding rivers and breaches in flood dykes in recent days have inundated
hundreds of villages in Punjab and Sindh adding to the miseries of the people
already hit hard by recent torrential rains. More than 60 villages were
submerged due to flood in river Sutlej. Hundreds of houses and crops cultivated
on thousands of acres were also damaged in Okara. In Vehari district, 75
villages were affected due to flood in Sutlej River.

According to Flood Forecasting Division, River Chenab is in high flood at
Panjnand while River Ravi is in high flood at Sadhhanai. River Sutlej is in low
flood at Sulemanki and Islam Headworks. River Indus is in medium flood at Sukkur
Barrage. Punjab Disaster Management Authority (PDMA) has dispatched ration and
tents to the district administration to cope with any situation. The flood-hit
people were shifted to safer places in the suburbs of tehsil Burewala and
Vehari.

In Sindh, 300 villages submerged due to flood water in Katcha areas of Khairpur
district and standing crops on thousands of acres of land were also destroyed.
In Uch Sharif, Bakhtiari band breached due to flood in the River Chenab.
Standing crops on hundreds of acres of land and several villages were inundated.

In Dadu, another 25 villages of Katcha area were inundated by flood water. In
Larkana, 170 houses have submerged under flood water. According to Irrigation
department people were evacuated from the Katcha areas to safe places. 45 relief
camps have been set up in the area to help the flood affected people. Deputy
Commissioner Khairpur said that thousands of people of flood affected areas were
shifted to safer places.

Presiding over a meeting regarding provision of relief items to the flood
affectees in Lahore, Director General Provincial Disaster Management Authority
(PDMA) Muhammad Asif has said that supply of relief goods to the flood affectees
of Punjab as well as Chitral (Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) is continuing and PDMA is
maintaining regular daily supply to meet their demands.

PDMA DG said that 24,552 tents, 111,100 food hampers, 512,750 kg rice, 525,000
kg atta, 218,700 bottles of mineral water, 8,000 mosquito nets and 25 dewatering
pumps had been sent to the flood-hit areas, while 26 boats, 100 life jackets and
15,000 blankets had also been provided.

He further said that expeditious measures were being adopted for the
rehabilitation of the calamity-hit areas with the consultation of provincial
ministers, assembly members, secretaries, administration and notables of the
respective areas.

He said that life had started normalising in the areas where water has receded
while effective measures were being taken for the drainage of water from the
low-lying areas.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2013 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 130 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             January 9, 2017 Monday

Flood Warning Issued by NWS Monterey (The San Francisco area)

LENGTH: 411  words

DATELINE: New York



  Washington: National Weather Service has issued the following news release:



 Flood Warning

 Alert:



 ...The Flood Warning is cancelled for the following rivers in

 California...

 Napa River near Napa



 ...The Flood Warning continues for the following rivers in

 California...



 Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville

 Additional rainfall is expected over the next several days, but

 at this point only the Russian River near Guerneville is expected

 to flood.  The Napa River near Napa is not expected to rise above

 flood levels.



 ...Flood Warning extended until Tuesday afternoon...The Flood Warning

 continues for

 The Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 * Until Tuesday afternoon



 * At 10AM Monday the stage was 34.7 feet



 * Minor flooding is occurring and Moderate flooding is forecast



 * Flood stage is 32.0 feet



 * The river will continue rising to near 35.2 feet by this afternoon.

 The river will fall below flood stage early tomorrow morning.



 * At 36.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Park Resort and Mirabel

 trailer park flood. In Guerneville Fern Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 35.0 feet...Moderate flooding is forecast along the lower

 Russian River. Numerous businesses and residences in the lowest

 sections of towns within the reach are expected to flood. In

 Guerneville Brookside Resort begins to flood. More extensive

 flooding occurs at Parkers Resort. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive

 floods.



 * At 34.0 feet...In Guerneville flooding begins at Johnsons Resort,

 Parkers Resort, Creekside Resort and Riverside Park. In Northwood

 lower Redwood Drive begins to flood.



 * At 33.0 feet...In Guerneville the intersection of HWY 116 and Drake

 Rd is closed. In Monte Rio Willow and Alder Streets flood. In

 Forestville Mirabel trailer park begins to flood.



 * At 32.5 feet...In Guerneville the intersecton of HWY 116 and Neeley

 Rd is closed. Mays Canyon Rd by the old rodeo grounds is closed.



 * At 32.0 feet...Flood stage. Minor flooding. Lower Mill Street in

 Guerneville and Old Bohemian Highway in Monte Rio are expected to

 flood.



 * At 29.0 feet...Monitor stage.

 &&



 Instructions:    All those affected by river conditions should remain alert for
rapid changes and for possible forecast revisions. The next statement will be
issued by 3 pm local time or sooner as conditions warrant.

 Target Area:

 Sonoma





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 131 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             January 9, 2017 Monday

Flood Warning Issued by NWS Monterey (The San Francisco area)

LENGTH: 417  words

DATELINE: New York



  Washington: National Weather Service has issued the following news release:



 Flood Warning

 Alert:



 ...The Flood Warning continues for the following rivers in

 California...

 Napa River near Napa

 Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 .Drier conditions can be expected through the afternoon before

 another systems bring rain to the North Bay this evening through

 Tuesday night.



 The Flood Warning continues for

 The Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 * through at least Tuesday with anotehr rise forecast later in the

 week.



 * At 02AM Monday the stage was 32.8 feet



 * Minor flooding is occurring and Moderate flooding is forecast

 after 6 AM this morning.



 * Flood stage is 32.0 feet



 * The river will continue rising to near 36.4 feet by near this noon

 then begin falling.



 * At 37.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Road at River Road floods. In

 Guerneville River Road east of Guerneville floods. Mill Street and

 5th Street flood. In Monte Rio River Blvd east of Monte Rio floods.



 * At 36.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Park Resort and Mirabel

 trailer park flood. In Guerneville Fern Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 35.0 feet...Moderate flooding is forecast along the lower

 Russian River. Numerous businesses and residences in the lowest

 sections of towns within the reach are expected to flood. In

 Guerneville Brookside Resort begins to flood. More extensive

 flooding occurs at Parkers Resort. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive

 floods.



 * At 34.0 feet...In Guerneville flooding begins at Johnsons Resort,

 Parkers Resort, Creekside Resort and Riverside Park. In Northwood

 lower Redwood Drive begins to flood.



 * At 33.0 feet...In Guerneville the intersection of HWY 116 and Drake

 Rd is closed. In Monte Rio Willow and Alder Streets flood. In

 Forestville Mirabel trailer park begins to flood.



 * At 32.5 feet...In Guerneville the intersecton of HWY 116 and Neeley

 Rd is closed. Mays Canyon Rd by the old rodeo grounds is closed.



 * At 32.0 feet...Flood stage. Minor flooding. Lower Mill Street in

 Guerneville and Old Bohemian Highway in Monte Rio are expected to

 flood.



 * At 29.0 feet...Monitor stage.

 &&



 Instructions:    All those affected by river conditions should remain alert for
rapid changes and for possible forecast revisions. The next statement will be
issued by 3 PM today or sooner as conditions warrant.

 Target Area:

 Sonoma





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 132 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             January 9, 2017 Monday

Flood Warning Issued by NWS Monterey (The San Francisco area)

LENGTH: 411  words

DATELINE: New York



  Washington: National Weather Service has issued the following news release:



 Flood Warning

 Alert:



 ...The Flood Warning is cancelled for the following rivers in

 California...

 Napa River near Napa



 ...The Flood Warning continues for the following rivers in

 California...



 Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville

 Additional rainfall is expected over the next several days, but

 at this point only the Russian River near Guerneville is expected

 to flood.  The Napa River near Napa is not expected to rise above

 flood levels.



 ...Flood Warning extended until Tuesday afternoon...The Flood Warning

 continues for

 The Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 * Until Tuesday afternoon



 * At 10AM Monday the stage was 34.7 feet



 * Minor flooding is occurring and Moderate flooding is forecast



 * Flood stage is 32.0 feet



 * The river will continue rising to near 35.2 feet by this afternoon.

 The river will fall below flood stage early tomorrow morning.



 * At 36.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Park Resort and Mirabel

 trailer park flood. In Guerneville Fern Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 35.0 feet...Moderate flooding is forecast along the lower

 Russian River. Numerous businesses and residences in the lowest

 sections of towns within the reach are expected to flood. In

 Guerneville Brookside Resort begins to flood. More extensive

 flooding occurs at Parkers Resort. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive

 floods.



 * At 34.0 feet...In Guerneville flooding begins at Johnsons Resort,

 Parkers Resort, Creekside Resort and Riverside Park. In Northwood

 lower Redwood Drive begins to flood.



 * At 33.0 feet...In Guerneville the intersection of HWY 116 and Drake

 Rd is closed. In Monte Rio Willow and Alder Streets flood. In

 Forestville Mirabel trailer park begins to flood.



 * At 32.5 feet...In Guerneville the intersecton of HWY 116 and Neeley

 Rd is closed. Mays Canyon Rd by the old rodeo grounds is closed.



 * At 32.0 feet...Flood stage. Minor flooding. Lower Mill Street in

 Guerneville and Old Bohemian Highway in Monte Rio are expected to

 flood.



 * At 29.0 feet...Monitor stage.

 &&



 Instructions:    All those affected by river conditions should remain alert for
rapid changes and for possible forecast revisions. The next statement will be
issued by 3 pm local time or sooner as conditions warrant.

 Target Area:

 Sonoma





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 133 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             January 9, 2017 Monday

Flood Warning Issued by NWS Monterey (The San Francisco area)

LENGTH: 417  words

DATELINE: New York



  Washington: National Weather Service has issued the following news release:



 Flood Warning

 Alert:



 ...The Flood Warning continues for the following rivers in

 California...

 Napa River near Napa

 Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 .Drier conditions can be expected through the afternoon before

 another systems bring rain to the North Bay this evening through

 Tuesday night.



 The Flood Warning continues for

 The Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 * through at least Tuesday with anotehr rise forecast later in the

 week.



 * At 02AM Monday the stage was 32.8 feet



 * Minor flooding is occurring and Moderate flooding is forecast

 after 6 AM this morning.



 * Flood stage is 32.0 feet



 * The river will continue rising to near 36.4 feet by near this noon

 then begin falling.



 * At 37.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Road at River Road floods. In

 Guerneville River Road east of Guerneville floods. Mill Street and

 5th Street flood. In Monte Rio River Blvd east of Monte Rio floods.



 * At 36.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Park Resort and Mirabel

 trailer park flood. In Guerneville Fern Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 35.0 feet...Moderate flooding is forecast along the lower

 Russian River. Numerous businesses and residences in the lowest

 sections of towns within the reach are expected to flood. In

 Guerneville Brookside Resort begins to flood. More extensive

 flooding occurs at Parkers Resort. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive

 floods.



 * At 34.0 feet...In Guerneville flooding begins at Johnsons Resort,

 Parkers Resort, Creekside Resort and Riverside Park. In Northwood

 lower Redwood Drive begins to flood.



 * At 33.0 feet...In Guerneville the intersection of HWY 116 and Drake

 Rd is closed. In Monte Rio Willow and Alder Streets flood. In

 Forestville Mirabel trailer park begins to flood.



 * At 32.5 feet...In Guerneville the intersecton of HWY 116 and Neeley

 Rd is closed. Mays Canyon Rd by the old rodeo grounds is closed.



 * At 32.0 feet...Flood stage. Minor flooding. Lower Mill Street in

 Guerneville and Old Bohemian Highway in Monte Rio are expected to

 flood.



 * At 29.0 feet...Monitor stage.

 &&



 Instructions:    All those affected by river conditions should remain alert for
rapid changes and for possible forecast revisions. The next statement will be
issued by 3 PM today or sooner as conditions warrant.

 Target Area:

 Sonoma





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 134 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             January 9, 2017 Monday

Flood Warning Issued by NWS Monterey (The San Francisco area)

LENGTH: 417  words

DATELINE: New York



  Washington: National Weather Service has issued the following news release:



 Flood Warning

 Alert:



 ...The Flood Warning continues for the following rivers in

 California...

 Napa River near Napa

 Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 .Drier conditions can be expected through the afternoon before

 another systems bring rain to the North Bay this evening through

 Tuesday night.



 The Flood Warning continues for

 The Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 * through at least Tuesday with anotehr rise forecast later in the

 week.



 * At 02AM Monday the stage was 32.8 feet



 * Minor flooding is occurring and Moderate flooding is forecast

 after 6 AM this morning.



 * Flood stage is 32.0 feet



 * The river will continue rising to near 36.4 feet by near this noon

 then begin falling.



 * At 37.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Road at River Road floods. In

 Guerneville River Road east of Guerneville floods. Mill Street and

 5th Street flood. In Monte Rio River Blvd east of Monte Rio floods.



 * At 36.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Park Resort and Mirabel

 trailer park flood. In Guerneville Fern Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 35.0 feet...Moderate flooding is forecast along the lower

 Russian River. Numerous businesses and residences in the lowest

 sections of towns within the reach are expected to flood. In

 Guerneville Brookside Resort begins to flood. More extensive

 flooding occurs at Parkers Resort. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive

 floods.



 * At 34.0 feet...In Guerneville flooding begins at Johnsons Resort,

 Parkers Resort, Creekside Resort and Riverside Park. In Northwood

 lower Redwood Drive begins to flood.



 * At 33.0 feet...In Guerneville the intersection of HWY 116 and Drake

 Rd is closed. In Monte Rio Willow and Alder Streets flood. In

 Forestville Mirabel trailer park begins to flood.



 * At 32.5 feet...In Guerneville the intersecton of HWY 116 and Neeley

 Rd is closed. Mays Canyon Rd by the old rodeo grounds is closed.



 * At 32.0 feet...Flood stage. Minor flooding. Lower Mill Street in

 Guerneville and Old Bohemian Highway in Monte Rio are expected to

 flood.



 * At 29.0 feet...Monitor stage.

 &&



 Instructions:    All those affected by river conditions should remain alert for
rapid changes and for possible forecast revisions. The next statement will be
issued by 3 PM today or sooner as conditions warrant.

 Target Area:

 Sonoma





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 135 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 11, 2017 Wednesday

Flood Warning Issued by NWS Monterey (The San Francisco area)

LENGTH: 474  words

DATELINE: New York



  Washington: National Weather Service has issued the following news release:



     Flood Warning

 Alert:



 ...The Flood Warning is cancelled for the following rivers in

 California...

 Carmel River at Robles Del Rio

 Napa River near St Helena



 ...The Flood Warning continues for the following rivers in

 California...



 Napa River near Napa

 Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 .Heavy rain on Tuesday on top of saturated soils resulted in

 continued flooding conditions along portions of the Napa as

 well as the Russian Rivers. River stages at The Napa River

 near St. Helena as well as the Carmel River at Rio Del Robles have

 receeded below flood stage.

 The Flood Warning continues for

 The Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 * Until midday Thursday



 * At 02AM Wednesday the stage was 36.5 feet



 * Moderate flooding is occurring and Moderate flooding is forecast



 * Flood stage is 32.0 feet



 * The river will continue rising to near 37.6 feet by late this

 morning then begin falling.



 * At 38.0 feet...In Duncan Mills Freezeout Road at Moscow Road

 floods. In Guerneville Park Cazadero Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 37.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Road at River Road floods. In

 Guerneville River Road east of Guerneville floods. Mill Street and

 5th Street flood. In Monte Rio River Blvd east of Monte Rio floods.



 * At 36.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Park Resort and Mirabel

 trailer park flood. In Guerneville Fern Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 35.0 feet...Moderate flooding is forecast along the lower

 Russian River. Numerous businesses and residences in the lowest

 sections of towns within the reach are expected to flood. In

 Guerneville Brookside Resort begins to flood. More extensive

 flooding occurs at Parkers Resort. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive

 floods.



 * At 34.0 feet...In Guerneville flooding begins at Johnsons Resort,

 Parkers Resort, Creekside Resort and Riverside Park. In Northwood

 lower Redwood Drive begins to flood.



 * At 33.0 feet...In Guerneville the intersection of HWY 116 and Drake

 Rd is closed. In Monte Rio Willow and Alder Streets flood. In

 Forestville Mirabel trailer park begins to flood.



 * At 32.5 feet...In Guerneville the intersecton of HWY 116 and Neeley

 Rd is closed. Mays Canyon Rd by the old rodeo grounds is closed.



 * At 32.0 feet...Flood stage. Minor flooding. Lower Mill Street in

 Guerneville and Old Bohemian Highway in Monte Rio are expected to

 flood.



 * At 29.0 feet...Monitor stage.

 &&



 Instructions:    All those affected by river conditions should remain alert for
rapid changes and for possible forecast revisions. The next statement will be
issued by 10 AM PST Wednesday or sooner as conditions warrant.

 Target Area:

 Sonoma





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 136 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 12, 2017 Thursday

Flood Warning Issued by NWS Monterey (The San Francisco area)

LENGTH: 460  words

DATELINE: New York



   Washington: National Weather Service has issued the following news release:



 Flood Warning

 Alert:



 ...The Flood Warning continues for the following rivers in

 California...

 Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 .The river level on the lower Russian River peaked early Wednesday

 evening. The stage at Guerneville peaked at 37.8 feet at 5:30 pm

 PST Wednesday, nearly 6 feet above flood stage. The river has begun

 to recede. The lower Russian River is forecast to gradually recede

 through today and drop below flood stage this afternoon.





 ...Flood Warning extended until late tonight...The Flood Warning

 continues for

 The Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 * Until late tonight



 * At 02AM Thursday the stage was 37.1 feet



 * Moderate flooding is occurring and Moderate flooding is forecast



 * Flood stage is 32.0 feet



 * The river will continue to fall to below flood stage by this

 afternoon.



 * At 38.0 feet...In Duncan Mills Freezeout Road at Moscow Road

 floods. In Guerneville Park Cazadero Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 37.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Road at River Road floods. In

 Guerneville River Road east of Guerneville floods. Mill Street and

 5th Street flood. In Monte Rio River Blvd east of Monte Rio floods.



 * At 36.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Park Resort and Mirabel

 trailer park flood. In Guerneville Fern Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 35.0 feet...Moderate flooding is forecast along the lower

 Russian River. Numerous businesses and residences in the lowest

 sections of towns within the reach are expected to flood. In

 Guerneville Brookside Resort begins to flood. More extensive

 flooding occurs at Parkers Resort. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive

 floods.



 * At 34.0 feet...In Guerneville flooding begins at Johnsons Resort,

 Parkers Resort, Creekside Resort and Riverside Park. In Northwood

 lower Redwood Drive begins to flood.



 * At 33.0 feet...In Guerneville the intersection of HWY 116 and Drake

 Rd is closed. In Monte Rio Willow and Alder Streets flood. In

 Forestville Mirabel trailer park begins to flood.



 * At 32.5 feet...In Guerneville the intersecton of HWY 116 and Neeley

 Rd is closed. Mays Canyon Rd by the old rodeo grounds is closed.



 * At 32.0 feet...Flood stage. Minor flooding. Lower Mill Street in

 Guerneville and Old Bohemian Highway in Monte Rio are expected to

 flood.



 * At 29.0 feet...Monitor stage.

 &&



 Instructions:    All those affected by river conditions should remain alert for
rapid changes and for possible forecast revisions. The next statement will be
issued by 10 AM PST Thursday or sooner as conditions warrant.

 Target Area:

 Sonoma





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 137 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 12, 2017 Thursday

Flood Warning Issued by NWS Monterey (The San Francisco area)

LENGTH: 460  words

DATELINE: New York



   Washington: National Weather Service has issued the following news release:



 Flood Warning

 Alert:



 ...The Flood Warning continues for the following rivers in

 California...

 Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 .The river level on the lower Russian River peaked early Wednesday

 evening. The stage at Guerneville peaked at 37.8 feet at 5:30 pm

 PST Wednesday, nearly 6 feet above flood stage. The river has begun

 to recede. The lower Russian River is forecast to gradually recede

 through today and drop below flood stage this afternoon.





 ...Flood Warning extended until late tonight...The Flood Warning

 continues for

 The Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville



 * Until late tonight



 * At 02AM Thursday the stage was 37.1 feet



 * Moderate flooding is occurring and Moderate flooding is forecast



 * Flood stage is 32.0 feet



 * The river will continue to fall to below flood stage by this

 afternoon.



 * At 38.0 feet...In Duncan Mills Freezeout Road at Moscow Road

 floods. In Guerneville Park Cazadero Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 37.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Road at River Road floods. In

 Guerneville River Road east of Guerneville floods. Mill Street and

 5th Street flood. In Monte Rio River Blvd east of Monte Rio floods.



 * At 36.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Park Resort and Mirabel

 trailer park flood. In Guerneville Fern Road at HWY 116 floods.



 * At 35.0 feet...Moderate flooding is forecast along the lower

 Russian River. Numerous businesses and residences in the lowest

 sections of towns within the reach are expected to flood. In

 Guerneville Brookside Resort begins to flood. More extensive

 flooding occurs at Parkers Resort. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive

 floods.



 * At 34.0 feet...In Guerneville flooding begins at Johnsons Resort,

 Parkers Resort, Creekside Resort and Riverside Park. In Northwood

 lower Redwood Drive begins to flood.



 * At 33.0 feet...In Guerneville the intersection of HWY 116 and Drake

 Rd is closed. In Monte Rio Willow and Alder Streets flood. In

 Forestville Mirabel trailer park begins to flood.



 * At 32.5 feet...In Guerneville the intersecton of HWY 116 and Neeley

 Rd is closed. Mays Canyon Rd by the old rodeo grounds is closed.



 * At 32.0 feet...Flood stage. Minor flooding. Lower Mill Street in

 Guerneville and Old Bohemian Highway in Monte Rio are expected to

 flood.



 * At 29.0 feet...Monitor stage.

 &&



 Instructions:    All those affected by river conditions should remain alert for
rapid changes and for possible forecast revisions. The next statement will be
issued by 10 AM PST Thursday or sooner as conditions warrant.

 Target Area:

 Sonoma





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 138 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                            Daily Post (North Wales)

                           September 23, 2002, Monday

FLOOD SEASON IS LOOMING

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14,15

LENGTH: 498 words


UNFORTUNATELY, October marks the beginning of winter flood season but if you
live in a high risk area, you can't prevent floods but you can prepare for them.

Five million people in England and Wales live in high risk flood areas, but less
than one in 20 in England, and one in ten in Wales are prepared for flooding,
according to an Environment Agency Report.

During October and November 2000, 746 properties in Wales were flood damaged,
but hopefully with some forward planning you can give your home and family a
head start with flood protection.

The Environment Agency is the principle flood defence authority in England and
Wales. The Agency spends around pounds 300m every year on flood defence
activities including issuing warnings to the public.

The Agency established a National Flood Warning Centre (NFWC) in April 2000,
following the severe floods of Easter 1998. The NFWC acts as a central location
in which resources can be utilised for improving flood research and development,
forecasting, warning and communications in order to effectively protect people
and their property.

The National Flood Warning Centre supports the Agency's operational flood
warning teams in the eight regions and 26 areas who deliver the flood warning
service locally.

Liz Cook, the Environment Agency's Campaign Manager said: "People can be
complacent about flooding - they think it only happens to other people. But the
last couple of years have demonstrated that flooding is a real and growing risk,
which is likely to increase with changing weather patterns. It can be a
nightmare for people whose homes, families and businesses are affected.

"As well as providing a flood warning service, the Environment Agency's key
focus this year is to encourage more people to act now. There are simple steps
people can take in advance to help reduce the emotional and financial losses
associated with flooding."

To find out if your area is at risk call FLOODLINE on 0845 988 1188 or visit
www.environment-agency.gov.uk/floodline. The lines are open 24-hours a day with
invaluable local flood warning alerts, handy guide books, fact sheet packs and
bilingual advice.

L Choose an insurance policy with adequate flood cover.

L Keep a list of important telephone numbers including your local council, and
insurance company.

L Prepare a family flood plan, and a business flood plan to reduce panic if
flooding occurs. Also consider whether elderly or incapacitated neighbours or
relatives could use your help. L Prepare sandbags to block doorways. These can
be made using pillow cases or tights filled with sand or earth.

L Put together a flood kit. Basic necessities are a torch, blankets, waterproof
clothing and shoes, a radio, first aid, and any important personal belongings.

L Store ground floor valuables in a high place such as shelves or cupboards.

L Use rugs rather than fitted carpets on the ground floor, and use blinds rather
than curtains.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: MISERY: Last year's floods hit thousands of homes in the North West and
parts of North Wales, in particular, was badly hit so it pays to take
precautions

               Copyright 2002 The Liverpool Daily Post & Echo Ltd


                          FOCUS - 139 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      March 29, 1998, Sunday, ALL EDITIONS

Flood defense needs more than umbrella

BYLINE: Gene Tharpe

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 08R Gene Tharpe

LENGTH: 756 words


When creeks and rivers start rising and cause millions of dollars in flood
damage, as they did this month in Georgia, some homeowners start wondering about
buying flood insurance to protect their homes. And if you are relying on your
regular homeowners insurance policy to cover flood damages, you normally will be
disappointed.

"A homeowners insurance policy for traditional site-built homes does not provide
coverage for flood damage, although it does cover several other types of water
damage," said David Colmans of the Georgia Insurance Information Institute.

To protect your home against floods, you have to buy a flood insurance policy
through the National Flood Insurance Program.

There's one big exception: "Insurance policies for mobile or manufactured homes
usually include coverage for flood damage, unlike standard homeowners policies,"
said John Oxendine, commissioner of the Georgia Insurance Department.

For owners of traditional homes, the key to understanding what water damage is
covered by flood insurance policies or standard homeowners policies is "where
the water is coming from" that causes the damage.

"Generally, damage caused by water that has been on the ground at some point
before damaging your home is considered to be flood damage," said Colmans.

An obvious example of flood damage is when a river overflows its banks and
washes into your home, but Colmans cited two other not-so-obvious examples
covered by flood insurance: Surface water caused by a heavy rain seeps into your
basement because the soil can't absorb the water quickly enough. A heavy rain or
flash flood causes a hill near your home to collapse into a mudslide that oozes
into your home.

Just the opposite from flood insurance, water damage covered by homeowners
policies occurs when water damages your home before it comes into contact with
the ground. Such damage may include: A hailstorm smashes your window, permitting
hail and rain inside your home. A heavy rain soaks the roof, allowing water to
drip through your attic or ceiling. A broken water pipe pours water into your
home.

Colmans said water damage insured by homeowners policies is the same or similar
in standard policies, but individual homeowners should check with their insurer
for specifics. How to get flood insurance To buy flood insurance, you must live
in a community that has joined the National Flood Insurance Program, which is
subsidized by the government and administered by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. To qualify for the program, communities are required to adopt
zoning and other guidelines to reduce the danger of flooding.

In most cases, the first person to contact about buying flood insurance is the
agent for your homeowners policy since his or her company probably also writes
flood policies under the government program. If not, contact other insurers that
sell homeowners policies.

You can buy flood insurance as long as your community participates in the
federal insurance program. Other important facts about flood insurance,
according to FEMA, include: You can insure your home with flood insurance for up
to $ 250,000 for the building and $ 100,000 for the contents. Remember contents
coverage is not automatically included with building coverage. Rates vary
according to the structure of the house and its vulnerability to flooding. The
average flood insurance policy costs about $ 300 a year for about $ 100,000 of
coverage. For homes in low- to moderate-risk areas, there is a preferred risk
policy that costs about $ 100 a year. About 25 percent to 30 percent of flood
insurance claims come from low- to moderate-risk areas. Since contents coverage
is separate from building coverage, renters may buy contents coverage up to $
100,000. Flood insurance coverage does not begin until 30 days after you
purchase it.

Colmans, of the Georgia Insurance Information Institute, also stressed that
although flood damage to contents is covered only by flood insurance, losses
from theft, fire or explosion resulting from that damage is normally covered by
standard homeowners policies.

Flood damage to automobiles is covered under the comprehensive portion of an
auto insurance policy. For other information about flood insurance, call the
National Flood Insurance Program at 1-800-638-6620, or check the Federal
Emergency Management Agency's site on the Internet at http://www.fema.gov.
E-mail:gtharpe@ajc.com To become a more knowledgeable consumer, call 511 for
soncumer tips. The four-digit code is 5646.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Metro Final

                    Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution


                          FOCUS - 140 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                 Todmorden News

                            November 3, 2015 Tuesday

Flood plans and warning sirens put to the test in upper Calder Valley

LENGTH: 479  words


Flood plans and warning sirens put to the test in upper Calder Valley

The test is part of the Environment Agency's Flood Action Campaign, taking place
throughout November, and the local Todmorden and Hebden Royd flood groups in the
Upper Calder Valley are taking this opportunity to raise awareness and encourage
others to get involved.

The Environment Agency uses the sirens to warn the Upper Calder Valley
communities when rivers are expected to flood. There are eight sirens in the
area with an audibility level similar to that used by emergency vehicles.

This year all the sirens will be tested together on Thursday, November 12, at
2:45pm.

Each test will last for two minutes. Residents and businesses in the towns do
not need to take any action when hearing the sirens at these times. Loud hailer
vehicles will be used to alert people to the tests, ahead of the sirens being
sounded.

Following these tests, there will be a public drop-in session at the Hebden
Bridge Town Hall from 4pm to 6pm where the Environment Agency, flood groups and
Calderdale Council will be present, to provide advice on how to register for
flood warnings and what to do in a flood.

Jon Follows, Environment Agency Flood Resilience Officer said: "It is important
that we test the sirens to check that they are working properly and can be
triggered remotely from our incident room in Leeds.

"Although no action needs to be taken during the test, people need to be aware
that if they hear the sirens at any other time, then this means that flooding is
expected.

"Flood water is dangerous, particularly in these areas where water cascading
down from the steep surrounding hills means flooding can happen very quickly and
with little warning. We would ask people not to put themselves at danger by
driving or walking through fast moving flood water. We are also encouraging
local residents and businesses to put together a flood plan to keep themselves
and their families safe."

Councillor Tim Swift, leader of Calderdale Council said: "The Council is
committed to working with other organisations like the Environment Agency on
flood prevention works.

"The siren test is a good reminder for people to make sure they are prepared if
a flood hits. There are steps you can take to protect your property, and it's
helpful to have a flood plan in place and get involved with your local flood
group. Keep updated at www.eyeoncalderdale.com and I encourage you to come along
to the drop-in session to find out more."

For the latest information on current flood warnings and the local weather
forecast, Calderdale residents can visit the Eye on Calderdale' website -
www.eyeoncalderdale.com

To find out more about the dangers of flood water, to find out if your property
is at risk of flooding and how to put together a flood plan for your home or
business, call  Floodline on 0345 988 1188 or visit www.gov.uk/flood

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NHTN


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 141 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                        Warwick Daily News (Queensland)

                           November 21, 2013 Thursday

Be ready for flood events

SECTION: Pg. 3

LENGTH: 201  words


SOUTHERN Downs Regional Council is distributing its new Warwick Flood Emergency
Action Guide to residents who live in flood-prone parts of Warwick.

Mayor Peter Blundell said council had developed the guide after the devastation
of the January 2013 floods and knowing future floods could occur.

"The guide is a comprehensive booklet with historical information, tips on how
to prepare for flood events, descriptions of flood warnings, flood severity
classifications and what to do before, during and after a flood.

"Most importantly the guide contains a series of flood evacuation maps which
show the Warwick flood zone in a moderate and major flood.

"Residents can identify if they live in an area that would need to be evacuated
in a flood event.

"The council and the Bureau of Meteorology work collaboratively to operate a
flood alert system for Warwick and our Local Disaster Management Group swings
into action immediately it is needed," he said.

Cr Blundell said council was working on developing similar guides for Stanthorpe
and Killarney.

"Already we are seeing extensive storm damage within our council area with the
Stanthorpe storms recently.

"There is no more clearer a warning than this," he said.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WDN


                    Copyright 2013 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 142 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 9, 2015 Monday

Responding to Criticisms of Federal Flood Protection Standards

LENGTH: 1273  words

DATELINE: New York


Natural Resources Defense Council has issued the following news release:

President Obama signed an executive order that updated the nation's flood
protection standards on January 30. The standards will guide the decisions that
federal agencies make when designing, building, or funding public infrastructure
and other projects. The previous standard required federal projects to be
designed to the elevation of the 100-year flood (a 100-year flood has a 1
percent chance of occurring in any given year). The executive order gives
agencies the flexibility to select one of three, more protective standards.

The 100-year flood level plus two feet of elevation for standard projects and
three feet of elevation for critical projects;

The 100-year flood level plus a projection of how much higher flood elevations
may rise in response to climate change; or

The 500-year flood level (a flood with a 0.2 percent chance of occurring in any
given year).

This common sense and much needed improvement to our standards drew this quote
from Sen. David Vitter of Louisiana (a state that has a bit of a history with
devastating floods).

"I understand your efforts to provide these standards are another 'give' to your
far-left environmental base, which views your climate policy efforts as a way to
scare the public into expanding the federal government's role in the lives of
all Americans." (January 26, 2015 letter from Sen. David Vitter to President
Obama)

Sen. Vitter's quote notwithstanding, the general reaction has largely been
positive. Fiscal conservatives recognize that upgrading the standards will save
money over the long-term by reducing damages from floods, hurricanes, and
extreme storms. Conservation groups realize that upgrading the standards
provides new opportunities for green infrastructure and the use of natural
systems to reduce flood risk that provide habitat, water quality improvements,
and other co-benefits. And risk management professionals have long dealt with
the reality that our flood protection standards do not match up with the true
risk of flooding--risks that are increasing as sea levels rise and precipitation
patterns change in response to climate change.

But there have also been criticisms. In this blog, I'm taking the opportunity to
respond to some common ones and set the record straight.
The new standards will cause an increase in National Flood Insurance Program
premiums for businesses and homeowners.

No, this will not be the case. The executive order establishes a new set of
standards for new federal projects built in floodplains or that are built there
using federal funding.

The premiums that homeowners and business owners pay for flood insurance are
based on their risk of flooding, as indicated on FEMA's flood maps (also known
as "flood insurance rate maps"). The new standards do not magically update any
of FEMA's flood insurance rate maps. Since no maps are updated by virtue of this
executive order, nobody's flood insurance rates will go up. (there are problems
with the flood maps, discussed below, but the new standards will not fix those)

Finally, it's much more likely that the improved standards would lower the cost
of flood insurance, if property owners elected to follow them. Flood insurance
rates are significantly reduced when properties are built in a way that reduces
their vulnerability to flooding.
The new standards will increase the costs of federal projects and cost jobs.

Over the long-term, the new standards will significantly reduce the costs of
storm recovery and rebuilding infrastructure that is damaged or destroyed in a
flood. Between 1980 and 2014, floods cost the US economy an estimated $260
billion. According to a report by the National Academy of Sciences, dollar
losses due to tropical storms and floods have tripled over the past 50 years and
currently comprise approximately half of all natural disaster losses. The
federal government has been picking up a larger share of recovery and rebuilding
costs as well, which puts the burden on the taxpayers. Clearly, the old standard
is not providing us with adequate protection and is costing the nation a lot of
money.

Will building things to a higher standard raise upfront construction costs?
Maybe. If a major infrastructure project is being built in a floodplain, it
probably will cost more to build it to higher level of flood protection. But it
probably won't have to be rebuilt after it's damaged by a flood, which is more
expensive. Plus, the new standards should encourage project managers to consider
moving the project to higher ground, where it is less at risk of flooding and
where less flood protection would be required. This could save capital costs and
decrease the possibility of flood damage.

Other states and local jurisdictions have already implemented similar standards.
New Jersey recently adopted the 500-year floodplain elevation as the standard
that new wastewater treatment plants and drinking water treatment plants need to
build to in order to be eligible for state financial support. New York also
applied a similar standard as the President's executive order for water
infrastructure repairs funded by the state in the wake of Superstorm Sandy.
Cities across the country have similarly adopted standards more stringent than
the proposed standard including Dallas (100-year + three feet) and Nashville
(100-year flood + four feet).
Current federal standards for floodplain management are already protective
enough.

Not even close.

Our existing flood protection standards are based on the assumption that the
100-year flood is the event magnitude we should design for. But we presume that
we know how big a 100-year flood actually is and that tomorrow's 100-year flood
is the same magnitude as today's. Both presumptions are wrong.

Future flood risks are going to be much higher due to climate change. Along our
coastlines scientists are projecting that sea levels will rise 2 to 6 feet by
the end of the century. This will put a great deal of public and private
property under water and an even larger number of properties will become
susceptible to flooding when severe coastal storms, hurricanes, and storm surges
occur. Along the nation's inland rivers, flood risks are also expected to rise.
AECOM published a study commissioned by FEMA that found that flood prone areas
along the nation's rivers could increase by 45%, with increases of 100% on
rivers in the Pacific Northwest and tributaries to the Great Lakes. On average
coastal areas are expected to see a 55% increase in size of areas prone to
flooding, mostly along the Eastern seaboard.

Our understanding of current flood frequencies and risks is incomplete at best.
So-called 20-year floods happen more frequently than once every twenty years;
100-year floods happen more frequently than once a century; and so on. Studies
have looked at how we estimate flood frequencies and pointed out that something
is amiss in those estimates. Most of our flood protecting standards are based on
these flawed assumptions of flood risk--assumptions to do not match the current
reality and don't even contemplate the future reality.

President Obama's Executive Order seeks to update the standards so that federal
agencies make a safer assumption about future flood risks and don't simply rely
on the 100-year flood as the standard. This is the right move for the nation.
Until we start building things that are designed to be resilient to current and
future conditions, we're just setting ourselves up for disaster.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 143 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          The New Nation (Bangladesh)

                          September 24, 2014 Wednesday

Over 200 villages inundated

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: Dhaka


Dhaka, Sept. 24 -- The flash flood hits for the second time again in several
districts, including Netrakona, Bhola, Kurigram and Gaibandha, following heavy
rains and onrush of water from the upstream.The Deputy Commissioner of
Netrakona, Dr. Torun Kanti Shikder, who visited the flood-hit areas of the
district on Tuesday, called upon the members of Army and Border Guard of
Bangladesh (BGB) to take part in the rescue operation in the worst-hit district.
At least 200 villages in 15 unions under Durgapur and Kalmakanda upazilas of the
district were inundated by the flood water.One person, Sirajul Islam, was killed
in the flood in Durgapur upazila, the DC confirmed. Many thatched houses were
damaged and the newly transplanted T-aman and vegetables on several thousand
acres of land went under water.District water development board office sources
said the river Sumeswari was flowing 250 cm above the danger level at Durgapur
point on Tuesday.The DCsaid that emergency relief operation was being carried
out in the flood-hit region under the supervision of district and upazila
administrations.Members of the Army and BGB have joined their hands in the
emergency relief operation in response to the call of the district
administration, the DC said. As the flood situation has started improving, there
was need of eviction of the flood-victims, added the DC.

No sooner had the reins of destruction of the previous flood healed, the flood
hits again to the extreme anxiety of the people. According to the Flood
Forecasting and Warning Centre (FFWC), the water was flowing above danger level
at least in 7 points in the country on Tuesday. The Ghur River was flowing above
8 cm of the danger level in Singra point. The water flow in the point was
increased by 28 cm than Monday. The Surma River in Sunamganj point was flowing
above 35 cm of the danger level, increasing by 80 cm. The Khuyai River was
flowing 55 cm in Balla point increasing by 80 cm, while the flow of Bhugai River
at Nakuagaon point was 116 cm, 221 cm in Jadhukata River in Lorergarh point
increasing by 142 cm, 250 cm in Someshwari River in Durgapur point increasing 80
cm and 225 cm in Konsho River in Jariajangail point increasing by 234 cm.A. N. M
Tareq Siddique, Assistant Programmer of the FFWC, said that the water was
continuing to rise in several rivers. For this reason, the flood situation may
worsen in different parts of the country. The Brahmaputra, the Jamuna, the
Ganges, the Padma and the Meghna rivers were in rising trend on Tuesday, while
the Brahmaputra, the Jamuna, the Ganges, the Padma, the Meghna and the rivers
around the Dhaka city-Buriganga, Turag, Shitalakkhya and Balu-may likely to rise
today (Wednesday) and tomorrow, according to the FFWC official. Amirul Hossain,
Executive Engineer of the FFWC, however, said that flash flood affected
Netrakona, Kurigram and some other districts. The situation will improve in the
district flood situation may further deteriorate in Bogra and Sirajganj
districts. The earlier flood from the mid August to first week of September
affected over two millions people in 20 districts in the country. The people in
flood hit areas had faced a lot of miseries, as many of them were homeless and
they lost their belongings, including their last hope- Aman paddy and other
seasonal crops. Different waterborne diseases were spread in the areas due to
the flood. When the flood hit-people is facing trouble to overcome the earlier
damage, in this backdrop, if they face another flood with span of days, they
have to face untold miseries. Experts and observes said that the government has
to take immediate and emergency initiative so that the flood hit people won't
face another flood. In Bhola, the low-lying areas of Bhola Sadar, Charfasion and
Doulatpur upazilas were inundated by the flood water. At least 30 thousand
people of the flood affected area have been marooned. The fresh flood hit the
district due to torrential rain from three days and tidal water in the rivers
flowing above the district. The crops and seasonal vegetables of the flood hit
areas also went under flood water.Abul Kalam Patwari, Chairman of Dhalchar U/P
of Charfasion, said that some areas of his union went under flood water from
Monday afternoon. At least five thousand people of the union along with domestic
animas have been marooned due to the flood, he said. Executive Engineer of Water
Development Board (WDB) of Bhola Abdul Hakim said that the flood hit the
district, as the water in Meghana River was flowing above the danger level due
to the heavy from last couple of days. In Kurigram, at least 30 villages of the
low-lying areas of Roumari, Rajibpur and Chilmari upazilas were flooded. For
this reason, about ten thousands people of the flood hit villages have been
marooned. According to the Agriculture Department, at least ten thousand
hectares of lands of Ropa Aman paddy also came under flood water. The farmers
are now concerned for the apprehension of fresh damage of different kinds of
vegetables alongside with the damage of Aman paddy. Sub-engineer of WDB Sabibur
Rahman said that the Dharla was flowing near the danger level, as the water flow
rose by 49 cm on Tuesday. The waters in 15 other rivers, including Brahmaputra,
Teesta and Dudhkumar, also rose in Kurigram due to heavy downpour from four more
days. In Gaibandha, the public life has been disrupted due heavy rains from two
days. Low-lying areas in different areas of the district, particularly V-Aid
Road, Munsipara, Devit Companipara, Sarakapara, Palasapara and Suhrawardy,
Station Road of Gainbandha Sadar, were inundated due to the rain water. Vast
areas of land of Aman paddy were also flooded. The rainfall is also damaging the
rural roads in the district.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from The New Nation. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The New Nation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 144 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                            March 15, 2014 Saturday

Pakistan: Two-day workshop on `Safe Connections Connected Communications
concludes

LENGTH: 384  words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD


ISLAMABAD, March 15 -- A two-day workshop on `Safe, Connected Communities
against Floods through Remote Sensing and GIS Tools' for early flood warning and
flood forecast concluded here on Friday. The workshop, aimed to improve and
strengthen the flood early warning system and management capacity of Pakistan,
was organized by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) in collaboration with Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere
Research Commission (SUPARCO). The workshop was focussed at building the
capacity of the participants from various organizations in flood modeling,
hazard mapping and web GIS based decision support system to visualize the flood
extent and its damages. During the two-day workshop, national and international
experts from China, Australia, Japan, France, Indonesia and the panelists shared
their expertise and experiences to help strengthen flood early warning system
and disaster management capacity of Pakistan.

Speaking on the occasion they said Pakistan has witnessed devastating floods and
torrential rains particularly in monsoon between 2010 and 2013 that caused
extensive damage to lives, property and infrastructure. These floods unfolded
the institutional impediments and capacity constraints in the existing flood
forecasting and early warning system in the country. To address this issue, the
technical experts added, UNESCO with the support of Government of Japan and
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), initiated a major project for the
up-gradation of the flood forecasting, flood early warning system and the hazard
mapping of the flood plains along the Indus River in 2011. The project focused
on the capacity building of nation's flood forecasting and early warning
infrastructure using state-of-the-art Remote Sensing and GIS technologies for
the flood assessment, management and decision support system. Application of
satellite remote sensing and GIS technologies in flood hazard mapping activities
along with the application of Web GIS technologies for flood early warning
remained the focus of the workshop

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2014 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 145 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                            September 7, 2014 Sunday

Pakistan: High flood in River Chenab puts Qadirabad at risk

LENGTH: 936  words

DATELINE: GUJRANWALA


GUJRANWALA, Sept. 7 -- High flood level in River Chenab has put the Qadirabad
Headworks at Hafizabad at high risk while the city is also facing danger of
getting submerged in the flood water.

Hundreds of villages have been badly affected, several marooned, by
exceptionally high flash floods in the rivers Chenab and Jhelum and devastating
torrential rains in the districts of Sialkot, Narowal, Gujrat, Mandi Bahauddin,
Gujranwala, Hafizabad, Sheikhupura of central Punjab.

Punjab government has declared emergency in the affected areas and launched full
scale rescue and relief operations. Pakistan army has already been called in to
assist the district administration in the flood-hit areas for evacuation and
rescue purposes.

As many as 85 far off Bajwat bordering villages remained cut off from rest of
Sialkot district due to flash floods in overflowing River Chenab, River Tavi and
River Jammu Munaawar. Reportedly hundreds of people were lying stranded there in
Bajwat villages. However, rescue and relief activities were there despite the
continued torrential rains.

The rescuers of rescue 1122 Sialkot saved as many as seven persons stranded and
trapped in the faster flow of flash flood water in River Chenab, Head Marala
Sialkot. Sialkot DCO Nadeem Sarwar told that district administration of Sialkot
has declared flood emergency in Sialkot district.

District admin on Friday made public announcements through the loudspeakers of
the local mosques urging people of Bajwat villages to remain alert. According to
senior officials of the Sialkot Irrigation Department, the flood water splashed
over the banks of flash flooded River Chenab near Sambrial Sialkot district due
to which the hundreds of the acres of land was inundated.

They said that Chenab flood water also inundated as many as 12 villages of two
union councils Randheer UC and Habeebabad UC in Sambrial tehsil. The officials
confirmed that as many as 60 cattle including buffaloes cows and goats were also
drowned in faster flow of Chenab flood water there.

They said that rescue and relief activities were on in flood hit Sambrial
villages. Assistant Commissioner Sambrial Munawar Hussain Malik told that Rescue
1122 rescuers were shifting the local stranded people in villages Chak Ikhtiyaar
Randheer in Sambrial tehsil to the safer places through two boats River Chenab
was in flash flood at Head Marala barrage near Sialkot as a peak of 485,000
cusecs in River Chenab was passing through the Head Marala barrage near Sialkot
at that moment.

The flash flood peak was moving towards Wazirabad, Gujrat and Head Khanki. As
many as 12 villages near Qila Ahmedabad, Zafarwal, Narowal were also inundated
due to flash flood in Naullah Dek as the flow of flood water was 35,000 cusecs
there. These villages were cut of the rest of the both Sialkot and Narowal
districts.

River Chenab was in flash flood at Head Marala barrage near Sialkot as a peak of
485,000 cusecs in River Chenab was passing through the Head Marala barrage near
Sialkot at that moment.

The flash flood peak was moving towards Wazirabad, Gujrat and Head Khanki. There
was a flash flood in River Chenab at Head Marala near Sialkot as the water level
today soured up to 660,271 cusecs in River Chenab as the flood water was
continuously souring up in Chenab here due to the ongoing fresh spell of
torrential rains in Sialkot region.

Flood Forecasting Division has issued the high flood warning to Sialkot district
administration saying that there could be very high flood in River Chenab at
Head Marala barrage near Sialkot on Sep 06 and 07, 2014.

Focal Person Malik Abid Hussain Awan, District Officer Coordination DOC Sialkot
told after the high level flood warning in River Chenab River Tavi and Naullahs
Aik Dek and Palkhu here in Sialkot district issued by the Flood Forecasting
Division all the concerned government departments had been put on red alert and
asked to make all the necessary arrangements on emergency grounds to avert the
recurring flood disasters in Sialkot district.

Focal Person Malik Abid Hussain Awan told all the concerned departments have
been put on red alert as they were continuously monitoring the flood situation
in River Chenab at Head Marala Barrage near Sialkot here. He added that the
water level also soured up to 12,834 cusecs in River Tavi and 2,300 cusecs in
River Jammu Munaawar near Bajwat Sialkot which also flow along the River Chenab
here as all of these Chenab Tavi and Jammu Munaawar originate from neighbouring
Occupied Jammu and Kashmir and enter into Pakistan near Sialkot.

DOC added that though the water level was souring up in these rivers and
seasonal Naullahs Dek with 24600 cusecs Aik with 22856 cusecs Palkhu with 2270
cusecs and Bhed due to the fresh spell of ongoing flash rains however the whole
flood situation was total under control saying that all the concerned government
departments were monitoring the flood situation round the clock here.

Sialkot DCO Nadeem Sarwar added that Sialkot district has already been divided
into 22 sectors to avert the recurring flood threats under a foolproof flood
protection plan besides establishing as many as 33 flood relief centers in
Sialkot district s all the four Sialkot Daska Sambrial and Pasrur tehsils.

He revealed that all the concerned departments had been put on red alert. He
said that the special vigilance teams were monitoring the flood situation in
River Chenab round the clock

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2014 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 146 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                          September 10, 2014 Wednesday

Pakistan: Chronology of worst floods in Pakistan

LENGTH: 516  words

DATELINE: MULTAN


ULTAN, Sept. 10 -- As Multanites await a flood wave

expected sometime Wednesday with arrangements ready to cope

with the troubled situation, it would be appropriate to peep

into history of floods in Pakistan and how it devastated

Southern Punjab rural landscape and urban settlements.

The on-going flood 2014 is the fifth in series of floods

after floods in 1973, 1988, 1992 and 2010.

July 28-29 torrential rains in 2010 in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,

had enraged rivers and flood warning was issued for the people

of South Punjab on August 1 after it left trail of destruction

behind.

On August 4, 2010 flood waters hit Layyah, Dera Ghazi Khan

and Muzaffargarh districts and entered Sindh province on August 5.

Flood waters hit Khairpur on Aug 8 and Jacobabad on Aug 13.

Independence Day celebrations were cancelled and the President

and Prime Minister spent the day with flood affected people in

2010.

Vast areas of Hyderabad, Thatha, Sajawal and Shahdad Kot

came under water on Aug 20, however, the intensity of floods

started reducing in early September after causing many deaths

of the people, cattle heads and destroying thousands of acre

crop area, according to a book 'Pakistan: 57 years', a description

of important events in Pakistan in chronological order, authored

by Razi Ud Din Razi and Shakir Hussain Shakir.

The 1992 floods came in September due to torrential rains.

Flood warning was issued to people of Multan, Shujabad,

Muzaffargarh, Khangarh and Sheher Sultan on Sep 12. River Jhelum

witnessed flood peak on Sep 14 and inundated many villages. High

flood situation was witnessed in rivers and water flow had to be

diverted by way of breach in an embankment to save Multan city

on September 15. Breaches were also made on Sep 18 to save Punjnad

headworks.

The 1973 floods began on August 8 and deaths of people were

reported from Sialkot and Gujranwala and Army was called for rescue

and relief operations.

Many villages of Lahore and Wazirabad came under water on

August 11 while train service between Lyalpur and Lahore was suspended.

New constitution of 1973 was enforced on August 14, however,

celebrations were postponed due to floods. Indus flood waters had

entered Larkana on August 21, Dadu on August 22, Khanpur on August 23, Ahmedpur
East on August 25, Bhalwal on August 29 and suburban areas

of Sadiqabad came under water on September 2. The country had also

witnessed floods in 1988.

It were the floods in 1976 following which the government

had set up a Federal Flood Commission with the responsibility of

preparing national flood protection plans, flood forecasting and

research to harness flood water.

Meanwhile, five units of Multan Corps of Pakistan Army,

district administrations of Multan, Muzaffargarh and Dera Ghazi

Khan, Rescue 1122 and officials from all the departments were

engaged in evacuation of people from riverine belt to safer

places ahead of a flood wave 2014 expected to reach Multan

sometime Wednesday

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2014 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 147 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 19, 2015 Thursday

Texas: TDI Reminds Consumers: Flood Coverage is Not Part of a Standard
Homeowners Policy

LENGTH: 263  words

DATELINE: Austin


Department of Library Developments, The State of Texas has issued the following
news release:

Hail storms and hurricanes get the headlines, but flash floods are the most
common natural disasters. And to further complicate the matter, most homeowners
insurance policies do not provide flood coverage. This is Flood Safety Awareness
Week. Now is a good time to review your property's flood risk, your current
insurance coverage, and consider whether a separate flood policy should be part
of your home protection plan.

Coverage for damage caused by rising waters must be obtained from the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).  "Even if you're not in a designated flood area,
it makes sense to at least consider a flood policy," said Insurance Commissioner
David Mattax. "The cost of a flood policy depends on where you live. But if it's
a low-risk area, the policy can be quite affordable."

People typically think of floods caused when a lake or river overflows, but
flooding can happen almost anywhere. Spring storms dropping locally heavy rain
in a short amount of time can quickly cause flash flood conditions. If you do
live in a high-risk area, your lender may require you to have flood insurance.

The NFIP is administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). A
good place to start if you are considering flood insurance is a conversation
with your regular insurance agent. Flood policies may cover your house, your
personal property, or both.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 148 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 9, 2015 Monday

Responding to Criticisms of Federal Flood Protection Standards

LENGTH: 1273  words

DATELINE: New York


Natural Resources Defense Council has issued the following news release:

President Obama signed an executive order that updated the nation's flood
protection standards on January 30. The standards will guide the decisions that
federal agencies make when designing, building, or funding public infrastructure
and other projects. The previous standard required federal projects to be
designed to the elevation of the 100-year flood (a 100-year flood has a 1
percent chance of occurring in any given year). The executive order gives
agencies the flexibility to select one of three, more protective standards.

The 100-year flood level plus two feet of elevation for standard projects and
three feet of elevation for critical projects;

The 100-year flood level plus a projection of how much higher flood elevations
may rise in response to climate change; or

The 500-year flood level (a flood with a 0.2 percent chance of occurring in any
given year).

This common sense and much needed improvement to our standards drew this quote
from Sen. David Vitter of Louisiana (a state that has a bit of a history with
devastating floods).

"I understand your efforts to provide these standards are another 'give' to your
far-left environmental base, which views your climate policy efforts as a way to
scare the public into expanding the federal government's role in the lives of
all Americans." (January 26, 2015 letter from Sen. David Vitter to President
Obama)

Sen. Vitter's quote notwithstanding, the general reaction has largely been
positive. Fiscal conservatives recognize that upgrading the standards will save
money over the long-term by reducing damages from floods, hurricanes, and
extreme storms. Conservation groups realize that upgrading the standards
provides new opportunities for green infrastructure and the use of natural
systems to reduce flood risk that provide habitat, water quality improvements,
and other co-benefits. And risk management professionals have long dealt with
the reality that our flood protection standards do not match up with the true
risk of flooding--risks that are increasing as sea levels rise and precipitation
patterns change in response to climate change.

But there have also been criticisms. In this blog, I'm taking the opportunity to
respond to some common ones and set the record straight.
The new standards will cause an increase in National Flood Insurance Program
premiums for businesses and homeowners.

No, this will not be the case. The executive order establishes a new set of
standards for new federal projects built in floodplains or that are built there
using federal funding.

The premiums that homeowners and business owners pay for flood insurance are
based on their risk of flooding, as indicated on FEMA's flood maps (also known
as "flood insurance rate maps"). The new standards do not magically update any
of FEMA's flood insurance rate maps. Since no maps are updated by virtue of this
executive order, nobody's flood insurance rates will go up. (there are problems
with the flood maps, discussed below, but the new standards will not fix those)

Finally, it's much more likely that the improved standards would lower the cost
of flood insurance, if property owners elected to follow them. Flood insurance
rates are significantly reduced when properties are built in a way that reduces
their vulnerability to flooding.
The new standards will increase the costs of federal projects and cost jobs.

Over the long-term, the new standards will significantly reduce the costs of
storm recovery and rebuilding infrastructure that is damaged or destroyed in a
flood. Between 1980 and 2014, floods cost the US economy an estimated $260
billion. According to a report by the National Academy of Sciences, dollar
losses due to tropical storms and floods have tripled over the past 50 years and
currently comprise approximately half of all natural disaster losses. The
federal government has been picking up a larger share of recovery and rebuilding
costs as well, which puts the burden on the taxpayers. Clearly, the old standard
is not providing us with adequate protection and is costing the nation a lot of
money.

Will building things to a higher standard raise upfront construction costs?
Maybe. If a major infrastructure project is being built in a floodplain, it
probably will cost more to build it to higher level of flood protection. But it
probably won't have to be rebuilt after it's damaged by a flood, which is more
expensive. Plus, the new standards should encourage project managers to consider
moving the project to higher ground, where it is less at risk of flooding and
where less flood protection would be required. This could save capital costs and
decrease the possibility of flood damage.

Other states and local jurisdictions have already implemented similar standards.
New Jersey recently adopted the 500-year floodplain elevation as the standard
that new wastewater treatment plants and drinking water treatment plants need to
build to in order to be eligible for state financial support. New York also
applied a similar standard as the President's executive order for water
infrastructure repairs funded by the state in the wake of Superstorm Sandy.
Cities across the country have similarly adopted standards more stringent than
the proposed standard including Dallas (100-year + three feet) and Nashville
(100-year flood + four feet).
Current federal standards for floodplain management are already protective
enough.

Not even close.

Our existing flood protection standards are based on the assumption that the
100-year flood is the event magnitude we should design for. But we presume that
we know how big a 100-year flood actually is and that tomorrow's 100-year flood
is the same magnitude as today's. Both presumptions are wrong.

Future flood risks are going to be much higher due to climate change. Along our
coastlines scientists are projecting that sea levels will rise 2 to 6 feet by
the end of the century. This will put a great deal of public and private
property under water and an even larger number of properties will become
susceptible to flooding when severe coastal storms, hurricanes, and storm surges
occur. Along the nation's inland rivers, flood risks are also expected to rise.
AECOM published a study commissioned by FEMA that found that flood prone areas
along the nation's rivers could increase by 45%, with increases of 100% on
rivers in the Pacific Northwest and tributaries to the Great Lakes. On average
coastal areas are expected to see a 55% increase in size of areas prone to
flooding, mostly along the Eastern seaboard.

Our understanding of current flood frequencies and risks is incomplete at best.
So-called 20-year floods happen more frequently than once every twenty years;
100-year floods happen more frequently than once a century; and so on. Studies
have looked at how we estimate flood frequencies and pointed out that something
is amiss in those estimates. Most of our flood protecting standards are based on
these flawed assumptions of flood risk--assumptions to do not match the current
reality and don't even contemplate the future reality.

President Obama's Executive Order seeks to update the standards so that federal
agencies make a safer assumption about future flood risks and don't simply rely
on the 100-year flood as the standard. This is the right move for the nation.
Until we start building things that are designed to be resilient to current and
future conditions, we're just setting ourselves up for disaster.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 149 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright (c) 2015 Washington University
                 Washington University Journal of Law & Policy

                                      2015

                 Washington University Journal of Law & Policy

                          49 Wash. U. J.L. & Pol'y 235

LENGTH: 11582 words

Note: The Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012: Temporarily
Curtailed by the Homeowner Flood Insurance Act of 2014 - A Respite to Forge an
Enduring Correction to the National Flood Insurance Program Built on Virtuous
Economic and Environmental Incentives

NAME: Alexander B. McDonnell*

BIO: * B.A., History (2007), DePaul University; M.B.A. (2015), Olin Business
School at Washington University in St. Louis; J.D. (2015), Washington University
School of Law. Thank you to my parents and brother who fostered my love for
nature, taught me about equity, and who I know believe as I do - that prudent
land-use must consider both. Thank you to Shannon for maintaining my health with
nutritious juices and prophylactic elixirs, and for her unwavering support.
Lastly, a special thank you to my friends and colleagues at the Journal for
their expert contributions to this piece.

HIGHLIGHT: One who knows the Mississippi will promptly aver - not aloud, but to
himself - that ten thousand River Commissions, with the mines of the world at
their back, cannot tame that lawless stream, cannot curb it or confine it,
cannot say to it, Go here, or Go there, and make it obey; cannot save a shore
which it has sentenced; cannot bar its path with an obstruction which it will
not tear down, dance over, and laugh at.



 - Mark Twain n1


 TEXT:
 [*235]

   Introduction

 Hurricane Sandy descended on New Jersey in late October of 2012. The densely
populated region braced for record storm surges, flooding, n2 and power loss. n3
More than $ 7.9 billion in National Flood  [*236]  Insurance Program (NFIP) n4
payments were eventually dispersed to policyholders affected by the storm. n5
These policyholders benefited from an antiquated version of the four-decade-old,
federally subsidized NFIP because their former premiums significantly
underestimated the flood risk to their properties. n6

   The passage and looming implementation of the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance
Reform Act of 2012 (Biggert-Waters) altered the New Jersey residents' calculus.
n7 They needed to determine if they could afford to dwell in their rebuilt homes
given near certain increases to flood insurance costs. n8 Anticipated and
observed growth of severe coastal storms and flood frequency from rising sea
levels  [*237]  further complicated their calculations of whether to remain. n9
A growing number of Americans now share the same concerns as these New Jersey
residents. Coastal populations in the United States grow at an alarming pace,
doubling-down on already population-dense areas n10 bolstered by the NFIP. n11

   Congress passed the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 to provide financial
security for property owners in elevated flood-risk areas. n12 The law made
otherwise risky development areas viable, and  [*238]  stabilized or increased
real property values in areas stricken with well above-average likelihoods for
flood events. n13

   The NFIP, prior to Biggert-Waters, allowed certain homeowners to purchase
flood insurance for "about half the "actuarial' rate private insurers would
offer." n14 Now, after decades of underpriced premiums, steady growth in the
number of outstanding flood insurance policies, and more severe and frequent
flood events the program is $ 24 billion in debt (as of January 2014). n15

   Biggert-Waters sought to quell the NFIP's swelling financial liability
through premium adjustments, flood mapping enhancements,  [*239]  and the
potential incorporation of private reinsurance. n16 Its passage in 2012 by a
"do-nothing Congress" unable to find much common ground to address the federal
government's other fiscal difficulties n17 hints at the significance of the
bipartisan consensus behind the law at the time - and arguably - its necessity.
n18

   Biggert-Waters harnessed political will only briefly, however. A movement
emerged to delay and strip the NFIP of its most critical Biggert-Waters
amendments - the removal of subsidized premiums. In 2014, President Obama signed
into law the Homeowner Flood Insurance Affordability Act of 2014 (Affordability
Act), n19 indefinitely postponing the requirement to impose risk premiums for
flood insurance that "accurately reflect the current risk of flood to such
property." n20 The US Senate voted sixty-seven to thirty-two to approve the
Affordability Act. n21 The new law was promoted by Representative Maxine Waters
- the very legislator who sponsored Biggert-Waters. n22 The White House was
initially critical of the  [*240]  Affordability Act and asserted that it would
further degrade the NFIP fiscal position and place into question the federal
government's ability to pay future claims. n23 Nonetheless, in the end,
political pressure overwhelmed the economic and environmental imperatives
furthered by Biggert-Waters, now dead in the water.

   Political bombardment of the Biggert-Waters amendments and the recent
implementation of the Affordability Act offers a chance to consider a more
thoughtful approach to the NFIP. n24 Premiums that reflect actual flood risk are
popular among fiscal conservatives, free-market proponents, and
environmentalists alike, but the imposition of significant premium increases on
property owners - even gradually over five years - chafes at morality, let alone
economic prudence. n25

   The question is: How can Congress preserve local communities that arose or
expanded under an anachronistic NFIP and also gracefully cease misguided
incentives imbedded in risk-ignorant NFIP flood insurance prices, encourage real
estate development that incorporates appropriate economic and environmental
flood risk considerations, lower NFIP debt, and control for risk in the nation's
fisc?

   This Note proposes that Congress should reverse the Affordability Act's
drastic gutting of Biggert-Waters and pass omnibus legislation  [*241]  that
reforms the NFIP through: (1) more gradual implementation of premium increases,
(2) cessation of federal mortgage insurance for mortgages in high flood risk
areas, and (3) the creation of a land purchase tax credit to property owners who
proactively relocate.

   I. History of National Flood Insurance Policy

   A. Path to the NFIP

 American notions of human influence on the behavior of waterways are centuries
old. n26 Early public attempts to limit flood risk centered on the role of
forests in the preservation of natural hydrologic cycles and as buffers to
watershed fluctuations and human activity. n27 US policy in the early twentieth
century - as reflected by the Weeks Act n28 - seemed to favor resilience
techniques over more expensive and drastic resistance methods that often involve
infrastructure improvements. n29 President Franklin Roosevelt charged  [*242]
the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) to apply forestry and soil erosion efforts
to "broad areas rather than ... [an] individual parcel of land ... [revealing]
his faith in the value of forests in reducing floods." n30

   New Deal politics, economics, scientific disagreements, and timely spring
floods moved President Roosevelt from a preference for resilience and avoidance
methods of flood management to one of resistance. n31 He signed the Flood
Control Act of 1936 n32 "enabling the federal government to build dams and
levees." n33 For several decades thereafter, the federal government's proactive
line of defense against flood risk for coastal and riparian dwellers and
businesses included crudely thought-out dams, levees, and seawalls. n34 Levees
[*243]  and dams were increasingly relied on to provide stability in flood-prone
areas. n35 These structural measures contributed greatly to development in
floodplains and to the damage caused by flood events. n36 Furthermore,
"[generally], disaster assistance was the only financial recourse for flood
victims" at that time. n37

   "Billion Dollar Betsy", a category three hurricane, n38 crashed into the
Louisiana coast in September 1965. n39 The hurricane killed  [*244]
seventy-five people and caused destruction on the order of $ 1 billion. n40
Private flood insurance was generally unavailable to property owners prior to
the hurricane, so the federal government and Louisiana residents were forced to
bear the financial burden for recovery. n41

   Immediately following Hurricane Betsy, the federal government considered new
methods to insulate property owners and federal disaster relief funds from
natural catastrophes. Congress passed the Southeast Hurricane Disaster Relief
Act n42 after Betsy in 1965 to furnish disaster relief for the affected region,
and notably, to consider the utility of prophylactic tools to reduce the
financial burden posed by flood recovery - including the provision of insurance.
n43

   The private insurance industry was, and still is, both unwilling and
unequipped to provide flood insurance. n44 Risk diversification, or risk
pooling, by way of "the law of large numbers" forms the backbone of an insurance
provider. n45 Floods, because of their catastrophic and  [*245]  concentrated
impact, are considered non-diversifiable events and are thereby considered
financially imprudent to insure against. n46

   In 1968, Congress applied what it learned from the Southeast Hurricane
Disaster Relief Act. It called on the federal government to step into the role
private insurers would not, and offered its citizens flood insurance through the
NFIP. n47 The flood loss insurance was made available to - among others -
homeowners, businesses, and renters. n48

   Congress wanted to expand flood insurance coverage to more Americans, but
likely did not anticipate the quagmire of financial and ecological problems the
program would rouse. n49 They believed the legislation was balanced and that
over time, risk would be  [*246]  appropriately delegated. n50 Furthermore,
Congress intended for the NFIP to curtail development in flood-prone areas. n51

   The NFIP has failed to realize its goals. n52 The program's primary flaw thus
far is the mandate to underprice premiums and otherwise ignore actuarial data,
i.e., the likelihood a natural disaster would occur or the expected value of a
flood policy claim. n53

   B. NFIP Structure

 NFIP oversight falls to the Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration
(FIMA). FIMA is a branch of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
which in turn is a subset of the Department of Homeland Security. n54 FIMA is
sub-divided into insurance and mitigation functions. n55

   For property owners to qualify for NFIP coverage, their locality must
participate in the NFIP and develop "floodplain management policies to manage
floodwaters and reduce risk to property." n56 Participating communities must
also create flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) that identify special flood hazard
areas, or one-hundred-year  [*247]  floodplains (SFHAs). n57 Federal funds may
not be applied for the purpose of furthering construction in SFHAs without flood
insurance. n58 Further, flood insurance is required for properties within SFHAs
that have a financial relationship or receive some form of assistance from a
federal body. n59 As of 2003, nearly 20,000 communities across the United States
and in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands participated in the program. n60 FEMA
issued 5,629,396 flood insurance policies in 2012. n61

   NFIP coverage for FIRM areas - known as participating communities - is
contingent on several requirements that are enforced by the participating
community through its building standards. n62 The FEMA administrator estimates
these construction  [*248]  requirements save approximately $ 1.7 billion in
annual avoided flood damage. n63 The NFIP incentivizes local mitigation efforts
through a system of discounts that a community may pass on to its citizens
through a community rating system (CRS). n64 A CRS "encourages adoption of more
effective measures that protect natural and beneficial floodplain functions" in
exchange for "credits on premium rates for flood insurance coverage ... based on
the estimated reduction in flood and erosion damage risks." n65 The NFIP also
provides funds for certain mitigation efforts. n66 Flood mitigation components
of the NFIP are small by financial comparison to its insurance element, but they
highly valued regulatory levers for flood management. n67

[*249]

   C. NFIP Reforms & Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012

 The NFIP's inadequacies began to emerge shortly after its passage. n68 US
population growth and rapid suburbanization in flood risk areas necessitated
Congressional action to amend the NFIP to avoid potentially dire consequences
for both the program's budget and communities where population growth and
development was incentivized by masking true flood risk. n69 Congress passed its
first NFIP correction with the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973. n70 The
1973 act made the purchase of flood insurance mandatory for buildings within
SFHAs. n71 Then, on the coattails of the Great Mississippi Flood of 1993,
Congress passed the National Flood Insurance Reform Act of 1994, which further
expanded the  [*250]  requirement to purchase flood insurance and bolstered
federal flood mitigation efforts. n72

   Congress acted again in 2004 with the passage of the
Bunning-Bereuter-Blumenauer Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2004. n73 The act
emphasized improved mitigation efforts - and possible relocation - for property
owners who suffered from repeat flood incidents. n74 The 2004 act is notable for
its requirement to increase premiums in situations where owners fail to accept
assistance for mitigation of repetitively flooded property. n75

   In 2010, as Congress continued to contemplate reformation of the NFIP,
evidence mounted that the program was unsustainable. n76 The NFIP was incapable
of charging "market rates, holding reserve funds, or purchasing reinsurance,"
making the possibility of financial independence, let alone solvency, unlikely.
n77 Below-market NFIP insurance rates triggered new environmental externalities
and shifted flood risk otherwise formerly held by those who owned and or
developed property in ecologically sensitive and flood-prone areas to the
federal government and taxpayers. n78 Furthermore, while environmental damage
and financial risk was "widely distributed to  [*251]  taxpayers," the benefits
largely fell to Gulf Coast states and owners of vacation residences. n79

   The share of Americans who benefit from NFIP flood policy also experience
disparate exposure to natural disasters. Hurricane Sandy caused nearly $ 65
billion in damage to the East Coast. n80 With similarly staggering numbers, in
2005, Hurricane Katrina and other major storms cost an estimated $ 20 billion.
n81 These storms were outliers, but they illustrate the cataclysmic cost of
rebuilding an area affected by just one natural event along with the problems
posed by discounting flood risk. n82

   An inadequate premium revenue stream to the NFIP risk reserve does not excuse
the federal government from paying claims to policyholders. Further, because of
other legislation like the Stafford Act - which provides federal funds to state
and local governments to perform infrastructure repair - the ultimate result is
additional federal debt set forth to promote unwise land use. n83

    [*252]  Furthermore, a continuing source of funds to rebuild after flood
events coupled with improperly adjusted premiums has helped foster a
difficult-to-break attachment to high-risk land in certain locales. According to
one resident of Dauphin Island, Alabama, "we're Americans, damn it. Retreat is a
dirty word." n84 Between 1988 and 2012 residents of Dauphin Island paid just
under 13 percent in flood premiums compared to what they received in NFIP
payments to rebuild after floods. n85 Despite repeated flooding of the small
island, some residents paid as little as $ 700 annually, while the highest
premiums were approximately $ 3,000 a year. n86

   The goal of Biggert-Waters was to deter continued reconstruction in places
like Dauphin Island. Politically, the law "was a breakthrough in one sense ...
both traditionally conservative free-market groups and traditionally progressive
environmental groups supported [it] enthusiastically." n87 The act passed with
bipartisan support in 2012, just months before Hurricane Sandy hit. n88

   Congress primarily approved Biggert-Waters to allow FEMA to mandate "more
realistic insurance rates that closely reflect "the rates private companies
would charge." n89 Specifically, Biggert-Waters raised "insurance premiums for
some "non-conforming properties' that [had] been provided flood insurance at
below-market rates since  [*253]  ... the 1970's." n90 Additionally,
Biggert-Waters' establishment of the "technical mapping advisory council
[(TMAC)] - intended to improve the maps [used] to define flood rates," allowed
premiums "to rise at a significant rate on the basis of the new maps," and
encouraged transformation of some of the federal government's flood risk "to the
private sector through the purchase of reinsurance." n91 The TMAC was charged to
insure FIRMs reflected accurate flood risk. n92 Furthermore, FIRMs would be
updated and reviewed on an ongoing basis through the new National Flood Mapping
Program (NFMP). n93

   Nonetheless, premium discounts were grandfathered for properties insured
prior to the new FIRM system, even in SFHAs. n94 In 2013, approximately 20
percent of flood insurance policies received some form of discount, ranging from
a 55 to 60 percent price reduction from full. n95 Biggert-Waters was set to
begin phasing out the grandfathered rate discounts at a pace of 20 percent per
year until the premiums were accurately adjusted for risk. n96

   D. Criticism of Biggert-Waters and Initial Efforts to Curtail the Act

 As the water receded after Hurricane Sandy, many coastal residents were left
with a brutal choice - rebuild their homes or move on. Their conundrum was
driven not only by the predicted increase in  [*254]  strong storms, but also by
a far more expensive flood insurance requirement. n97 For some residents, the
choice was illusory. Revised flood maps would include more buildings and, in
most cases, dictate that the NFIP charge significantly higher premiums, n98
meaning flood insurance costs were expected to remain prohibitively expensive.
n99

   The higher premiums caused outrage and triggered politicians in flood-prone
regions to take steps to delay implementation of the rate increases. n100 Just
as Biggert-Waters passed with bipartisan support, Congressional members of both
parties took a vested interest in hampering the act's realization. n101
Political pressure to limit Biggert-Waters also emerged at local political
levels. In the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, former New York Mayor Michael
Bloomberg formed the Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency. n102 The
[*255]  initiative recommended that Biggert-Waters be amended to provide for
"cheaper insurance with higher deductibles." n103

   In response to the growing outcry, despite still favorable arrangements for
many subsidized property owners in flood-prone areas, the Biggert-Waters
co-sponsor, Maxine Waters, worked to deconstruct her 2012 efforts to the dismay
of FEMA, free-marketers, environmentalists, and fiscal conservatives. n104

   As a result of Rep. Water's initiative, a contingent of representatives
elected who almost exclusively served coastal districts introduced House Bill
H.R. 2199. n105 The bill was introduced as an amendment to Biggert-Waters and
sought to delay key aspects of the act, most notably, the implementation of
proper risk-adjusted premiums. n106 Additionally, the bill was drafted to
postpone the prohibition against subsidized rates for any property purchased
after the enactment of Biggert-Waters. n107

   Some critics of Biggert-Waters argued that improvements to flood mitigation
systems should be the goal of federal flood policy. n108  [*256]  Accordingly,
H.R. 2199 also encouraged state and local governments to invest in
flood-protection infrastructure by disallowing FEMA to consider federal funding
"when determining if a community has made adequate progress on flood protection
improvement systems." n109 The bill was also intended to make Biggert-Waters
more reasonable for property owners by prohibiting immediate premium increases
in the wake of flood disasters that compromised a relevant local
flood-protection system. n110

   Few insurance and economics experts disagree that the flood insurance program
needs to be overhauled. n111 According to Frank W. Nutter, the president of the
Reinsurance Association of America, "The program is $ 26 billion in debt and
much of that debt is borne by federal taxpayers who do not have flood insurance
... they are subsidizing those that do." n112 For example, property owners in
high-risk areas file 80 percent of NFIP claims and receive two-thirds of
disaster assistance when flooded. n113

    [*257]  Nonetheless, many residents questioned the economics and financial
sense of the program's rate increases. Stephen C. Acropolis, mayor of Brick
Township, is an example. Before Biggert-Waters, he paid $ 1,200 annually for
flood insurance. Then his rates accelerated to $ 10,000 a year. Mr. Acropolis
asserted that he would "not pay $ 10,000 for flood insurance because the most I
will get for my house is $ 80,000 to $ 90,000 to repair it ... [every] 10 years,
I will pay for my house to be totally replaced. It doesn't make any sense." n114

   Passage of the Affordability Act helped soften the blow for homeowners faced
with higher premiums. n115 In Pennsylvania, for example, the Affordability Act
granted some thirty-five thousand flood insurance policyholders temporary
reprieve from rising rates. n116 Existing rate hikes spoiled the potential sale
of some flood insured homes when buyers learned of the premium growth. n117

   E. The Moral Hazard of Flood Insurance and the Affordability Act's
Curtailment of Biggert-Waters

 The policy behind subsidizing flood insurance premiums is fraught with moral
hazard. n118 It masks the true cost of a flood-risk property and perpetuates
development and redevelopment in areas where building may otherwise be unlikely
to occur. Once a flood  [*258]  disaster hits, the insured property owners are
permitted to rebuild in a place clearly not meant for long-term habitation.
Artificially low flood insurance premiums promote growth in towns and cities
built out of flood-rich soil - places not meant for development. Furthermore,
local governments are often not punished for their role in reckless land use
decisions, as the Stafford Act typically pays for repairs to infrastructure
damage in flood damaged areas. n119

   In addition to tampering with the value of flood risk properties and the
economy of the towns or cities with which they are a part, reducing the cost to
build in flood plains has devastating ecological impacts. These low-risk,
low-cost sites for suburban sprawl threaten to eliminate the benefits of
floodplains. n120 Further, the downstream consequences of dams and levees alter
ecosystems, hasten river currents, and direct floods to non-natural flood areas
and landowners. n121 Natural floodplains should be used for parks and
recreation, not subdivisions and strip-malls. The ecological damage is caused by
a shift in "insurance risks to the taxpayers" and a reduction in "long-term
private costs of building in floodplains." n122 This "development will
inevitably trigger environmental damage." n123

   Despite the adverse ecological and long-term economic consequences of
artificially low flood insurance costs, the Affordability Act's reversal of
Biggert-Waters' swift removal of subsidized flood premiums may help temper
near-term economic punishment to local insured areas. n124

    [*259]  The Biggert-Waters implementation was likely complicated by the
political concerns of coastal lawmakers. These particular representatives hoped
to avoid constituent anger caused by the newly instated flood insurance
premiums, which increased the costs of owning a flood insured property and
decreased its market value. n125 Indeed, the high premiums could force some
residents to move - and sell their homes for less than before Biggert-Waters -
and also make a coverage lapse more likely. n126

   The Biggert-Waters political storm likely stems from anger over flood
insurance premiums. As the act mandates that prices reflect risk yet keeps
intact the requirement to purchase flood insurance if the property lies in a
"high-risk" flood area and is encumbered by a federally regulated or insured
lender, constituent and political anger may not be an unwarranted response. n127
Premium cost concerns together with the opportunity to better incorporate
environmentalist and free-market ideas, are cause for a reimagining of the NFIP
- to improve on the Biggert-Waters amendments. n128

   Biggert-Waters fell short in several key categories. It "continued a
near-total federal government monopoly on writing primary flood insurance for
private homes and smaller businesses for at least another five years", failed to
impose ""mandatory purchase' of flood insurance for holders of federally backed
mortgages" in high-risk areas and ""residual risk' areas located behind levees",
and does not reign in the NFIP's massive debt-which grew by $ 3 billion since
November, 2012 to approximately $ 23 billion as of December 31, 2014. n129

    [*260]  This is not to say that Biggert-Waters should be completely
overhauled. It promoted many noble policies. Most notably, it discouraged
development in high-risk areas by beginning to demand appropriate actuarial
rates, called for updated technical oversight and FIRMs, and allowed FEMA to
participate in the private reinsurance market. n130 These aspects of the law
should be preserved and improved. n131

   However, the Affordability Act strips the NFIP of its central Biggert-Waters
alterations. n132 It effectively neuters § 4014(g), which ended subsidies for
new or lapsed NFIP policies, and eliminates § 4015(h), which called for "the
risk premium rate charged for flood insurance on such property adjusted to
accurately reflect the current risk of flood to such property." n133

   These changes are unfortunate given the significant political will required
to achieve passage of risk-adjusted premiums. Rather than gut the heart of
Biggert-Waters, Congress should have dialed back premium increases across the
board to mete out financial stability without drastic reductions in premium
affordability and adjust the NFIP to more effectively direct thoughtful land use
development.

[*261]

   II. Propositions for NFIP Reform

 Biggert-Waters began to address major structural hurdles that contributed to
NFIP's financial woes, but it did not do enough. n134 In consideration of the
Biggert-Waters shortcomings and the shortsighted modifications imposed by the
Affordability Act, Congress should pass omnibus legislation that incorporates
the following proposals to recast the NFIP as a financially sustainable and fair
land use tool. The following proposals envision a forward-thinking, financially
sustainable NFIP - a twin-pillared program engendered to not only backstop
property owners who suffer a flood event, but also provide states and localities
with resources to permanently mitigate unreasonably risky land-use choices. An
amended NFIP should slowly implement market driven policies to price premiums.
Premium adjustments should increase at a rate that prevents local economies from
suffering drastic financial adjustments for an inability to pay risk-adjusted
premiums. Premiums should be implemented pragmatically over a longer time period
than Biggert-Waters, with special attention paid to primary home, operating
businesses, and low-income neighborhoods. Furthermore, a greater share of NFIP
funds should be directed to states and localities to engage in permanent
mitigation efforts - specifically, the public acquisition of high flood risk
properties.

   Ultimately, a slower-paced schedule of premium increases and more proactive
mitigation strategy, vis-a-vis securing public control over flood risk property,
will help the NFIP reduce its debt, lower its contingent liability, and direct
many Americans to abstain from detrimental land use choices that harm the
natural system, the federal fisc, and their own personal safety and finances.

[*262]

   A. Anodyne Premium Increases

 Congress should pass omnibus legislation that more gradually implements premium
increases. A US Government Accountability Office (GAO) report in 2015 made a
frightening assertion: even if the Treasury forgave the NFIP's approximately $
20 billion debt, flood insurance premiums would need to increase annual
subsidized rates by 150 to 325 percent. n135 Such drastic increases would surely
have a negative effect on flood insurance participation among property owners
not required to purchase insurance. Reduced participation among this group would
generate a greater need for FEMA disaster assistance loans and necessitate a
further rise in premiums for the remaining insured.

   Instantly unleashing a free-market approach to flood insurance is reckless.
Congress should pay heed to the implications of allowing risk-adjusted rates to
set in without a significant cushion. The Affordability Act "reinstated certain
premium subsidies and slowed down some premium rate increases ... included in
[Bigger Waters] requiring FEMA to refund premiums to certain policy holders."
n136 Yet, in the short time between Biggert-Waters and the Affordability Act,
home prices declined in flood zones because of the higher premiums, an
indication that anticipated increases to flood insurance premiums were a
contributing factor. n137

   Therefore, consider the implications of the fact that "flood insurance covers
$ 1.3 trillion of property in all 50 states, with Florida, Texas, Louisiana,
California and New Jersey making up two-  [*263]  thirds of all policies." n138
And further, that over one million homeowners are covered by flood insurance
policies. n139 It would be catastrophic if the majority of these properties were
suddenly stricken with a 5 to 10 percent reduction in value (equating to an
aggregate loss of $ 65-$ 130 billion in property value). n140 This instantaneous
contraction in real estate wealth would be particularly destructive for property
tax revenues in the aforementioned coastal states and localities.

   One way of limiting the sting of necessary premium hikes, maintaining level
participation, and controlling property value losses is to provide a longer
linear phasing in of premium increases. Biggert-Waters sought incrementally
increase premiums over a five-year (20 percent per year) period to reach the
desired actuarial level. n141 Borrowing the GAO's suggested average premium
increases of 150 to 325 percent (if NFIP debt were forgiven), this premium
increase schedule corresponds to annual growth of to 30 to 60 percent over five
years. n142

   Congress should implement premium increases over a slightly more protracted
schedule. If the schedule included two additional years, premiums would grow
over a seven-year span, resulting in an average raise of 21 to 46 percent
annually.

   While a seven-year schedule still results in staggering rate increases
relative to current levels it would afford time for local governments to prepare
for lower property tax revenues and lenders that secured loans with affected
properties to restructure their financing arrangements. Further, a seven-year
span is far more palatable to voters and economies than a five-year
implementation -  [*264]  and certainly more so than a one-time increase. The
downside of slower premium growth is the increased possibility that the NFIP
will need to borrow more from the nation's fisc should a significant disaster
occur before the financial benefits related to actuarial premiums are realized.
n143

   While a Biggert-Waters pace of premium rate increases - five years - would be
beneficial to the NFIP's financial standing and would more rapidly marshal good
land use policy, it poses a significant economic risk to both local and national
governments and economies and must be approached with care. Any premium increase
schedule should be structured in a manner that only subtly influences real
estate markets.

   B. Ban Federal Mortgage Insurance for Flood Risk Properties

 Congress should no longer permit currently qualified borrowers from obtaining
federally insured mortgages for the purchase of flood-risk properties.
Presently, borrowers who finance property with federally insured mortgages are
required to obtain flood insurance if they live in a high-risk flood area. n144
Federally insured mortgages are available to borrowers who are not
market-competitive - most often because they are unable to amass a 20 percent
equity down payment for the purchase of a home. n145 By requiring NFIP insurance
on federally insured mortgages on flood-risk properties, Congress is ostensibly
requiring that the federal government backstop itself. n146

    [*265]  While ceasing federal mortgage insurance for sub-prime purchasers
may be perceived as a draconian measure that goes against homeownership and
decreases the number of potential purchasers for many, if not most, flood-risk
properties - resulting in a reduction in the value of these properties (a cost
to current owners) - it ultimately forces potential new owners to assume their
fair share of risk.

   Given that federal mortgage insurance is generally only available to
sub-prime borrowers, the measure would prevent purchasers who are already at
increased risk of triggering a federal insurance claim (e.g., defaulting on
their mortgage) from incurring disproportional federal benefits where it is not
necessary. Just as the Internal Revenue Service employs a policy that
discourages not-for-profit corporations from "double-dipping" tax benefits, so
too should individual borrowers who obtain federally-backed mortgages be
disallowed from obtaining additional benefit by obtaining subsidized flood
insurance. n147

   Even if the NFIP were to allow such double-insurance, and not subsidize
premiums on flood insurance for coverage on flood-risk properties obtained by
federally insured mortgages, flood insurance premiums would in many cases
elevate a borrower's homeownership costs to a high level, such that they would
be at increased risk of defaulting on their mortgage compared to a scenario that
did not dictate that they obtain flood insurance.

   Absent the pairing of flood-insurance and federal mortgage insurance for
flood-risk properties, the market would demand that borrowers be credit-worthy
enough to not only obtain a mortgage without federal backing, but also be able
to afford the actual cost of flood insurance. This is because, presumably,
lenders would require that borrowers who secure their mortgage with a flood-risk
property obtain flood insurance to protect that security. This would shift the
burden and blame of increased property ownership costs to the mortgage
instrument rather than flood insurance. n148

    [*266]  Financial institutions may oppose this measure given that it could
reduce the value of flood-risk properties on which they have secured mortgages
and reduce the pool of potential borrowers. However, the measure would be
popular among free-market proponents and concentrate risk management on the
mortgage underwriting process. This is efficient and logical. Mortgage
underwriting should comprehensively consider risk and banks that underwrite new
loans for properties in high-risk flood areas should demand larger down payments
or higher borrowing costs. In this way, mortgage underwriters could deter
borrowers from purchasing homes in high-flood risk areas and in some cases
reward borrowers who obtain adequate flood insurance with lower interest rates.

   Lastly, banks could even incentivize borrowers to take flood mitigation
measures if their collateral was in a flood zone. n149 For example, a bank could
adjust its interest rate if the borrower raised their home or installed breakout
walls on the first floor. That way, private landowners would be encouraged to
account for their own risk through personal mitigation and rely less on public
infrastructure measures like levees, dikes, and dams.

   C. Replacement Land Tax Credit and Land Buy-back Program

 Property owners in flood plains, especially those in repeat flood areas or
high-risk zones should be encouraged not to rebuild in the same place. Because
property owners are currently only required to insure for the amount of any
federally-backed outstanding mortgage on their property, many will not receive
insurance payments adequate to rebuild, let alone purchase land elsewhere. n150

   One way to soften the blow, while also encouraging development on high land,
would be for the federal government to offer an  [*267]  investment tax credit
for land purchases following a flood disaster. Perhaps the credit would be
offered for two years following a flood disaster and be available to any
property owner in the affected area, regardless of whether their land
improvements were destroyed. The program could be further strengthened by
states, which could enact similar tax motivations.

   The tax credit would incentivize property owners who had suffered flood
damage and been awarded a flood insurance payment not to rebuild in an area with
high flood-risk. The credit could be offered as a one-time investment tax credit
structured as a percentage of the value of land purchased as a substitute for
their flood-damaged property.

   The credit could also be scaled. For example, if a property owner moved from
a SFHA to a moderate or low risk area they would be awarded a 20 percent credit,
from SFHA to no risk area a 30 percent credit, or from moderate or low risk to a
no risk area a 20 percent credit.

   The credit program could be renewed every five years, until a large portion
of high-flood risk populations relocated. This action would benefit the
homebuilding and real estate industry as it slowly incentivizes depopulation of
flood-risk areas.

   Further, Congress should empower the National Parks Service (NPS) and the
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to offer to purchase certain land tracts from
affected property owners. These land purchases would need to be in line with the
NPS and BLM's growth strategy. Nonetheless, Congressional authorization and
funding of NPS and BLM land acquisitions from affected owners is a way for some
repeat disaster areas to slowly come under the designation of protected federal
land, shift development to more suitable areas, and reunite the country with its
holistic hydrologic heritage espoused through avoidance and resilience
techniques. n151

[*268]

   III. Conclusion

 The political dismantling of Biggert-Waters puts FEMA in a precarious position.
As currently constructed, the NFIP will continue to accrue debt, property owners
will not be compelled to avoid development in non-flood prone areas, and the
flood risk pool will grow without adequate premium funding. There is no easy
solution to NFIP reform. Residents in flood risk areas will need to pay more or
move away. The eventual imposition of actuarial rates is likely unavoidable.

   Politicians can both please their constituents and bolster the NFIP by
instituting premium increases - albeit, slower than directed by Biggert-Waters -
as they simultaneously encourage policyholders to move out of floodplains and
low-lying coastal areas, and allow the free market to take a larger role in
controlling prudent land use decisions.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Banking LawNational Flood Insurance ProgramInsurance LawProperty InsuranceFlood
InsurancePublic Health & Welfare LawSocial ServicesEmergency Services

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  Mark Twain, Life on the Mississippi 234 (P.F. Collier, 1917) (1874).





n2.  See Fed. Emergency Mgmt. Agency, National Flood Insurance Program: Answers
to Questions About the NFIP 2 (2011), available at
http://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/20130726-1438-20490-1905/f084_atq_11aug11
.pdf [hereinafter Answers] ("Flood is defined in the Standard Flood Insurance
Policy (SFIP), in part, as: "A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land area or of two or
more properties ... from overflow of inland or tidal waters, from unusual and
rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, or from
mudflow.'").





n3.  See Hurricane Sandy Recovery Efforts One Year Later, Fed. Emergency Mgmt.
Agency (Oct. 28, 2013),
http://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/1382967173777-7411aa1
b6d729a8a97e84dbba62083d8/FEMA%20Sandy%20One%20Year%20Fact%2 0Sheet_508.pdf
[hereinafter One Year].





n4.  See Flood Insurance Reform Act, Pub. L. No. 108-264 (2004), National Flood
Insurance Reform Act, Pub. L. No 103-325 (1994); Flood Disaster Protection Act,
Pub. Law 93-234 (1973); Housing and Urban Development Act, Pub. Law 91-152
(1969); and Housing and Urban Development Act, 42 U.S.C. § 4201-4128.





n5.  See One Year, supra note 3. More than 8.5 million people lost power, 23,000
needed temporary shelter, $ 4.6 billion was spent for individual assistance and
emergency work, and $ 2.4 billion was distributed in the form of low-interest
disaster loans. Id.





n6.  See The National Flood Insurance Act, 42 U.S.C. § 4054(a) (2012). "The
Administrator ... shall make periodic payments to the [flood insurance pool] ...
in recognition of such reductions in chargeable premium rates under section 4015
of this title below estimated premium rates under section 4014(a)(1) of this
title as are required in order to make flood insurance available on reasonable
terms and conditions." Id. See also Christopher Joyce, Program Drowning in Debt.
Who Will Pay?, Nat'l Pub. Radio (Jan. 1, 2014),
http://www.npr.org/2014/01/01/258706269/federal-flood-insurance-program-drowning
-in-debt-who-will-pay. "Millions of American property owners get flood insurance
from the federal government, and a lot of them get a hefty discount...You can
buy a FEMA flood insurance policy for about half the "actuarial' rate private
insurers would offer. (The actuarial rate more accurately reflects the value of
a property at risk.)" Id.





n7.  Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012, 126 Stat. 916 (codified
as amended at 42 U.S.C.§§4001-4131 (2012)).





n8.  See Joyce, supra note 6. "[Over] the past decade, the government has paid
out huge amounts of money after floods, and the flood insurance program is
deeply in the red. Congress tried to fix that in 2012 by passing a law to raise
insurance premiums. Now that move has created such uproar among property owners
that Congress is trying to make the law it passed disappear." Id.





n9.  See U.S. Global Change Research Program, Introduction to Third National
Climate Assessment Report (2014), available at http://nca2014.globalchange.
gov/report/our-changing-climate/sea-level-rise.



   Scientists are working to narrow the range of sea level rise projections for
this century ... In the context of risk-based analysis, some decision makers may
wish to use a wider range of scenarios, from 8 inches to 6.6 feet by 2100 ...
Nearly 5 million people in the U.S. live within 4 feet of the local high-tide
level ... In the next several decades, storm surges and high tides could combine
with sea level rise and land subsidence to further increase flooding in many of
these regions ... Sea level rise will not stop in 2100 because the oceans take a
very long time to respond to warmer conditions at the Earth's surface. Ocean
waters will therefore continue to warm and sea level will continue to rise for
many centuries at rates equal to or higher than that of the current century.

 Id.





n10.  See NOAA, National Coastal Population Report: Population Trends from 1970
to 2020, 4, Fig. 3, (2013), available at
http://stateofthecoast.noaa.gov/features/coastal-population-report.pdf. "In
2010, 123.3 million people, or 39 percent of the nation's population lived in
Coastal Shoreline Counties ... the population in Coastal Shoreline Counties
increased by 34.8 million people, a 39 percent increase, while the nation's
entire population increased by 52 percent over the same time period." Id. While
costal population growth is outpaced by the national average, the data does not
incorporate populations along rivers or consider population density. See NOAA,
NOAA's State of the Coast: Communities: The U.S. Population Living at The Coast,
(2013) available at http://stateofthecoast.noaa.gov/population/ welcome.html.
Coastal shoreline counties make-up ten percent of the U.S. land area (excluding
Alaska). Id. However, U.S. coastal county population density is more than four
times the U.S. average (446 persons per square mile (excluding Alaska), compared
to the U.S. average of 105 persons per square mile). Id.





n11.  Joyce, supra note 6. "Millions of American property owners get flood
insurance from the federal government, and a lot of them get a hefty
discount...You can buy a FEMA flood insurance policy for about half the
"actuarial' rate private insurers would offer. (The actuarial rate more
accurately reflects the value of a property at risk.)" Id.





n12.  National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, Pub. L. 90-448, 82 Stat. 572
(codified as amended at 42 U.S.C.§§4001-4131 (2012)).



   The Congress finds that (1) from time to time flood disasters have created
personal hardships and economic distress which have required unforeseen disaster
relief measures and have placed an increasing burden on the Nation's resources;
(2) despite the installation of preventative and protective works and the
adoption of other public programs designed to reduce losses caused by flood
damage, these methods have not been sufficient to protect adequately against
growing exposure to future flood losses; (3) as a matter of national policy, a
reasonable method of sharing the risk of flood losses is through a program of
flood insurance which can complement and encourage preventative and protective
measures; and (3) if such a program is initiated and carried out gradually, it
can be expanded as knowledge is gained and experience appraised, thus making
flood insurance coverage available on reasonable terms and conditions to persons
who have need for such protection.

 Id. § 4001(a). See also id. § 4002(a)(5)-(6).



   The Congress finds that - ...(5) the Nation cannot afford the tragic losses
of life caused annually by flood occurrences, nor the increasing losses of
property suffered by flood victims, most of whom are still inadequately
compensated despite the provision of costly disaster relief benefits; and (6) it
is in the public interest for persons already living in flood-prone areas to
have both an opportunity to purchase flood insurance and access to more adequate
limits of coverage, so that they will be indemnified, for their losses in the
event of future flood disasters.

 Id. See also id. § 4012. "Priority for insurance for certain residential and
church properties and business concerns." Id.





n13.  Id. § 4012. Consider that the intrinsic value of an asset like real
property equals the present value of its future cash flows. When revenue and
discount rates remain constant but expenses rise (e.g., flood insurance premiums
increase) then cash flows are reduced and the value of the asset diminishes. See
also Joyce, supra note 6. Federal subsidization of flood insurance premiums
increases the value of properties in flood plains because it reduces the cost of
ownership. Hence, undeveloped property that without the federal subsidy did not
provide an adequate return could - given the reduced expenses associated with
its ownership - become profitable enough to justify development.





n14.  Joyce, supra note 6.





n15.  See id. "FEMA has a problem. "We are $ 24 billion in debt' says Craig
Fugate, who directs FEMA. Fugate delivered that bit of news to Congress' House
Financial Services Committee in Washington, D.C., recently, as he tried to make
the case for raising insurance rates." Id. See also Sarah Fox, This is
Adaptation: The Elimination of Subsidies Under the National Flood Insurance
Program, 39 Colum. J. Envtl. L. 205, 218 (2014). Unable to cover all claims from
Hurricane Katrina, the NFIP secured increased borrowing authority from Congress
to $ 20.775 billion. After Hurricane Sandy, NFIP borrowing authority expanded to
$ 30 billion. See id.





n16.  See Eli Lehrer, Strange Bedfellows: Smartsafer.org and the Biggert-Waters
Act of 2012, 23 Duke Envtl. L. & Pol'y F. 351, 352 (2012-2013) (describing the
Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act 2012).





n17.  See Chris Cillizza, The Least Productive Congress Ever, Wash. Post, July
17, 2013,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-fix/wp/2013/07/17/the-least-productive-c
ongress-ever (citing statistics that Congress in 2012 passed only 561 bills,
"the lowest number since they began keeping these stats way back in 1947").





n18.  Partisanship aside, consider the political and economic climates in 2012.
The Great Recession, while it waned, still dominated attention among domestic
political issues. For Votes It's Still the Economy, Pew Res. Center (Sept. 24,
2012), http://www.people-press.org/
2012/09/24/for-voters-its-still-the-economy/. Normally, most legislators in both
houses of Congress would have balked at any bill to increase costs for Americans
- lest it amount to a tax increase. Bigger-Waters however, emerged alive despite
the significant premium increases.





n19.  See S. 1926, 113th Cong. (2014).





n20.  Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act, Pub. L. No. 112-141, §
100207, 126 Stat. 405, 919 (2012). [42 U.S.C. § 4015(h) (2012).]





n21.  See S. 1926, 113th Cong. (2014). See also Natasha Lindstrom, Senate Bill
Delays Flood Insurance Hikes, The Intelligencer (Jan. 31, 2014),
http://www.theintell.com/news/
local/u-s-senate-bill-delays-flood-insurance-hikes/article_27a3269d-f490-5e73-a5
48-3ca67ec2d 2c9.html. Senators Robert Menendez, Democrat from New Jersey, and
Johnny Isakson, Republican from Georgia, wrote the Act. See id.





n22.  See Coral Davenport, Popular Flood Insurance Law Is Target of Both
Political Parties, N.Y. Times (Jan. 28, 2014),
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/29/us/politics/popular-flood-insurance-law-is-tar
get-of-both-political-parties.html. "Although the effort there is being led by
Ms. Waters, she already has more than 180 co-sponsors from both parties, and
House Speaker John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, indicated that G.O.P.
leadership may consider the effort." Id.





n23.  See id.





n24.  See Joyce, supra note 6. Even the namesake of Biggert-Waters,
Representative Maxine Waters of California, has blasted the NFIP amendments.



   Waters described her law as "well-meaning," and then scolded Fugate, FEMA
Administrator, for not coming to Congress earlier to explain just how high the
premium increases would go (though they were specifically called for in the
Biggert-Waters Act). "Let me just say," she told Fugate, "all of the harm that
has been caused to thousands of people across the country - [who] are calling,
[who] are going to lose their homes, [who] are placed in this position - is just
unconscionable.'"

 Id.





n25.  See Fox, supra note 15, at 211. Fox reflects on the difficulty with
discontinuation of a widespread public subsidy.



   People were able to settle in sprawling suburbs because of the low cost of
transportation, were enticed to move to the desert based on an artificially low
price of water, and made choices to live in coastal communities because of
guarantees provided by subsidized flood insurance. Those choices are likely to
come with a sense of entitlement to the continuation of these subsidies in
perpetuity, and shifts in policy that force changes in lifestyle are likely to
be met with an emotional response.

 Id.





n26.  See Douglas Helms, Legacy of the Flood Control Act of 1936, in The Flood
Control Challenge: Past, Present, and Future 67 (Rosen, Howard & Martin Reuss
eds., 1988), available at
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/national/abo ut/history/?
cid=nrcs143_010953. Observations of the effects that deforestation for
agricultural purposes had on riparian areas in Seventeenth Century New England
were put forth by colonial naturalist John Bartram who Hems quotes, "wear to ye
sand & clay which it bears away with ye swift current down to brooks & rivers
whose banks it overflows." Id. (quoting Hugh Hammond Bennett, Soil Conservation
869 (McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1939).





n27.  See Helms, supra note 26, at 67.





n28.  Weeks Act, Pub. L. No. 85-862, 36 Stat. 961 (1911); The Weeks Act, U.S.
Forest Service History,
http://www.foresthistory.org/ASPNET/Policy/WeeksAct/index.as px (last updated
Mar. 1, 2013). President Taft signed the Weeks Act into law in 1911. Id. The
law, "permitted the federal government to purchase private land in order to
protect the headwaters of rivers and watersheds in the eastern United States ...
[and is described as] one of the most successful pieces of conservation
legislation in U.S. history." Id.





n29.  The Weeks Act, supra note 28. Generally speaking, there are three
approaches to flood risk - avoidance (e.g., not building in a floodplain or
rebuilding after a flood disaster), resilience (e.g., allowing water to flow
naturally and design structures to compliment this), and resistance (e.g.,
preventing or significantly altering natural water flow to allow for existence
of a structure). See generally, Ass'n of British Insurers, A Guide to Resistant
and Resilient Repair After a Flood (2009), available at
https://www.abi.org.uk/Insurance-and-savings/Topics-and-issues/<diff>/media/0837
E8F0B35147D59A92D0A7231A572F.ashx. For a comparison of United States and Dutch
flood policy and discussion about disaster avoidance see Andrew Higgins, Lessons
for U.S. from a Flood-Prone Land, N.Y. Times (Nov. 14, 2012),
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/15/world/europe/netherlands-sets-model-of-flood-p
revention. html ("The Dutch "way of thinking is completely different from the
U.S.,' where disaster relief generally takes precedence over disaster avoidance,
said Wim Kuijken, the Dutch government's senior official for water control
policy. "The U.S. is excellent at disaster management,' but "working to avoid
disaster is completely different from working after a disaster.") and Abhas K
Jha, Robin Bloch, & Jessica Lamond, Cities and Flooding: A Guide to Integrated
Urban Flood Risk Management for the 21st Century, 32 (2012). Flood avoidance is
categorized by some as a "Non-structural" measure that relies on accurate flood
forecasting. An example of avoidance flood technique includes land use planning
and land use regulations designed to discourage new construction in high-risk
flood areas.





n30.  See Helms, supra note 26.





n31.  See id. "The legislative journey of the Flood Control Act of 1936 began in
response to the spring floods, but emerged as a national policy on flood
control." Id.





n32.  Flood Control Act of 1936, Pub. L. No. 74-738, § 1. President Franklin
Roosevelt signed the act into law and affirmed Congressional declaration of
policy which states in part:



   Destructive floods upon the rivers of the United States, upsetting orderly
processes and causing loss of life and property, including the erosion of lands
... constitute a menace to national welfare ... that the Federal Government
should improve or participate in the improvement of navigable waters or their
tributaries, including watersheds thereof, for flood-control purposes if the
benefits to whomsoever they may accrue are in excess of the estimated costs, and
if the lives and social security of people are otherwise adversely affected.

 Id





n33.  Beth Davidson, How Quickly We Forget: The National Flood Insurance Program
and Floodplain Development in Missouri, 19 Wash. U. J.L. & Pol'y 365, 366
(2005).





n34.  See id. at 366-67. "Despite the government's investment of billions of
dollars into flood control projects, flood damages continued to rise. In the
1950s, when the government first considered flood insurance, it was clear that
private industry could not provide coverage and retain a profit." Moreover, "the
costs of building and maintaining structural measures, such as dams and levees,
were increasing, as were losses from flooding." Id at 367. Yet the structural
measures also "created a false sense of security that led to development in
flood-prone areas" and upon failure "caused more damage than if the structural
measures had never existed." Id. See also Fox, supra note 15, at 213 (The Flood
Control Act of 1936 "authorized the construction of more than 200 specific flood
control projects ... control measures tended to exacerbate the problems that
they were intended to solve by fostering misplaced confidence in the safety of
living in the floodplain and tampering with the operation of the ecosystem.").





n35.  See Davidson, supra note 33, at 366-67. See also supra text accompanying
note 26. See Joseph Arnold, Office of History, U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs., The
Evolution of the 1936 Flood Control Act (1988), available at
http://www.publications.usace.army.mil/
Portals/76/Publications/EngineerPamphlets/EP_870-1-29.pdf. ("The [Flood Control
Act of 1936] authorized hundreds of flood control projects and established
policies that endure to this day. Moreover, it dramatically increased the Corps'
work load, forcing the agency to develop new procedures and offices"). See also
Higgins, supra note 29.





n36.  See Davidson, supra note 33, at 365-67. To make matters worse, if the
levees failed, "flooding caused more damage than if the structural measures had
never existed, increasing the costs of floods." Id. at 367; see also id.
(quoting Oliver A. Houck, Rising Water: The National Flood Insurance Program and
Louisiana, 60 Tul. L. Rev. 61, 67 (1985) ("If investments have been placed below
a dam or behind a levee, relying on their protection, the losses will be greater
than ever. Another limitation ... is that constriction of the floodplain in one
area will inevitably increase water stages somewhere else. The net result has
been that "efforts at control may, in some cases, in the end produce results
worse than they were intended to cure.'")).





n37.  Davidson, supra note 33, at 366; See also Fox, supra note 15, at 213
(discussing the general unavailability of private flood insurance prior to the
NFIP, and explaining that "local, state, and especially, the federal government
bore the burden of providing flood victims with disaster relief funds ...
[which] "placed an increasing burden on the Nation's resources.'" (quoting 42
U.S.C. § 4001 (a)(1) (1988)).





n38.  See Timothy Schott et al., Nat'l Weather Ser., The Saffir-Simpson
Hurricane Wind Scale 1 (2012), available at
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/pdf/sshws.pdf. The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale
rates hurricanes between one and five based on wind speed at particular points
in time. Id. Category Three Hurricanes cause "devastating damage" with wind
speeds of 111-129 miles per hour. Id. at 3.



   There is a high risk of injury or death to people ... nearly all older
(pre-1994) mobile homes will be destroyed ... poorly constructed frame homes can
be destroyed, well built frame homes can experience major damage ... there will
be a high percentage of roof covering and siding damage to apartment buildings
and industrial buildings ... complete failure of older metal buildings is
possible and unreinforced masonry buildings can collapse ... many trees will be
snapped or uprooted [and] electricity and water will be unavailable for several
days to a few weeks after the storm passes.

 Id.





n39.  J. Scott Holladay & Jason A. Schwartz, Inst. for Policy Integrity: NYU
Sch. of Law, Flooding the Market: The Distributional Consequences of the NFIP 1
(Policy Brief No. 7, Apr. 2010), available at
http://policyintegrity.org/documents/Floodingthe Market.pdf





n40.  Id. See also Fox, supra note 15, at 213 (citing Tarak Anada, Comment, The
Perfect Storm, an Imperfect Response, and a Sovereign Shield: Can Hurricane
Katrina Victims Bring Negligence Claims Against the Government?, 35 Pepp. L.
Rev. 279, 285 n.32 (2008) (claiming Hurricane Betsy killed 81, injured in excess
of 17,600, and displaced 250,000 residents)).





n41.  See Holladay & Schwartz, supra note 39, at 1.





n42.  Southeast Hurricane Disaster Relief Act, Pub. L. No. 89-339, 79 Stat.
1301-02 (1965).





n43.  See Fox, supra note 15, at 213-14.





n44.  See Davidson, supra note 33, at 367 n.10 (quoting National Flood Insurance
Program: Program Description 1 (2002), available at
http://www.fema.gov/fima/nfip. shtm) (The private flood insurance market would
not develop "primarily because of the catastrophic nature of flooding and the
inability to develop an actuarial rate structure which could adequately reflect
the risk to which flood-prone properties are exposed."); see also Mark S.
Dorfman & David A. Cather, Introduction to Risk Management & Insurance 29 (6th
ed.) (explaining that private insurance companies prefer not to insure
catastrophic, non-diversifiable events like floods). Because of their aversion
to catastrophic, non-diversifiable events, and given the like, nature of flood
events, the private insurance industry may never enter the market without public
subsidy. Theoretically, however, private insurers will insure most events if
premiums and deductibles reach high enough levels. Id.





n45.  See Dorfman & Cather, supra note 44, at 29-30.



   In its simplest form, risk diversification is a process in which the
financial losses of a few members in a group are spread across a much larger
number of people in the group who have not suffered a loss ... Crucial to the
success of such risk-bearing arrangements is making sure that there are a large
number of clients to share the risk, and that the risk is not likely to cause a
large number of group members to suffer a loss at the same time and thus
financially overwhelm the group ... Most common types of insurance, such as auto
and life insurance, offer protection from risks well suited to diversification
via risk pooling because the loss usually affects only one person, not a large
number of clients in the same risk pool. On the other hand ... catastrophic
risks ... [such as] floods, wars and unemployment - tend to be non-diversifiable
risks for insurers because they often result in financial losses for a large
number of people in the risk pool at the same time. Private insurers rarely
offer insurance for non-diversifiable risk, recognizing that their financial
strength could be harmed if such a catastrophic loss occurred.

 Id. at 5.





n46.  See id. at 29; see also Fox, supra note 15, at 213 ("The combination of
high monetary losses ... and inaccurate risk data makes flood insurance
financially infeasible for many providers. Furthermore, those who purchase flood
insurance tend to be those most at risk of flooding, and insurance companies are
subjected to a large volume of claims from any given flood event.").





n47.  See National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, Pub. L. 90-448, 82 Stat. 572
(codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. § 4001(a) (2012)) ("The Congress finds that
(1) from time to time flood disasters have created personal hardships and
economic distress which have required unforeseen disaster relief measures ...
(3) as a matter of national policy, a reasonable method of sharing the risk of
flood losses is through a program of flood insurance ... .").





n48.  See id. § 4012(a)-(b) ("In carrying out the flood insurance program, the
Director shall afford a priority to making flood insurance available to cover
residential properties which are designed for the occupancy of from one to four
families, church properties, and business properties which are owned or leased
and operated by small business concerns.").





n49.  See id. U.S.C. § 4002(b)(1) ("The purpose of this Act, therefore, is to -
(1) substantially increase the limits of coverage authorized under the national
flood insurance program.").





n50.  See id. § 4001(d) ("It is therefore the purpose of this chapter to (1)
authorize a flood insurance program by means of which flood insurance, over a
period of time, can be made available on a nationwide basis through the
cooperative efforts of the Federal Government and the private insurance
industry, and (2) provide flexibility in the program so that such flood
insurance may be based on workable methods of pooling risks, minimizing costs,
and distributing burdens equitably among those who will be protected by flood
insurance and the general public.").





n51.  See id. § 4001(e) ("It is the further purpose of this chapter to (1)
encourage State and local governments to make appropriate land use adjustments
to constrict the development of land which is exposed to flood damage and
minimize damage caused by flood losses, (2) guide the development of proposed
future construction, where practicable, away from locations which are threatened
by flood hazards ... (5) authorize continuing studies of flood hazards in order
to provide for a constant reappraisal of the flood insurance program and its
effect on land use requirements.").





n52.  See Davidson, supra note 33, at 366.





n53.  Lehrer, supra note 16, at 352. Also see Fox supra note 15, at 208. "The
NFIP...generates high costs for the federal government, mainly because premiums
do not reflect actual flood risk and because many policyholders receive
subsidized rates. These federal subsidies effectively underwrite the cost of
coastal development... ." Id.





n54.  See FEMA Organizational Chart, Fed. Emergency Mgmt. Agency,
http://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/1422480349134-95c3a7f4e006fc39dd19d20c2c
067325/ FEMA_Org_Chart_1-26-2015_508.pdf (last updated Jan. 26, 2015).





n55.  Id.





n56.  Holladay & Schwartz, supra note 39, at 1.





n57.  See Tetra Tech, Kittitas County Hazard Mitigation Plan Volume 1:
Planning-Area-Wide Elements 10-1 (2012), available at
http://co.kittitas.wa.us/public-works/hazard-mitigation-plan/documents/KittitasC
oHMP_Vol1_Final_complete.pdf.



   The frequency and severity of flooding are measured using a discharge
probability, which is a statistical tool used to define the probability that a
certain river discharge (flow) level will be equaled or exceeded within a given
year. Flood studies use historical records to determine the probability of
occurrence for the different discharge levels. The flood frequency equals 100
divided by the discharge probability. For example, the 100-year discharge has a
1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year...The extent of
flooding associated with a 1-percent annual probability of occurrence (the base
flood or 100-year flood) is used as the regulatory boundary by many agencies.

 Id.





n58.  42 U.S.C. § 4106 (2012).





n59.  Answers, supra note 2, at 11.





n60.  Id. at 3. "A community, as defined for the NFIP's purposes, is any state,
area, or political subdivision; any authorized tribal organization, or Alaska
native village; or authorized native organization that has the authority to
adopt and enforce floodplain management ordinances for the area under its
jurisdiction." Id. at 3. See also Flood Insurance: Challenges Facing the
National Flood Insurance Program Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Housing and
Community Opportunity, Comm. on Financial Services, H. of Representatives, 108th
Cong. 3 n.1 (2003) (statement of JayEtta Z. Hecker, Director Physical
Infrastructure).





n61.  See Fox, supra note 15, at 214.





n62.  Id. "[The] lowest floor of the structure be elevated to or above the base
flood level - the highest elevation at which there is a 1-percent chance of
flooding in a given year." Id. See also Dept. of Homeland Sec., Fed. Emergency
Mgmt. Agency, Nat'l Flood Ins. Fund, Fiscal Year 2013 Congressional
Justification 2 (2012), available at https://www.fema.
gov/pdf/about/budget/11h_fema_nfi_fund_dhs_fy13_cj.pdf [hereinafter Fiscal Year
2013 Congressional Justification].



   By law, FEMA can only provide flood insurance to those States or communities
that adopt and vigorously enforce floodplain management regulations that meet or
exceed minimum NFIP requirements. Communities incorporate NFIP requirements into
their zoning codes, subdivision ordinances, and/or building codes, or they adopt
special purpose floodplain management ordinances. NFIP requirements include: [1]
Elevation of new and substantially improved residential structures above the
base flood level. [2] Elevation or dry floodproofing (made watertight) of new or
substantially improved nonresidential structures. [3] Regulation of development
in floodways, the central portion of a riverine floodplain needed to carry
deeper and faster moving water, to ensure that there are no increases in
upstream elevations. [4] Additional requirements to protect buildings in coastal
areas from the impacts of waves, high velocity, and storm surge.

 Id.





n63.  See Fox, supra note 15, at 214. "These requirements are the most
cost-effective way to reduce the flood risk to new buildings and infrastructure.
Structures built to NFIP standards experience 80 percent less damage than
structures not built to these standards, and have resulted in $ 1.7 billion per
year in reduced flood losses." Id.





n64.  See 42 U.S.C. § 4022 (b)(1)-(3) (2012).





n65.  42 U.S.C. § 4022 (b) (2012). Also see Fox, supra note 15, at 215-16. "The
CRS is a voluntary incentive system that offers community-wide discounts on
insurance premiums in exchange for additional flood mitigation measures. A
community's prevention efforts are rated according to the CRS scale, and
communities may earn discounts of up to 45% for SFHA, or 10% for non-SFHA." Id.





n66.  See Davidson, supra note 33, at 374 n.69 (discussing 44 C.F.R.§§201.1.6,
Flood Mitigation Assistance (FMA) Program, http://www.fema.gov/fima/fma.shtm
(last visited Sept. 2, 2005)). "Grants are available for administration,
planning, technical assistance, and implementation of mitigation programs." Id.





n67.  See Fiscal Year 2013 Congressional Justification supra note 62, at 1.
"Currently the NFIP insures more than 5.5 million residential and commercial
policyholders totaling approximately $ 1.2 trillion insurance coverage." Id.
Compare to the "$ 1.7 billion in flood-related losses avoided annually" from
"flood hazard grant programs and floodplain management efforts." Id. More
specifically, the FEMA fiscal year 2013 request for
Grants/Subsidies/Contributions was $ 115,424,000 and $ 1,401,715,000 for
Insurance Claims and Indemnity. Id. at 22. See also Abhas K Jha, Robin Bloch, &
Jessica Lamond, supra note 29, at 311 (discussing land use planning).



   Two of the most effective regulatory systems are land use planning and the
finance and insurance sector ... Both seek to control unregulated development of
the floodplain, the former by land use plans and development frameworks to guide
and control development and the latter by imposing minimum design standards for
finance and insurance provision.

 Id.





n68.  See Bruce W. Merwin, The National Flood Insurance Program - Future Use of
the Flood Plain?, 1 Urb. L. Rev. 135, 136, (1977). A flood insurance scholar at
the time noted that "flood losses are increasing substantially as a result of
the accelerating development and concentration of people in flood hazard areas."
Id.





n69.  Flood insurance premiums that discount the true cost of a flood event for
a landowner increase the value of the discounted parcel over its otherwise
un-subsidized premium value by virtue of the discounted expense that the
landowner would otherwise incur. That parcel's reduced flood expense increases
its viability for development relative to a parcel without the benefit of the
subsidy. The value of the subsidized flood-risk is baked into the value of the
parcel. For editorial commentary on US development patterns and policy, see
James Howard Kunstler, Home From Nowhere, The Atlantic (Sept. 1, 1996, 12:00
AM), http://www.the atlantic.com/magazine/archive/
1996/09/home-from-nowhere/376664/.



   Human settlements are like living organisms. They must grow, and they will
change. But we can decide on the nature of that growth - on the quality and the
character of it - and where it ought to go. We don't have to scatter the
building blocks of our civic life all over the countryside, destroying our towns
and ruining farmland.

 Id.





n70.  Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, Pub. L. No. 93-234, § 4001, 87
Stat. 975 (1968) (amended 1973).





n71.  Id.





n72.  See Riegle Community Development and Regulator Improvement Act of 1994,
P.L. 103-325, § 4001, Stat. 511, available at
http://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/20130726-1545-20490-4986/frm_rf94.pdf.





n73.  Bunning-Bereuter-Blumenauer Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2004, Pub. L.
No. 108-264, § 4001, Stat. 712.





n74.  See id. The act's preamble noted that, "approximately 48,000 properties
currently insured under the program have experienced, within a 10-year period, 2
or more flood losses where each such loss exceeds the amount $ 1000." Id. §
2(3); see also id. § 102(g) ("A State or community may take action under
subsection (c)(2) to purchase a severe repetitive loss property.").





n75.  See id. § 102(h)(1). See also id. § 102(a) (directing FEMA to provide
funds for mitigation activities that include "elevation, relocation, demolition,
and floodproofing of structures, and minor physical localized flood control
projects, and the demolition and rebuilding of properties to at least Base Flood
Elevation ... .").





n76.  See Answers, supra note 2, at 3. ("The sale of flood insurance under the
NFIP is subject to FEMA rules and regulations. FEMA has elected to have
state-licensed insurance companies' agents and brokers sell flood insurance to
consumers."); see also Holladay & Schwartz, supra note 39, at i ("Because of its
below-market insurance rates and the intense hurricane-related floods in recent
years, the NFIP has accrued a substantial deficit: $ 19 billion. As currently
structured, the program will not be able to repay this debt.").





n77.  See Holladay & Schwartz, supra note 39, at i.





n78.  Id. at 3.





n79.  Id. at i. See also Vishaan Chakrabarti, America's Urban Future, N.Y. Times
(Apr. 16, 2014),
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/17/opinion/americas-urban-future.html?_r=0
(providing a corollary to the imbalance of flood insurance benefits reaped from
a small segment of coastal and river dwellers.).



   A staggering 90 percent of our gross domestic product and 86 percent of our
jobs are generated in 3 percent of the continental United States, namely our
cities ... Unfortunately, our state and federal policies continue to encourage
the opposite. Sprawl didn't just happen - it is a direct consequence of "big
government.' Cities don't keep the wealth they generate: Our major cities send
billions more in tax dollars to the suburbs, via state and federal coffers, than
they get back ... I am not arguing that people should not live in suburbs. But
we shouldn't pay them to do so ...

 Id. Chakrabarti's key point ties into the argument against non-risk adjusted
flood insurance incentives and the notion that the federal government should not
"pay" for development in flood prone areas. Id.





n80.  Doyle Rice, Hurricane Sandy, Drought Cost U.S. $ 100 billion, USA Today
(Jan. 25, 2013, 8:34 AM), http://www.usatoday.com/story/weather/
2013/01/24/global-disaster-report-sandy-drought/1862201/.





n81.  Holladay & Schwartz, supra note 39, at 1.





n82.  Id. at 2 ("[A] single flood event can affect a great number of covered
properties, none of which have paid insurance premiums at a market rate.").





n83.  Justin Gillis & Felicity Barringer, As Coasts Rebuild and U.S. Pays,
Repeatedly, the Critics Ask Why, N.Y. Times (Nov. 18, 2012),
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/19/science/
earth/as-coasts-rebuild-and-us-pays-again-critics-stop-to-ask-why.html?pagewante
d=all. The federal government also contributes relief funds to flood disaster
areas by way of the Stafford Act. Id. These funds however go directly to state
and local governments to repair infrastructure. Id. "Experts say the law is at
least as important as the flood program in motivating reconstruction after
storms" because it "shields local and state governments from the full
implications of their decisions on land use." Id. According to a Government
Accountability Office report, the federal government committed more than $ 80
billion in Stafford Act funds from 2004 to 2011. Id.





n84.  Id.





n85.  Id. ("Dauphin Island property owners have paid only $ 9.3 million in
premiums to the national flood insurance program, but they have received $ 72.2
million in payments for their damaged homes.").





n86.  Id. Ironically, one of the residents of Dauphin Island interviewed for
this piece, remarked at his strong emotional attachment to the island's natural
elements, stating "There's a lot of wildlife and a lot of bird life ... you can
sit on the porch and watch the dolphins swim past your house." Id. Surely most
ecologists would agree that the Dauphin Island natural habitat would improve
absent continued human habituation and repeated construction associated with
flood recovery. Id.





n87.  Lehrer, supra note 16, at 351.





n88.  Jenny Anderson, Outrage as Homeowners Prepare for Substantially Higher
Flood Insurance Rates, N.Y. Times (July 28, 2013),
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/29/nyregion/
overhaul-and-a-hurricane-have-flood-insurance-rates-set-for-huge-increases.html.
""Biggert-Waters was passed with overwhelmingly bipartisan support,' said
Caroyln Kousky, a fellow at Resources for the Future, a research group that has
focused on flood insurance. "The right and left were aligned in moving toward
risk-based rates.'" Id.





n89.  See Joyce, supra note 6.





n90.  Lehrer, supra note 16, at 352. Reinsurance is a tool for insurance
companies to pass part of their risk to other insurance companies or group of
insurance companies. This risk assessment limits the loss a primary insurer may
suffer. Typically, reinsurance regulations require some measure of liquidity or
solvency reserves. See generally Reinsurance, Ins. Info. Inst. (Nov. 2014),
http://www.iii.org/issue-update/reinsurance.





n91.  Leher, supra note 16, at 352-53.





n92.  Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-141, §
100215(c)-(d), 126 Stat. 916 (codified as 42 U.S.C. § 4101a(c)-(d) (2012)). See
also Fox, supra note 15, at 227 (stating that TMAC needed to consider "the best
available climate science and risk of sea level rise").





n93.  Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012 § 100216(a).





n94.  Fox, supra note 15, at 217.





n95.  Id. Additionally, the author points out:



   "Compounding the actuarial instability of the NFIP, even unsubsidized premium
rates do not reflect actual risk levels. Premium rates are set not based on
NFIP's actual loss experience, but on a hydrologic model. Using that model,
NFIP's stated goal is to collect sufficient premiums to cover at least the
historical average loss year."

 Id.





n96.  Id. at 228.





n97.  Christopher Joyce, In Sandy's Wake, Flood Zones and Insurance Rates
Re-Examined, NPR (Oct. 30, 2013),
http://www.npr.org/2013/10/30/241690144/in-sandys-wake-fema-re-examines-flood-in
surance-rates [hereinafter In Sandy's]. "And scientists say there will be many
more Sandy-style storms - that is, torrential rain and wind that create heavy
coastal flooding - and they'll be more frequent than in the past." Id. "Sea
level is changing and it is going to keep changing ... . The impacts are going
to become more and more frequent and severe." Id.





n98.  See Anderson, supra note 88 ("For the last seven years, Palmer Doyle ...
has paid between $ 350 and $ 458 annually for flood insurance. He lives a block
and a half from the water in Queens ... . Now, though, the costs for Mr. Doyle
are about to jump to as much as $ 15,000 annually ... .").





n99.  Id. "It's also a bitter pill for many." Id. According to Robert Moore,
senior policy analyst for the Natural Resources Defense Council, "People
obviously have a little bit of sticker shock." Id. Democratic New Jersey Senator
Robert Menendez said, "many homeowners will be forced to pay premiums that are
several times higher than the current rate they pay," and he called the
Biggert-Waters-induced new FEMA flood maps and higher insurance rates "a
man-made disaster." Id.





n100.  Id.



   In Brick Township, N.J., local officials have paid a mapping expert to obtain
certification in floodplain technology to challenge the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's new flood maps. Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has proposed
changes to make flood insurance more affordable and accessible. Senators from
flood-prone states, including New York, New Jersey and Louisiana, have offered
amendments and bills to extend the time frame over which the steep rates go into
effect.

 Id.





n101.  Cosponsors: H.R. 2199, 113th Cong. (2013-2014), available at
http://beta.congress. gov/bill/113th/house-bill/2199/cosponsors. Cosponsors
include twenty-four Democrats and nine Republicans. Id.





n102.  Anderson, supra note 88.





n103.  Id. "The report also called on FEMA to give financial credit to people
who undertake renovations to protect their property, like moving boilers from
the basement to the first floor." Id. See also In Sandy's, supra note 97
(quoting Robert Moore, senior policy analyst for the Natural Resources Defense
Council: "New York City formerly had about 35,000 buildings sitting in flood
zones. That number has now doubled.").





n104.  Davenport, supra note 22. "Tucked into broader transportation
legislation, the bill had enthusiastic support across the political spectrum,
from liberal environmentalists to fiscal conservatives. But Ms. Waters is now
leading an effort in the House to gut the legislation she sponsored." Id.





n105.  See Cosponsors: H.R. 2199, 113th Cong. (2013-2014) (The exceptions were
Rep. William Enyart, from Illinois's 12th district, and Rep. Bruce Braley, from
Iowa's 1st district. It is worth noting that both Enyart and Braley's districts
encompass flood-prone areas, and the bill's sponsors were all from coastal
states.).





n106.  See id. (summarizing H.R. 2199: "Delays until three years after enactment
of this Act the requirement of the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of
2012 ... that any property located in an area participating in the national
flood insurance program have the risk premium rate charged for flood insurance
on the property adjusted to accurately reflect its current risk of flood.").





n107.  See id. (summarizing H.R. 2199: "Amends the National Flood Insurance Act
of 1968 to delay until five years after enactment of Biggert-Waters the
prohibition against provision to prospective insureds of flood insurance by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) at (subsidy) rates less than full
actuarial estimates for property purchased after enactment of Biggert-Waters.").





n108.  Anderson, supra note 88. Former New York Mayor, Michael Bloomberg's
office asserted that as many as eight hundred thousand New Yorkers statewide
would lie in a one-hundred-year-floodplain by the 2050s. Id. According to
Bloomberg's senior mayoral aide, Seth Pinsky, "the risk that New York faces is a
combination of residents being priced out of their homes and realistic
mitigation measures not being incentivized by the strategy of the federal flood
insurance program ..." Id. (emphasis added).





n109.  See H.R. 2199, 113th Cong., supra note 105. Unfortunately,
flood-protection systems for certain areas invariably cause other areas along
the river to become flooded. Id. In other words, flood-protection systems simply
shirk the flood off on a different area; it is an imperfect system. Id.





n110.  Id.



   Makes flood insurance available at certain special flood hazard area rates to
riverine and coastal levees located in a community which FEMA has determined to
be in the process of restoring a flood protection system previously accredited
on a Flood Insurance Rate Map as providing 100-year frequency flood protection
but which no longer does so.

 Id.





n111.  See generally Houck, supra note 36, at 64. Rather than halt or hinder the
flood policy disaster circuit outlined in Houck's 1986 article, it is still
alive and well. The cycle includes: "(1) flooding, (2) flood losses, (3)
disaster relief, (4) flood control projects ... , (5) renewed encroachment and
development onto the floodplain and upstream watershed, (6) flooding, (7) flood
losses, (8) disaster relief, (9) more projects, (10) more encroachment and
development, ad infinitum." Id.





n112.  Anderson, supra note 88.





n113.  NFIP, About the National Flood Insurance Program: When Insurance is
Required, FloodSmart.gov (Jan. 30, 2014),
http://www.floodsmart.gov/floodsmart/pages/about/when_ insurance_is_required.jsp
[hereinafter About the National]. A "high-risk" area has "at least a 1 in 4
chance of flooding during a 30-year mortgage." Id.





n114.  Anderson, supra note 88.





n115.  U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, High Risk Series: An Update 385 (2015),
available at http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/668415.pdf. "[The Affordability Act]
reinstated certain premium subsidies and slowed down certain premium rate
increases that had been included in the Biggert-Waters Act. Aspects of HFIAA
were intended to address affordability concerns for certain property owners, but
may also increase NFIP's long-term financial burden on taxpayers." Id.





n116.  Lindstrom, supra note 21 (reporting that "some Pennsylvania policyholders
have already reported facing increases of thousands to tens of thousands of
dollars annually ...").





n117.  Id. Senator Bob Casey, Democrat from Pennsylvania said he was pleased the
Senate passed the bipartisan legislation. He stated further, that the bill would
give "peace of mind that this legislation will prevent sudden drastic rate
hikes" from the implementation of Biggert-Waters. Id.





n118.  Joyce, supra note 6.



   Meanwhile, people keep rebuilding in flood zones, in part because FEMA offers
cut-rate prices on one-fifth of its policies... . Fugate made it clear that this
is bad policy: "The moral hazard of subsidizing risk is, we're going to rebuild
right where we were, just the way it was, and we're going to get wiped out."

 Id.





n119.  See Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, 42
U.S.C. § 5172(a) (1988). ("The President may make contributions - (1) to a State
or local government for the repair, restoration, reconstruction, or replacement
of a public facility which is damaged or destroyed by a major disaster and for
associated expenses incurred by such government ... .").





n120.  Nat'l Conference of State Legislatures, Restoring and Protecting
Floodplains (2012), available at
http://www.ncsl.org/documents/environ/Floodplains.pdf.





n121.  See Houck, supra note 36.





n122.  Holladay & Schwartz, supra note 39, at 3.





n123.  Id.





n124.  Consider a flood-risk town occupied primarily by property owners who will
pay two or three times more for flood insurance premiums. Property values in
that town will fall because the cost of owning property will go up. Rents will
increase relative to the change in the cost of maintaining or insuring the
property. The increase in housing costs will decrease discretionary spending and
saving among the affected group. Meanwhile, because commercial property costs
will also rise, an increase in the cost of goods and services will follow.





n125.  See generally Anderson, supra note 88. Considered in a vacuum (e.g.,
independent of tax effects and intrinsic value considerations), if the cost to
own or operate an asset increases without equal or greater growth in that
asset's revenue production, then the asset's profitability will fall, as will
its market value.





n126.  See id.





n127.  About the National, supra note 113.





n128.  Lehrer, supra note 16, at 353-54.





n129.  Id. at 353 (describing Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012,
Pub. L. No. 112-141, § 100206, 126 Stat. 916). Lehrer also asserts that these
measures were included in the original language of the bill. Id. (internal
citations omitted). He further emphasizes that properties located behind levees
are not required to purchase flood insurance. Id. (internal citations omitted).
See High Risk, supra note 115, at 385. "As of December 31, 2014, FEMA owed the
Treasury $ 23 billion, up from $ 20 billion as of November 2012. FEMA made a $ 1
billion principal repayment at the end of December 2013 - FEMA's first such
payment since 2010." Id.





n130.  Lehrer, supra note 16, at 351, 352-53.





n131.  See Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012: Section by Section Highlights,
Nat'l Ass'n Realtors (Nov. 7, 2012),
http://www.realtor.org/articles/flood-insurance-reform-act-of-2012-section-by-se
ction-highlights. Most politically troubling - but effective long-term - is §
100205. It requires implementation, at 25 percent annually, actuarial rates for
second homes, businesses, severe repetitive loss properties, and properties with
substantial damage or improvements built before a community's first FIRM. Id.

   Section 100215 creates a Technical Mapping Advisory Council comprises of
local, state, and national flood experts to recommend flood map standards. Id.

   Section 100216 provides a mapping appeals court that allows local communities
to request a remapping should they suspect their map does not fall within
Technical Mapping Advisory Council guidelines. Id.

   The last resort for community mapping appeals is the Scientific Resolution
Panel, made up of at least five flood experts. Id.

   See also High Risk, supra note 115, at 385. "[The Affordability Act]
reinstated certain premium subsidies and slowed down certain premium rate
increases that had been included in the Biggert-Waters Act ... [it] intended to
address affordability concerns for certain property owners, but may also
increase NFIP's long-term financial burden on taxpayers." Id.





n132.  See High Risk, supra note 115, at 385.





n133.  See 42 U.S.C. §§4014(g), 4015(h) (2012).





n134.  See High Risk, supra note 115, at 385. First, it "excludes subsidized
premium rates for new flood insurance policies and phases them out for many
other properties, including those that have sustained repeated, severe losses
and second homes." Id. Second, FEMA must establish a reserve fund for the
payment of claims and eventual repayment of Treasury debt. Id.





n135.  Id. "Such rate increases could have negative effects on participation in
NFIP, particularly among lower income property owners." Id.





n136.  See High Risk, supra note 115, at 386.





n137.  Toluse Olorunnipa, Flood Insurance Price Hikes Wreak Havoc with Home
Sales, St. Louis Post Dispatch (Oct. 27, 2013),
http://www.stltoday.com/business/local/flood-insurance-price-hikes-wreak-havoc-w
ith-home-sales/article_a130bc63-2244-5eeb-b607-6d0071 3679da.html.



   Monthly premiums for more than 1 million homeowners are set to increase due
to a rewrite by Congress last year of the federal flood insurance program. As a
result, home prices in flood zones nationwide are declining as potential buyers
balk at the premiums, said Moe Veissi, a Miami real estate agent who led the
Chicago-based National Association of Realtors last year.

 Id.





n138.  Id.





n139.  Id.





n140.  If the aggregate value of NFIP insured real estate is $ 1.3 trillion, a
five percent reduction in value is equivalent to $ 65 billion and a ten percent
reduction is equivalent to $ 130 billion in value. Olorunnipa, supra note 137.





n141.  See 42 U.S.C.A. § 4015(h) (2012) which, under the Affordability Act, will
not be implemented: "Any increase in the risk premium rate charged for flood
insurance on any property that is covered by a flood insurance policy on the
effective date of such an update that is a result of such updating shall be
phased in over a 5-year period, at the rate of 20 percent for each year
following such effective date." Id.





n142.  High Risk, supra note 115, at 385. For a nine-year phase-in, the
annualized increases correspond to 16.6 to 36.1 percent. Id. These estimates do
not consider inflation.





n143.  See High Risk, supra note 115, at 386. It's worth noting that the
Affordability Act did take a small step to shore-up the NFIP risk profile.
According to the GAO, it added "an annual surcharge for all policies ($ 25 for
most policies) to be added to the reserve fund." Nonetheless, FEMA claimed at
the end of 2014, that "the required reserve fund balance (approximately $ 13
billion) would be achieved in the next 20 years." See High Risk, supra note 115,
at 386-87.





n144.  About the National, supra note 113.





n145.  See Let FHA Loans Help You, HUD.gov,
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/ buying/loans (last accessed Dec. 24,
2015).





n146.  For example, should a property purchased with a federally-insured
mortgage without flood insurance, suffer a total loss from a flood-event, then a
rational borrower may chose to not rebuild the property improvements, walk away
from the mortgage, and subsequently cause the federal government to reimburse
the lender for non-repayment of their note. Conversely, should the borrower in
this scenario insure the flood-loss property with the NFIP then the federal
government would also incur the cost to restore value to the affected parties.
Hence, in either case, the federal government is on the hook for any loss.





n147.  See, e.g., Education Benefits - No Double Benefits Allowed, IRS (Dec. 8,
2015),
https://www.irs.gov/Individuals/Education-Benefits-No-Double-Benefits-Allowed.





n148.  See Fox, supra note 15, at 216. ("Financial institutions may also require
flood insurance for properties in participating communities outside SFHA.").





n149.  See Anderson, supra note 88. Consider, the affect mitigation can have on
the cost of risk-this example is in the context of post Biggert-Waters NFIP
insurance rates.



   George Kasimos ... in Toms River [New Jersey] was put in a V Zone ["Velocity
Zone"], which would have taken his rates to over $ 30,000 annually. Now he is in
a less risky zone, but he still has to raise his home three feet. His flood
insurance will be $ 8,300 a year.

 Id.





n150.  See 42 U.S.C. § 4012a(b) (2012).





n151.  See Helms, supra note 26.


                          FOCUS - 150 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            Kashmir Monitor (India)

                             March 31, 2015 Tuesday

Flood Control dept. caught napping again?

LENGTH: 575 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR


SRINAGAR, March 31 -- Within seven months of September deluge the Irrigation and
Flood Control department again failed to deal with the floods as it had not made
any preparation to meet any eventuality despite the Meteorological department
having predicted about the wet weather a week ago.

The memory of September 2014 floodshas been haunting people as many areas have
been inundated in waters since Sunday.

Like last year September floods, the I&FC department was again caught napping as
it was it was ill-prepared to deal with the floods, underscoring the
government's unawareness.

The Flood Control department announced the flood alert late Sunday evening when
several areas were already inundated and people in various areas had started
moving to safer places.

"Kashmir has been flooded and people living in low lying areas, especially in
and around Jhelum are advised to move to safer areas," the administration
declared late Sunday evening.

Till then panic had gripped as Jhelum was flowing above the danger mark and few
bridges were already washed away and many houses had collapsed.

"The Bund had got damaged at several places by the last year floods but only its
temporary restoration was made till now. The last years deluge has weakened the
banks of River Jhelum and could be breached again if water level further
arises," Farooq Ahmad, a resident of Rajbagh said.

He said their houses remained inundated in water for two weeks last year and
would not withstand the flood waters again.

Mushtaq Ahmad, a resident of Mehjoor Nagar, said his house had developed severe
cracks by the last year floods. "The emerging situation of floods reminded us
the horrors we underwent last year when this area remained inundated in water
for weeks," Ahmad said.

Valley witnessed a massive damage with 2.54 lakh private structures and more
than Rs 6500 crore public infrastructure were lost by the last year floods and
around 300 people lost their lives besides rendering thousands of people
homeless. According to a survey, the Kashmir is prone to the floods with
Sonawari, Awantipora and Srinagar always being at risk of flash floods.

Residents of many areas close to rivers and flood channels like Mehjoor Nagar,
Hamdania Colony in Bemina, Rajbagh, Abi-Guzar, Natipora were tending to Jhelum
embankments by placing sand bags to stop water from entering into the
residential areas as these bunds were weakened by the last year floods. The
residents of Hamdania Colony blamed the government for giving them permission to
make constructions on the flood channel.

The flood water also entered into several villages of Budgam district after the
Bund of Nallah Tulbrun breached at few places. In south Kashmir's Pulwama and
Kulgam district, the flood waters entered into various villages, forcing people
to move to safer areas.

The MeT department said the two Western Disturbances in quick succession are
likely to affect till April 4 with occasional gaps, causing heavy rain at most
places in the state, mainly on April 1 and 3, with the possibility of snowfall
in the hilly areas.

The R&B department had carried out only temporary restoration of the bunds and
many low lying areas have been breached by the flash floods as government had
filled them with loose soil.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from The Kashmir Monitor. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 The Kashmir Monitor
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 151 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           September 25, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

STORM VICTIMS FIND LACK OF FLOOD COVERAGE FINAL INDIGNITY

BYLINE: By JEFF OSTROWSKI Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1373 words


A few days after Hurricane Katrina devastated the Gulf Coast, Victoria Beck
stood in a Salvation Army food line in Biloxi, Miss., and lamented the lack of a
flood-insurance policy on her home, which was destroyed by storm surge.

"After Camille hit (in 1969), we were told this wasn't a flood zone, so I didn't
have flood insurance," the 87-year-old Beck said. "Now the insurance people say
they don't want to pay the cost unless you had flood insurance. I don't know
what's going to happen."

Beck's complaint is common among thousands of homeowners the gulf inundated
during Katrina, and it's a gripe likely to surface again after Hurricane Rita.
Consumers say they didn't know homeowners insurance policies don't cover storm
surges, or they didn't realize floodwaters could reach their homes.

Katrina's surge and heavy rains have focused new attention on flood coverage,
which is readily available from the federal government and is relatively cheap.

Still, less than half of the homes in Palm Beach County and the Treasure Coast
have flood policies, just as less than half the homes Katrina flooded had the
coverage. For those homeowners, no flood coverage means no insurance payout to
rebuild, a harsh reality that can prove financially devastating.

Mortgage lenders require borrowers who live in the most flood-prone areas, along
the ocean or Intracoastal Waterway or in some low-lying areas, to buy flood
insurance. But buying flood insurance is a matter of choice for everyone else,
even homeowners in neighborhoods with a history of flooding or in some
high-elevation parts of barrier islands.

Area insurance agents say they regularly mail brochures reminding homeowners
that standard policies don't cover floods, and they stress to clients that the
coverage is available for as little as $112 a year, although prices go as high
as $1,800 for homes in the riskiest flood zones.

"I just beg every customer I have: You need flood insurance," said North Palm
Beach insurance agent John Farr. "Why wouldn't you? It doesn't cost squat."

Even in flat and storm-prone Florida, too few homeowners understand flood risk,
said Pete Travis, a Palm Beach Gardens resident who is the flood expert for
Sarasota-based Florida Select Insurance.

"The misconception everybody has carried for years is that, if the bank says,
'You're not in the flood zone,' they think they're not going to be flooded,"
Travis said.

But homeowners whose lenders don't require them to buy flood coverage still can
find their homes under water. Nearly a third of flood claims come from areas
that flood maps define as low-risk zones, Travis said, and even federal
officials acknowledge that their maps often contain inaccuracies.

"The flood maps are out of date," Travis said. "The water's not going to stop at
the line of a map. Unless you're sitting on the top of a hill, I'd say you need
a flood policy."

When a freak deluge soaked Palm Beach County and the Treasure Coast in October
1995, Palm Beach Gardens resident Lint Harrell watched the water rise until he
had 2 inches of water in his living room.

"We didn't have flood insurance when we bought the house, and of course the area
wasn't designated a flood zone," said Harrell, a general contractor.

Harrell's homeowners insurance didn't cover the damage, so he took out a
low-interest, $19,000 loan from the federal government to pay for repairs such
as new drywall, cabinets, wood floors and vanities.

And Harrell bought a flood insurance policy for about $300 a year, although his
neighborhood near the Gardens Mall hasn't flooded since 1995.

"It's well worth it, knowing what we've been through," Harrell said.

For nearly four decades, private insurers have refused to cover flood damage,
which insurers have defined to include storm surge. Carriers say the risk is too
great to insure profitably.

So that responsibility falls to the federal government, which formed the
National Flood Insurance Program in 1968. Uncle Sam writes policies for about
4.6 million properties throughout the country.

Still, the news that homeowners' insurers don't cover damage from water whipped
up by a hurricane infuriated many in the Gulf Coast.

Mississippi Attorney General Jim Hood recently sued State Farm, Allstate,
Nationwide and other insurers in an attempt to force carriers to pay for
Katrina's water damage, and Biloxi Mayor A.J. Holloway likewise was outraged.

"This was no flood," Holloway said. "A flood is when the river rises, not when
the gulf is blown on top of you."

It's unclear whether the Mississippi suit will yield relief for homeowners
without flood insurance. And with the average flood premium in Palm Beach County
a modest $288, many insurance agents say everyone should buy the coverage.

"We're all in a flood zone," said David Lodwick, an insurance agent and mayor of
Royal Palm Beach. "It's just that some areas are higher-risk than others."

Still, Lodwick acknowledged, soaring insurance premiums and home prices have
left many homeowners so squeezed that they're looking for any savings they can
find.

"People's budgets are so stressed from the rising costs of homeowners policies,"
Lodwick said, "it's getting tougher and tougher for people to afford homes."

Staff writer John Lantigua contributed to this story.

- jeff_ostrowski@pbpost.com

Flood insurance basics

- Private insurers stopped covering flood losses in the 1960s. In 1968, the
federal government created the National Flood Insurance Program. The program
collects $2 billion a year in premiums from about 4.6 million property owners.

- The average premium in Palm Beach County last year was $288, although prices
vary, depending on flood risk, location and property value. Insurance agents
sell the policies.

- Federal flood policies for homes offer maximum coverage of $250,000 for the
building and $100,000 for contents.

What's covered, what's not

- Homeowners insurance: Typically covers losses from fire or theft, but not
flood.

- Windstorm insurance: Covers damage from wind and from wind-driven rain or
falling water, but not rising water.

- Flood insurance: Covers damage from rising water, including storm surge.

On the Web

National Flood Insurance Program: www.floodsmart.gov.

Flood policies

Tens of thousands of people in Palm Beach County and the Treasure Coast buy
flood insurance policies from the federal government.
                       Number Average
Area              of policies premium
Palm Beach County     139,198    $288
Martin County          18,103    $353
St. Lucie County       18,807    $255
Florida              1,873,52    $353
United States       4,558,696    $438

Includes commercial and residential policies, as of Dec. 31.

Source: National Flood Insurance Program

Atlantis

Policies: 317

Average premium: $268

Boca Raton

Policies: 15,717

Average premium: $267

Boynton Beach

Policies: 8,628

Average premium: $280

Briny Breezes

Policies: 164

Average premium: $430

Delray Beach

Policies: 9,042

Average premium: $313

Fort Pierce

Policies: 44,239

Average premium: $303

Gulf Stream

Policies: 388

Average premium: $603

Hypoluxo

Policies: 984

Average premium: $211

Juno Beach

Policies: 1,754

Average premium: $169

Jupiter

Policies: 8,339

Average premium: $258

Lake Clarke Shores

Policies: 216

Average premium: $360

Lake Park

Policies: 741

Average premium: $236

Lake Worth

Policies: 1,824

Average premium: $386

Lantana

Policies: 986

Average premium: $438

Manalapan

Policies: 249

Average premium: $639

Unincorporated Martin County

Policies: 16,798

Average premium: $337

North Palm Beach

Policies: 3,741

Average premium: $198

Ocean Ridge

Policies: 1,317

Average premium: $396

Unincorporated Palm Beach County

Policies: 62,948

Average premium: $279

Palm Beach Gardens

Policies: 3,022

Average premium: $353

Palm Beach Shores

Policies: 958

Average premium: $236

Palm Beach

Policies: 7,757

Average premium: $404

Palm Springs

Policies: 1,593

Average premium: $188

Port St. Lucie

Policies: 3,969

Average premium: $260

Royal Palm Beach

Policies: 572

Average premium: $277

Sewall's Point

Policies: 407

Average premium: $904

Unincorporated St. Lucie County

Policies: 10,494

Average premium: $230

St. Lucie Village

Policies: 105

Average premium: $549

Stuart

Policies: 898

Average premium: $408

Tequesta

Policies: 1,335

Average premium: $251

Wellington

Policies: 488

Average premium: $365

West Palm Beach

Policies: 5,982

Average premium: $291

Belle Glade

Policies: 81

Average premium: $451

Pahokee

Policies: 38

Average premium: $247

South Bay

Policies: 17

Average premium: $301

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions. Info boxes at end of text.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC (B&W)
 BRENNAN KING/Staff Artist Flood policies

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2005 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 152 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          The Frontier Post (Pakistan)

                             October 2, 2011 Sunday

It's no use crying over spilt milk

LENGTH: 1075 words

DATELINE: Islamabad


Islamabad, Oct. 2 -- Natural disasters are common nowadays in today's world.
They are result of sudden change in state of natural elements due to natural
forces. Most of the natural disasters are beyond control of human beings and
cannot be predicted accurately when it will occur.

Major natural disasters like floods, earthquakes, landslides and droughts when
they happen, it results in threat to human life, loss of property; affect
infrastructure, agriculture and environment. The impact of disaster is different
due to its intensity and coverage area. Wolf Dombrowsky said"Disasters do not
cause effects; the effects are what we call a disaster".Above quotation conveys
a message that the disaster is an effect of an event that brings vulnerability
in environment. Floods are the most common occurring natural disasters that
affect human and its surrounding environment (Hewitt 1997). It is more
vulnerable to Asia and the Pacific regions. It affects social and economic
stability of a country. There are many occurrence of flood in China, the worst
flood in China in 1998 affected 223 million people, 3004 people were reported
dead, 15 million were rendered homeless and the economic loss was over US$ 23
billion for that year. Due to heavy floods in Cambodia and Vietnam during year
2000, 428 people died and estimated economic loss was over US$250 million. In
1991, 140,000 people across the world were reported dead and in 1998, it
affected 25 million lives. For the last 10 years due to frequent occurring of
floods thousands of people have been affected in India, Pakistan, Korea, China,
and Bangladesh with their agricultural fields, residential areas i.e. livelihood
and food. The effect of floods in less-developed countries is more vulnerable.
It has a lot of problems with emergency response and early warning preparation.
It occurs when a river or stream breaks out through their natural or artificial
bank due to heavy rainfall, melting of snow and dam failure, etc.Monsoon rains
have flooded large parts of Pakistan particularly the southern Sindh province
over the last six weeks, leaving more than 80,00,000 people homeless. Local
authorities, the UNO, and foreign and local aid groups are distributing water,
medicines and food, while the army is rescuing people from communities trapped
by the water and providing them all out assistance in shape of food, shelter and
medical camps. It is a positive sign that our army always come for rescue but
where are the politicians and disaster management institutions? Thousands have
received little or no help and are living under rainy skies or scorching sun.
There have been widespread accusations of diversion of flood water by
influential figures during the 2010 floods, as reported widely in the national
and international media. Children are the major victims in such situations. Lack
of proper nutrition has been a problem in Sindh for some time and the situation
was exacerbated by the floods as stored food, standing crops and agricultural
inputs like seed and fertilizer were destroyed.Pakistan gained independence 64
years ago but we are still poor and can't handle heavy rains year after year.
Although floods were already predicted, yet we failed to take safty measures
resulting in heavy loss of lives and property. People are angry that the
authorities have not done more in the wake of last year's disaster. They say
flood prevention projects and proper drainage systems could have saved homes and
lives and a lot of misery. As Pakistan marks the one-year anniversary of the
worst floods in living memory, the aid agency, Oxfam, has warned that the
country is still unprepared for the monsoon season. In a new report "Ready or
not, Pakistan's resilience to disasters, one year on from the floods", Oxfam
said that families had not fully recovered from last year's disaster and were
likely to fall even deeper into poverty if hit by floods again. Oxfam is calling
on the Pakistan government and donors to invest more and more in measures to
reduce the impact of disasters. This could include flood resistant housing, and
effective early warning systems especially at the village level. The cost of
reconstruction for last year's floods is estimated at more than ten billion
dollars; but investing an initial 27 million dollars, backed up with yearly top
ups, to improve disaster management would make a huge difference in making
Pakistan better-prepared for future emergencies. In order to control floods, we
should take necessary steps and flood management department or national disaster
management authorities should be made more potent. Flood management means an
effective plan towards occurrence of flood event to reduce extreme flow along
the identified extent of river. Flood management helps to reduce interruption of
flow or destruction of crops and agriculture field. Flood management needs to
have a clear understanding of maximum extent of floodplain area in order to
avoid the people from further encroachment. A proper flood management can keep
people away from flood.The flood management can be estimated by two ways. First
by identifying different causes of obstruction of floodwater in floodplain and
affecting the human settlements and its environment. This cause must be
identified, ranked and aggregated. Secondly studying future projection made for
flood damage based on the past records.There are two measures for flood
management viz. structural and non-structural measures.Structural measures
concern physical work like construction of dams, reservoirs, bridges, channel
improvement, river diversion and other embankments to keep floods away from
people and the non-structural measures is concerned with planning, analyzing the
flooding situation, flood plain zoning, flood proofing for reducing risk of
flood damage to keep people away from floods.Furthermore, in this hour of need
if we collect one rupee from each individual, then 18 crore rupees will be
collected in a day.

We made it before in the last earthquake and flood and we will make now. We
should not forget that these are not flash floods but were warned floods.
Politicians should gather under one platform, leave their petty issues and work
collectively for the betterment of Pakistan. Published by HT Syndication with
permission from Frontier Post. For any query with respect to this article or any
other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 The Frontier Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 153 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                           The Mercury (South Africa)

                            December 31, 2007 Monday
                                   e1 Edition

Dams a blunt instrument to manage floods;
Africa should adopt more sophisticated measures to prevent drowning and damage
to property in an era of global warming, writes Patrick McCully

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 991 words


Floods are the most destructive, frequent and costly natural disasters on earth.
And they are getting worse.

In recent months, 14 African countries have experienced their worst floods in
decades.

More than a million people have been affected, more than 200 have drowned, and
countless others have been made homeless across the continent. At least some of
that suffering was preventable.

The recent flood disaster in Ghana was reportedly greatly worsened when dam
operators in Burkina Faso opened a floodgate to prevent the Bagre Dam from
overflowing after heavy rains.

The water raced downstream to Ghana, through the Black and White Volta rivers,
hitting riverbank dwellers hard.

It was not the only time this had happened in Africa.

Hundreds of people were killed and hundreds of thousands were harmed when
Nigerian dam operators opened floodgates without warning in 1999 and 2001.

In those cases - and in many others the world over - dams which were supposed to
help reduce floods only made them worse. Yet a number of governments in Africa
and elsewhere are proposing more dams as the answer to flooding.

Flood damage has soared internationally in recent decades, partly because global
warming is causing more intense storms, and partly because more people are
living and working on flood plains.

The UN estimates that by 2050 the number of people at risk from damaging floods
will double to two billion. But one cause of the spiralling flood damage are the
very flood control measures that are supposed to protect them.

Dams and embankments can never be fail-proof, and when they fail, they do so
spectacularly and, sometimes, catastrophically. They provide a false sense of
security that encourages development on vulnerable flood plains.

Too often people living downstream of dams are at put at risk by agencies that
are more intent on wringing as much electricity or irrigation water as is
possible from a reservoir, rather than keeping water levels low enough to absorb
any flood waters.

The limitations of conventional flood control will become even more evident as
global warming-induced storms test dams and embankments beyond their intended
limits.

Author Jacques Leslie aptly described dams as "loaded weapons aimed down
rivers". Dams kill not only because of their operators' negligence and failure
to warn those downstream when they suddenly open their gates, but also because
they collapse (as many as 230 000 people died from a chain of dam failures in
central China in 1975). Several large dams have collapsed in Nigeria with deadly
consequences, notably, the Bagauda Dam in Kano state in 1988, the Cham Dam in
Gombe state in 1991 and the Bagoma Dam in Kaduna state in 1994.

Conventional "hard path" flood control ignores the complex workings of rivers
and coasts. Dams, embankments and the straightening and dredging of rivers
trigger profound changes in the ways in which water and sediment flows through
watersheds.

Flood damage soars when engineering projects reduce the capacity of river
channels, block natural drainage, increase the speed of floods and cause the
subsidence of deltas and coastal erosion.

In addition, "hard path" flood control often ruins the ecological health of
rivers and estuaries.

There is a better way to deal with floods - the "soft path" of flood risk
management.

Flood risk management assumes that all anti-flood infrastructure can fail and
that this failure must be planned for.

The "soft path" is also based on an understanding that some flooding is
essential for the health of riverine ecosystems.

Instead of spending billions vainly trying to eradicate floods, mankind needs to
recognise that floods will always occur and that it needs learn to live with
them as best it can.

That means taking measures to reduce their speed and size (for example,
restoring meanders and wetlands) and duration (such as improving drainage).

It means protecting valuable assets by raising houses on mounds or stilts, and
by defending built-up areas behind carefully planned and well-maintained
embankments.

It also means doing all that is possible to get out of floods' destructive paths
by having improved warning and evacuation measures in place.

Such practices are already in use in many parts of the world. In China, efforts
are under way to restore 20 000km2 of Yangtze River wetlands to act as flood
absorption areas.

Artificial flood releases are being tested in Nigeria as a means to revive
wetland ecosystems downstream from the Tiga and Challawa Gorge dams.

Alterations in water management are being proposed for Mozambique's Cahora Bassa
Dam that could reduce the impact of major floods and restore downstream
ecosystems.

In the United States, a 10-year project to reduce floods on the Napa River in
California will restore tidal marshlands, remove some buildings from the flood
zone and set back embankments to give the river room to spread.

Communities along France's longest river, the Loire, persuaded the government to
scrap a planned "flood control" dam in favour of river restoration and a new
flood warning system.

Despite a growing worldwide consensus that mitigation, not elimination, is the
only realistic flood policy, there remain powerful factions devoted to outmoded
"hard" flood control.

An iron triangle of politicians, bureaucrats and dam builders continues to
promise salvation through embankments and dams after floods strike (even when
such floods have been worsened - or caused - by existing dams and embankments).

Africa can learn from the mistakes of other nations and adopt a more flexible,
effective and sophisticated set of techniques to cope with floods.

Such an approach will provide greater protection, at less cost, than engineered
flood control, and more flexibility for adapting to future climate changes.

q Patrick McCully is an executive director of the International Rivers Network
and is the author of Before the Deluge: Coping with Floods in a Changing
Climate, which is published by the network.

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NM


                 Copyright 2007 Independent News and Media Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 154 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                                  May 7, 2001

Better flood control

SECTION: Opinion; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 566 words


THE flood waters have fortunately subsided in Kuala Lumpur, but we are
still left with the daunting task now of doing whatever is necessary to
prevent a similar flood in future.

There had been flash floods which had hit the capital city when there
were heavy thunderstorms and torrential rains. But these floods were not
as serious as the flood last month which could be considered as the worst
flood to hit the city since the devastating floods of 1971. Before 1971,
the last major flood in Kuala Lumpur happened way back in 1926.

There had been complaints from the public and other quarters of the
agony they had to go through when flash floods hit Kuala Lumpur. These
occasional flash floods were warning signs that a more severe flood could
occur if more effective measures were not taken to stop these floods.
However, the worst fears became a reality with last month's flood which
claimed three lives.

The departments and agencies responsible for controlling floods in Kuala
Lumpur must now get on with the important task of seeing that a flood of
last month's severity does not recur.

If more efficient and effective measures are not taken to do this, then
the city could be faced with a similar flood in future. What is even worse
is that a flood that is even more severe than last month's flood and that
may claim more lives may hit the city if we do not buck up and overcome
the flood problems in Kuala Lumpur once and for all.

The relevant government departments responsible for flood mitigation
should heed Deputy Prime Minister Datuk Seri Abdullah Ahmad Badawi's
advice that they should stop bickering and solve the flood problem.

The Deputy Prime Minister has called for efforts to be stepped up to
check the design, construction and maintenance of the city's drainage
system. He also attributed last month's flood to weak supervision and the
lackadaisical attitude of those involved.

Flood control obviously involves a number of departments but bickering,
finger pointing and blaming each other will not get anybody or any
department anywhere. When the buck is passed around and nobody wants to
take responsibility for a problem, the sad thing is that the problem
itself does not get solved.

In the meantime, the problem may get worse and becomes even more
difficult to solve in future, while the bickering and finger pointing
become even more ridiculous. It is a vicious cycle that needs to be
broken. Otherwise, it is like a chain that binds us to our negative
thinking which undermines effective problem-solving.

What needs to be done is for the various departments to agree on the
reasons for the floods and to accept that if an improvement or change is
required which comes under the purview of the department concerned, then
it should get cracking and get the work done. The public just wants the
flood problem solved because it affects them and makes their live
miserable. They want to avoid travelling by boats to their houses. They
would certainly welcome immediate action by the relevant government
departments to put an end to their flood woes rather than just listening
to their explanations as to why floods occur.

To effectively control the floods require the close co-operation and co-
ordination as well as dedication and hard work of all the relevant
departments. The public expects nothing less.


LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

            Copyright 2001 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad


                          FOCUS - 155 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              India Insurance News

                        April 8, 2013 Monday 6:30 AM EST

Survey Shows a Large Knowledge Gap Amongst Americans When it Comes to Coverage
for Flood

LENGTH: 617  words


New Delhi, April 8 -- As part of National Flood Safety Awareness Week and in
advance of the spring storm season, a survey commissioned by Allstate Insurance
Company shows Americans may not be as familiar with their insurance policy as
they should be, and therefore may have misconceptions that they have flood
coverage when they don't.



The survey of residents with homeowners and renters insurance from various
companies shows 44% of Americans believe they are covered for weather-related
floods. But when asked whether they actually have a flood insurance policy
through the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), only 15% admit to having
specifically purchased a supplemental flood policy.

"Results indicate that there is a knowledge gap among some Americans who believe
they are covered in the case of flood, but in actuality, are not covered," said
Mark Green , senior vice president, Allstate. "Unfortunately, we have seen this
scenario play out following a number of major disasters. Some people believe
flood is part of their standard homeowner policy and sadly, don't realize they
need a separate flood policy until it's too late."

Flood insurance is offered through the federal government's National Flood
Insurance Program and policies are sold and managed by private insurance
companies like Allstate.

Allstate reminds Americans that now is the time to prepare for floods and
consider their flood insurance needs. Floods are the #1 natural disaster in the
United States. The average flood loss cost is $30,000 for homeowners and $75,000
on commercial property according to the NFIP. Add to that the fact that floods
can happen anywhere and in all 50 states. Nearly 20% of flood claims come from
moderate to low-risk flood zones.

Besides educating yourself on flood, Allstate recommends reading through your
insurance policy and if you have questions about coverage call an insurance
agent. Here are a few other things property owners can do to help prepare,
courtesy of the Insurance Institute for Business and Home Safety:

* Keep drains, gutters and downspouts clear of debris.

* Prepare an evacuation plan with a kit that includes insurance documents,
medications and critical items in case you need to leave your home for a few
days.

* Inspect sump pumps and drains regularly to ensure proper operation.

* Have a licensed electrician raise electric components at least 12 inches above
the expected flood levels for your area.

* To prevent sewage backup, have a licensed plumber install an interior or
exterior backflow valve. Make sure your yard's grading (slope) directs water
away from the building.

* Have the installation of your furnace, water heater and other permanent
equipment modified so that they are elevated above the expected flood levels for
your area.

The tips provided here are guidelines. Please use your best judgment when
evaluating your flood preparation needs. For more ways to prepare, respond and
recover from a flood, visit the Insurance Institute for Business and Home Safety
website.

National Flood Insurance Program policies can take up to 30 days to go into
effect. Contact your local Allstate agency to talk about your flood insurance
needs.

The study was based on telephone interviews with a nationally representative
sample of 1,000 residents with homeowners or renters insurance, age 18 years and
older across the United States. Interviews were conducted May 16-17 & 19, 2012,
and the survey has a margin of error of + 3.1% at the 95% confidence interval.
The survey investigates Americans' attitudes, opinions and experiences about how
well prepared and covered they are in the case of a natural disaster striking.
The survey was conducted by FTI Consulting for Allstate.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2013 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 156 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Halifax Courier

                            November 3, 2015 Tuesday

Flood plans and warning sirens put to the test in upper Calder Valley

LENGTH: 479  words


Flood plans and warning sirens put to the test in upper Calder Valley

The test is part of the Environment Agency's Flood Action Campaign, taking place
throughout November, and the local Todmorden and Hebden Royd flood groups in the
Upper Calder Valley are taking this opportunity to raise awareness and encourage
others to get involved.

The Environment Agency uses the sirens to warn the Upper Calder Valley
communities when rivers are expected to flood. There are eight sirens in the
area with an audibility level similar to that used by emergency vehicles.

This year all the sirens will be tested together on Thursday, November 12, at
2:45pm.

Each test will last for two minutes. Residents and businesses in the towns do
not need to take any action when hearing the sirens at these times. Loud hailer
vehicles will be used to alert people to the tests, ahead of the sirens being
sounded.

Following these tests, there will be a public drop-in session at the Hebden
Bridge Town Hall from 4pm to 6pm where the Environment Agency, flood groups and
Calderdale Council will be present, to provide advice on how to register for
flood warnings and what to do in a flood.

Jon Follows, Environment Agency Flood Resilience Officer said: "It is important
that we test the sirens to check that they are working properly and can be
triggered remotely from our incident room in Leeds.

"Although no action needs to be taken during the test, people need to be aware
that if they hear the sirens at any other time, then this means that flooding is
expected.

"Flood water is dangerous, particularly in these areas where water cascading
down from the steep surrounding hills means flooding can happen very quickly and
with little warning. We would ask people not to put themselves at danger by
driving or walking through fast moving flood water. We are also encouraging
local residents and businesses to put together a flood plan to keep themselves
and their families safe."

Councillor Tim Swift, leader of Calderdale Council said: "The Council is
committed to working with other organisations like the Environment Agency on
flood prevention works.

"The siren test is a good reminder for people to make sure they are prepared if
a flood hits. There are steps you can take to protect your property, and it's
helpful to have a flood plan in place and get involved with your local flood
group. Keep updated at www.eyeoncalderdale.com and I encourage you to come along
to the drop-in session to find out more."

For the latest information on current flood warnings and the local weather
forecast, Calderdale residents can visit the Eye on Calderdale' website -
www.eyeoncalderdale.com

To find out more about the dangers of flood water, to find out if your property
is at risk of flooding and how to put together a flood plan for your home or
business, call  Floodline on 0345 988 1188 or visit www.gov.uk/flood

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NHEC


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 157 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 23, 2013 Monday

Rhode Island: Flood Insurance: Not a Cut and Dried Proposition

LENGTH: 915  words

DATELINE: Providence


American Institute of CPAs, The State of Rhode Island has issued the following
press release:

From Superstorm Sandy to disasters in Florida, California, and even Japan,
floods are the most common and widespread of all natural disasters. Many
communities have experienced a flood at some point--after spring rains, heavy
thunderstorms, hurricanes, or winter snowmelts. Surprisingly, you do not have to
live by a river, lake, or ocean to be affected; 20% to 25% of all flood claims
happen to clients living in low- to moderate-risk areas.

Examined from another angle, if your client's house is on a 100-year flood
plain, a 1% chance of flooding each year does not seem too bad. On the other
hand, if this same client has a 30-year mortgage, he or she might want to know
that the probability of damage from a 100-year flooding event during the 30-year
lifetime of the mortgage is 25%.

Ensuring that your clients have the proper insurance in place to help recoup the
costs associated with rebuilding or repairing a home or replacing personal
property not only softens the financial impact, but is also likely to accelerate
the emotional healing that often comes with such losses. However, did you know
that basic homeowner's insurance does not cover damage caused by flooding?

The intent of this article is not to make you an expert on flood insurance, but
rather to provide information and insight to develop a basic understanding of
the risk and the insurance options available, so you will be comfortable
discussing the topic with your clients.

Flood and Risk
The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) defines a flood as "a general and
temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of two or more acres of
normally dry land area, or of two or more properties (at least one of which is
your property) from an overflow of inland or tidal waters, unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, or a mudflow." The
definition also includes "the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of
a lake or similar body of water, as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels that result in
a flood."

Several homeowners insurance companies that primarily focus on high-value homes
also offer flood insurance and have slightly broader definitions.

The Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) conducts flood insurance
studies to determine a community's flood risk. FEMA uses data, such as river
flow, storm tides, hydrologic or hydraulic analyses, and rainfall, to create
flood hazard maps that outline a community's flood risk areas. The resulting
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) delineates the special hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.

Floodplains and areas subject to coastal storm surge are shown as high-risk
areas or Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs). Areas outside the SFHAs are
referred to as low- or moderate-risk and are designated as B, C, or X zones.
However, areas directly outside the SFHAs may also find considerable risk. The
location of your client's home, relative to the hazard area, will determine what
kind of flood coverage is available and its cost.

Financial Protection through NFIP
Many clients mistakenly believe that a homeowners or renters policy covers the
damage to their home and personal belongings caused by a flood. This is a common
misconception that can have devastating consequences. Most homeowners or renters
policies specifically exclude damage caused by floods, and most private insurers
will not write flood policies, saying that they are too risky. As a result, the
federal government offers flood coverage through the NFIP, run by FEMA.

Another common misconception you may hear is, "I can't buy flood insurance
because I don't live in a flood plain." Almost everyone can purchase flood
insurance, regardless of whether they live in a high-risk flood zone. The NFIP
offers flood coverage through Write Your Own (WYO) insurance companies, as well
as the NFIP servicing agent. Your client's insurance adviser likely has a
relationship with a WYO company or one of the few private homeowners companies
that now offer flood insurance. The adviser should be able to facilitate
placement of the coverage.

Because there is typically a 30-day waiting period before any new or modified
flood insurance policy can go into effect, planners should counsel clients not
to wait until a storm is barreling up the coast to try to purchase coverage.
Exceptions to the 30-day waiting period are limited to insurance required in
connection with a loan, insurance purchased within 13 months of a map revision
(1-day waiting period), and wildfire.

The average flood insurance policy costs $600 per year. Premiums vary depending
on the amount and type of coverage being purchased, location and flood zone, and
the design and age of your client's home. Preferred Risk Policy (PRP) premiums
are the lowest premiums available through the NFIP, with building and contents
coverage each starting at $129 per year.

NFIP Flood Policies
This section provides an overview of the two types of NFIP flood policies,
preferred and high risk, what they cover, and their limitations.

Preferred Risk Policy
The NFIP PRP offers multiple coverage combinations for buildings and contents
(or contents-only for renters) and for eligible properties that are located in
moderate- to low-risk flood areas.

For further information please visit: http://www.aicpa.org/

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 158 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                             Kashmir Times (India)

                             July 21, 2015 Tuesday

Flood forecast system yet to be set up in J&K

LENGTH: 446 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR


SRINAGAR, July 21 -- Although the repeatedly looming flood threats over the
state of Jammu and Kashmir have made it drastically vulnerable to floods yet the
administration has not pitched for the flood monitoring system for the state.

The Central Water Commission (CWC) India includes flood forecast mechanism for
almost every flood prone place in India and provides with predictions regarding
the floods at any particular state. However the same lacks any flood monitoring
mechanism for the state of J&K.

The monitoring system includes the mechanism of early detection of flood
threats. Moreover, CWC makes it possible to keep a track over the flood scenario
and any future threats.

CWC consequently issues advisories to the most vulnerable places in India to get
them alerted in dealing with the flood like situation.

However, despite repeated efforts CWC has not included flood monitoring system
for Jammu and Kashmir.

Director CWC V D Roy revealed that CWC was in a process to set up the forecast
system for J&K. But so far nothing has been done about the same

"CWC does not have any flood forecast system for the state of J&K. though we are
in the process to set up the same since valley has become more flood prone since
last year," V D Roy said.

The forecast system includes a monitoring set up which gets future scenario
detected.

After the devastating floods in September last year flood threats have loomed
over valley several times. The incessant downpour has resulted in flood alerts
across the state this year too.

Although traders federations in valley had pressed the demand for flood
monitoring mechanism for valley yet nothing has been done.

Sheikh Aashiq president Kashmir Chamber of Commerce and Industry said that
traders' bodies had time and again forwarded the demand for the implementation
of flood monitoring system for valley. But the administration was yet to start
an initiative.

"The admin had assured us that the monitoring system shall be implemented by the
month of June this year. But nothing has been done so far. We fail to understand
why it is being delayed," Sheikh Aashiq said.

He added, "Just a day's downpour and valley is under flood threat. Since
September deluge our state has become highly vulnerable to floods owing to heavy
rainfall. We need a proper monitoring system which could at least alert valley
about any flood threat. In several meetings we have pressed this demand but as
of now no initiatives have been taken by the central government."

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Kashmir Times. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2015 Kashmir Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 159 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                             The News International

                             July 28, 2015 Tuesday

Flood claims 12 more lives

SECTION: Vol. 25 No. 152

LENGTH: 1080  words


At least 12 people were killed as heavy monsoon rains swept through parts of
Sindh, Punjab and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa on Monday, making life miserable for
citizens while a red alert was issued in Layyah and Taunsa.

Army personnel were called out in Larkana and Kashmore in the wake of the
expected heavy flood in the River Indus.In Lashari village of Khairpur, the roof
of a house caved in under the pressure of the heavy downpour, killing three
people, including two children. In the Sekha-Kot area of Malakand Agency, a
person was killed and a child sustained injuries when the roof of their house
collapsed on them due to torrential rain.

Rains also caused 247 feeders of SEPCO - the main electricity distributor in
Sukkur to trip, effectively disrupting electricity supply to 10 districts of
interior Sindh.Flood-affected people in Sukkur say they are still awaiting
relief from the government.

In Hyderabad, overnight rain inundated several areas, with some areas drowning
under several feet of rainwater.The River Indus is likely to attain high flood
ranging between 550,000 to 600,000 cusecs at Kalabagh during the next 30 hours.

According to the Flood Forecasting Division Lahore, this flood water level has
been forecast from 1400 hours Monday to 1400 hours Tuesday, the Radio Pakistan
reported. The river Indus at Chashma is also likely to attain a similar
high-level flood from Tuesday to Wednesday.

Departments concerned and the people living in the low lying areas along River
Indus have been advised to take all possible precautionary measures to meet any
eventuality.The River Indus is in a high flood at Guddu, in medium flood at
Tarbela, Kalabagh, Chashma and Taunsa while in low flood at Sukkur.

The Flood Forecasting Division, Lahore, told the Radio Pakistan that 513,600
cusecs of floodwater was flowing at Guddu in River Indus on Monday morning.The
River Kabul is in medium flood at Nowshera, while River Jhelum is in medium
flood at Mangla. All other rivers and nullahs are flowing normally.

Meanwhile, floodwaters continued to cause destruction in several parts of
Rajanpur, where more than 60 villages have been inundated and land routes to
several areas cut off.Local administration officials say they are carrying out
aid and relief efforts.

Meanwhile, the death toll from the flash floods has risen to 36 in the Chitral
Valley, where floodwaters have swept away several houses, bridges and
powerhouses.According to the ISPR, 98 people have been rescued including 48
stranded tourists who were airlifted to Peshawar by a C-130 aircraft of Pakistan
Air Force.

In Gilgit-Baltistan, 2,800 tents have been placed with the district
administration and out of this, 243 tents have so far been distributed among the
victims.At least 14 persons died and a dozen others were injured in various
incidents due to the recent flash floods in various parts of Azad Jammu and
Kashmir, official sources said on Monday.

The sources told Media that as many as 25 houses were damaged completely and 78
partially following the heavy rainfall and floods in the seasonal nullahs.

Most of the casualties in the recent calamity were reported from the Bhimbher
district, whereas six persons of a family aboard a car, were drowned during an
abortive attempt to cross a flooded seasonal Nullah near Kasgumma.

At least 43 houses, 6 mosques and one hotel have been completely destroyed in
Skardu, Baltistan and Ghanche due to monsoon rain and flood in rivers.And in
southern Punjab, the Pak Army has rescued about 9,000 people from the flood-hit
areas and shifted them to safer places.

Multan Corps soldiers continued their relief operations in the flood-hit areas
of south Punjab, rescuing and shifting 1,025 persons to safer places besides
extending free medical services, medicines and ration to affected people.

According to a release issued by ISPR, Multan, on Monday, the army also set up
free medical camps in different flood-affected parts of the southern Punjab
where they checked 528 patients and provided medicines to them while 10 ration
bags were also distributed among the flood-hit families.

The troops also provided medical facilities and distributed ration and tents
among the flood victims at several places in district Layyah.

Free medical camps were also set up in Muzaffargarh, Kot Addu, Alipur and Kot
Mithan.The army is also assisting civil administration for evacuation of people
from the flood-affected areas of Sadiqabad, Rahim Yar Khan, Khanpur and
Liaqatpur.

Authorities on Monday issued flood warnings to different areas due to the
high-level flood in River Sindh. The authorities concerned have been instructed
to have people evacuated from localities on and near riverbanks.

At least 34 people were killed and one missing in rain and flood related
incidents in different parts of Khyber Pakthunkhwa.According to a spokesman of
the PDMA, 32 people were killed in Chitral and two in Kohat by the flash floods
and rain related mishaps, raising the death toll to 34 in the province.

Seven persons were also injured in Kohat while one person was still missing due
to the floods in Bhudnai Nullah Peshawar on July 26.Torrential rains resulting
in flash flood on Monday destroyed dozens of houses, roads, crops and households
in all over Hazara Division area.

The continuous monsoon rain, landsliding and floods in most parts of hilly areas
in district Abbottabad and Manshera cut off the land communication among
different localities.Road links in Galyat, Nathaigali, Oghi, Baffa, Ghai,
Havelian, Kaghan and Sirran valley have been badly damaged and in some parts
communication links were totally disrupted.

The Havelian to Rajoia Road was washed away at several places whenover flooded
river Dor destroyed the safety wall of Rajoia Road.In district Haripur, the
administration has opened the gates of small dams including Kharbara, Kabul,
Mand and Chatri when they were filled to their capacity.

Punjab Chief Minister Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif on Monday reviewed the flood
situation, protective arrangements and relief activities in south Punjab and
issued necessary instructions to Provincial Cabinet Committee on Flood and
administrations concerned in this regard.

He said that administrations of concerned districts should complete all
protective arrangements in time to cope with the flood.He said that timely
evacuation of people of the areas where there was a threat of flood should be
ensured and all-out measures should be taken for the protection of life and
property of citizens.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 The News International
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 160 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Business Recorder

                             July 14, 2016 Thursday

Government prepares to avoid monsoon losses

BYLINE: ABDUL RASHEED AZAD

SECTION: Vol. 52 No. 194

LENGTH: 895  words


The government has directed all the departments concerned to take appropriate
steps to avert maximum life and property losses during monsoon season as 10-20
percent above the normal rains are expected. Federal Minister for Water and
Power Khawaja Muhammad Asif said this while chairing the meeting of National
Flood Commission (NFC) on Wednesday held to review arrangements made to tackle
any flood situation in current monsoon season.

The meeting was briefed about measures taken by different organisations to
mitigate the damages of floods. The meeting was told that National Disaster
Management Authority (NDMA) in collaboration with Provincial Disaster Management
Authorities (PDMAs) has finalised all necessary arrangements for tackling
expected flooding situation. The NDMA representatives informed the participants
that in case of serious situation, Pakistan Army was also ready for the rescue
and relief efforts.

The minister directed all organisations to remain alert to meet any untoward
situation. The meeting was informed that due to climate change and its
particular impacts on Pakistan in recent years, the frequency and intensity of
floods and corresponding damages increased manifold, making it imperative to
have an integrated and innovative approach to flood protection.

The flood plan maps, prepared by consultants, ie NESPAK have already been
distributed to the provinces wherein the level and extent of inundation are
clearly marked with respect to various scenarios of water flows in rivers. It
was stressed that now the onus lied with Provincial and Federal Line Agencies to
cope with any flood situation arising during the 2016 Monsoon season.

The meeting was briefed by the Chairman Federal Flood Commission on different
aspects of the plan. He informed that floods were the most devastating natural
disasters and were generally caused by heavy concentrated rainfall in the
catchments during the Monsoon Season (July through September). During the past
six years, overall damages due to floods are almost equal to total flood damages
in preceding 60 years.

Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) of Mangla and Tarbela Dam were also
presented to inform all stakeholders about their operation during the flood
season. Pakistan Meteorological Department (PMD) presented the forecast for 2016
Monsoon Season. The minister instructed the PMD to improve their weather
forecast system to give ample time to deal with any emergency situation.

The preparedness of NDMA/PDMAs was also discussed in detail with regard to
relief and rescue preparations. The minister directed them to remain vigilant
throughout the flood season and further improve upon the already made
preparations. In view of forecast of rains and expected urban flooding,
provinces were asked to be vigilant and ready. Secondly, encroachments
restricting free flow of rivers which may result in floods were discussed and
relevant authorities were asked to remove these bottlenecks. Additionally,
desilting and removal of encroachments of Nullahs passing through urban areas
including Rawalpindi, Multan, Sialkot, Lahore and Faisalabad was stressed.

The meeting was informed that floods were causing serious life and property
losses in Kacha areas and authorities kept warning the people living there but
they ignored warnings so there is a need to resolve this situation so that life
and property losses could be minimised.

On this occasion, FFC shared Annual Flood Report 2015 according to which there
is a lack of effective co-ordination among institutions involved in flood
management, caused in part by limitations of technical capacities such as
dissemination of early warning, disaster preparedness measures, emergency
response and structural measures for flood mitigation.

The report said that the local communities do not have enough disaster
preparedness information and there is lack of general awareness for raising,
sensitisation and education of the masses regularly affected by floods, focusing
especially on populations residing within the active flood plains along major
and other rivers. Floods in Pakistan are generally caused by the heavy
concentrated rainfall, which are sometimes augmented by snowmelt due to high
temperature and generate exceptionally high flood flows in major and other
rivers flowing across the country.

In view of increasing flood damages, the Ministry of Water And Power through
Federal Flood Commission (FFC) formulated 10 years plan through World Bank
funding. Internationally renowned experts in water resources and flood
management, "The Deltares" of Netherlands along with (NESPAK) were engaged in
this regard.

According to a report of the Federal Flood Commission, the country has endured a
cumulative financial loss of over $38.165 billion during the past 68 years.
Around 12,177 people lost their lives, some 197,230 villages damaged/destroyed
and an area more than 616,598 Sq.km was affected due to 23 major flood events.
The upcoming monsoon is predicted to possibly bring torrential floods in the
mountains of Suleiman range. In 2010, gushing flows of Suleiman range abruptly
bloated the flow of Indus deriding all predictions of the volume of flood in
Sindh. The province was set to receive a flood of 800,000 cusecs which
eventually swelled to over 1.1 million cusecs causing an unprecedented
devastation in vast areas on the right bank of Indus.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 Business Recorder
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 161 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 19, 2015 Thursday

Texas: TDI Reminds Consumers: Flood Coverage is Not Part of a Standard
Homeowners Policy

LENGTH: 263  words

DATELINE: Austin


Department of Library Developments, The State of Texas has issued the following
news release:

Hail storms and hurricanes get the headlines, but flash floods are the most
common natural disasters. And to further complicate the matter, most homeowners
insurance policies do not provide flood coverage. This is Flood Safety Awareness
Week. Now is a good time to review your property's flood risk, your current
insurance coverage, and consider whether a separate flood policy should be part
of your home protection plan.

Coverage for damage caused by rising waters must be obtained from the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).  "Even if you're not in a designated flood area,
it makes sense to at least consider a flood policy," said Insurance Commissioner
David Mattax. "The cost of a flood policy depends on where you live. But if it's
a low-risk area, the policy can be quite affordable."

People typically think of floods caused when a lake or river overflows, but
flooding can happen almost anywhere. Spring storms dropping locally heavy rain
in a short amount of time can quickly cause flash flood conditions. If you do
live in a high-risk area, your lender may require you to have flood insurance.

The NFIP is administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). A
good place to start if you are considering flood insurance is a conversation
with your regular insurance agent. Flood policies may cover your house, your
personal property, or both.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 162 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                         Morris Daily Herald (Illinois)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            September 6, 2015 Sunday

Illinois Valley Flood Resiliency Alliance gets proactive addressing future
floods

BYLINE: Heidi Litchfield, Morris Daily Herald, Ill.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1177 words


Sept. 06--MARSEILLES -- As the Illinois River rose and water flowed over the
Marseilles Dam in 2013, barges slammed into the levee along River Street,
causing a breech and the evacuation of hundreds of residents.

Two of those Marseilles residents, Jim Burns and his wife Karen, bought a home
in the early 1980s just two blocks from the river. They never thought they would
see the river flow through their home. But it did: Burns said the couple had 14
inches of water through their first floor, and river sediment filled the garage
and driveway.

"In all my years in Marseilles -- and I was 62 when the flood happened -- I've
never seen these homes flooded," he said. "I was born and raised just four
blocks away from this house."

Like many of the residents, the Burns family didn't have flood insurance. They
didn't know they needed it.

"For years, this was not considered a flood plain area. A few years ago that
changed and we could have purchased flood insurance, but no one told us," he
said. "Of the 100 homes damaged, only three had flood insurance."

To help prevent homes like the Burns' being destroyed by future floods, as well
as businesses and infrastructure, state Sen. Sue Rezin, R-Morris, and officials
from several communities along the Illinois and Fox rivers including Ottawa and
Marseilles, joined forces and created the Illinois Valley Flood Resiliency
Alliance.

The IVFRA is competing for a $1 billion federal grant.

Hundred-year flood

Ottawa building and zoning official Michael Sutfin understands what Marseilles
and the Burns family have had to deal with.

Ottawa has faced three "hundred-year" floods in seven years.

"I think the name is misleading, and people often question why a hundred-year
flood is happening more often. We had it in 2007, 2008 and 2013," Sutfin said.
"The name has changed to a 1 percent event, which is more accurate."

The name change is because there is a 1 percent chance of it happening in any
given year. Locally, along the Illinois and Fox rivers, it has happened several
times in recent years.

Sutfin also noted floods are the only weather event measured by rarity versus
severity. Tornadoes and hurricanes, for instances, are measured by scales people
recognize and in a manner where they can understand the damage caused.

The Enhanced Fujita scale (EF-Scale) rates the strength of tornadoes in the
United States and Canada based on the damage they cause. The Saffir-Simpson Wind
Scale is a categorical classification of hurricanes based on their wind speed.

In the past eight years, Sutfin and the city of Ottawa have been working on a
flood plan to help eliminate the loss of life and minimize damage to homes and
businesses.

Sutfin became certified as a flood manager for the city and got to work adopting
and enforcing higher standards for land that falls inside the flood plain.

In the floods in 2007 and 2008, there was significant damage to homes and
businesses. By 2013 when the all-time record event hit, formerly referred to as
a 500-year-flood, there was no infrastructure loss and no life loss.

"The flood was 13 feet higher then we've ever seen," Sutfin said. "We lost some
picnic tables and docks."

As Rezin toured the areas affected by the 2013 flood, she questioned why
Marseilles had so much damage and Ottawa did not. Rezin's district includes
about 100 miles of the Illinois River and 30 miles of the Fox River, which meet
at Ottawa.

"I saw firsthand in Ottawa what being proactive looks like," Rezin said.

Becoming proactive

As the IVFRA competes for the $1 billion federal grant, Sutfin said the group is
in phase two of the grant competition, which is sponsored by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development. While several other areas in Illinois are in
competition for the grant, it is the IVFRA the state has chosen to partner with.

Rezin said the grant money, if received, will be used within the IVFRA area to
help participating municipalities become more flood ready.

"It's not a question of if we flood again, it's a question of when," Rezin said.

The first goal was to have every community in the region have a certified flood
plain manager so all the municipalities could learn from one another and start
to implement strategies to prevent future flood damage.

Rezin said there are now 24 certified managers and the alliance is still working
toward getting one in every community. She said the more that join the IVFRA,
the better communication is and the better chance to avoid loss of life and
structures.

Morris does not have a flood manager, but representatives have been attending
alliance meetings.

"I have been in discussion with the city attorney to see if we need an ordinance
to create the flood manager title," Morris Mayor Richard Kopczick said.
"Flooding is currently addressed by the Building and Zoning officer."

Kopczick said while the flooding in Morris in 2013 wasn't nearly as bad as what
Marseilles faced, the city has taken action on flood mitigation.

Grundy County was declared a major disaster area after the April 18, 2013, flood
caused the Illinois River and area creeks to flood into city streets, filling
some people's homes with water and leaving many stranded.

In 24 hours Morris received 3.88 inches of rain. Continued rain pushed the total
over 4 inches. The river crested at 24.91 feet, surpassing the 2008 record of
24.8 feet.

Emergency responders made about 75 rescues, many on Cemetery Road in Morris, the
first day of the flooding. In addition, the historical aqueduct carrying the I&M
Canal over Nettle Creek collapsed. No one was killed or severely injured from
the flooding.

Morris Hospital had to evacuate 47 patients during the flood, based on
recommendations from the Emergency Management Agency, which was worried the
water would continue to rise.

"The city, as well as the Morris Hospital, have taken mitigation efforts to make
sure the hospital doesn't flood again," Kopczick said.

Burns said it makes sense to have the communities come together in the alliance.

"I think any time you get a bunch of heads together, it's a good thing," he
said.

Burns said the combined knowledge of a great group makes him feel better that
there will be solutions to prevent his newly rebuilt home from becoming part of
the river again.

Education is key to the success of the alliance, Sutfin said.

"We want every part of this coalition to adopt higher standards. It's much
easier to do it collectively," he said.

It's also important when addressing the issues that municipalities realize what
one does can affect another town up or down river, Sutfin said.

If all municipalities in the region use the same regulations such as the flood
plain compensatory storage regulation -- which would mean that for every one
shovel full of fill you place in the flood plain, you take 1.5 shovel full of
fill out -- they can be sure that the flood mitigation they are planning won't
be negatively affected by their neighbors.

___ (c)2015 the Morris Daily Herald (Morris, Ill.) Visit the Morris Daily Herald
(Morris, Ill.) at www.morrisdailyherald.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20150906-1MO-Illinois-Valley-Flood-Resiliency-Alliance-gets-proactive-addressing
-future-floods-0906-20150906

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1MO


                       Copyright 2015 Morris Daily Herald


                          FOCUS - 163 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                             July 23, 1993, Friday

MAKING FLOOD INSURANCE WORK

BYLINE: ROBERT E. HOYT

SECTION: EDITORIAL PAGES, Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 732 words


In the wake of the worst flooding in 30 years, Midwest homeowners and businesses
will learn that most of their losses will not be covered by private insurers.
Standard homeowners and business property insurance policies generally exclude
coverage for losses caused by floods.

Certainly many of the water-soaked homeowners of the Mississippi Valley would be
happier right now if they had insurance coverage for their considerable losses.
Does the absence of coverage for flood damage in standard insurance policies
suggest that the private insurance market has failed? No, it oes not.

Private insurers have long recognized that buildings exposed to damage from a
flood are difficult to insure. Homes, factories and offices in flood-prone areas
essentially are not independent of each other since they are all affected when a
flood occurs and are subject to catastrophic loss. This results in premiums that
would be relatively high in areas that are likely to flood.

Moreover, since most homeowners and businesses are not located in areas subject
to flooding, only those in flood-prone regions are likely to want to buy
coverage. From the insurance company's standpoint, this results in a relatively
small number of potential customers and limits the extent to which losses can be
pooled.

Nevertheless, insurers can still estimate the probability of flood losses fairly
accurately and, therefore, could calculate an actuarially fair premium to charge
for flood coverage. The problem is that the fair premium for homeowners and
businesses located in flood-prone areas would be higher than most individuals
are willing to pay.

As a solution to the lack of coverage in the private market, the federal
government offers insurance coverage through the Federal Flood Insurance
Program. This coverage is provided at subsidized rates to those who live in
flood areas. The average premium for flood insurance is about $ 320 a year, more
than most people pay for a standard homeowners policy.

It's important to understand that over the typical 30-year home mortgage, homes
located in a flood plain are 26 times more likely to suffer a flood loss than
loss from a fire. In spite of this, only 17 percent of the homes and buildings
located in flood zones, and which are eligible for coverage, are actually
insured against a flood. So why do so few people buy flood insurance? Because
government policies effectively discourage it.

Consider the following two actions by the government in the recent disaster.
First, President Clinton, while touring the flood-ravaged Midwest, said he would
make available $ 397 million in disaster funds and would seek another $ 2.5
billion from Congress. Whey would anyone spend money on flood insurance if the
federal government will provide the needed funds after a disaster?

Second, the Department of Agriculture sells flood insurance to farmers and has a
disaster relief fund for those without insurance. Secretary of Agriculture Mike
Espy announced an easing of eligibility requirements for certain federal
programs that would assist farmers who sustained flood damage. Why should a
farmer spend money on crop insurance if the federal government will supply the
needed cash after a disaster?

Farmers know that bottom land - that is, land along rivers and streams - is some
of the most fertile farmland available. Does it make economic sense for the
federal taxpayer to bail out flooded farmers in a bad year when the farmer reaps
all the benefits in the good years?

The private insurance market has not failed; it has been displaced by the
federal government. The advantage of a private insurance market charging
actuarially fair rates is that individuals are forced to focus on the probable
losses associated with their decisions. As a result, decisions are made - and
resources are allocated - more efficiently.

For example, farmers are forced to decide if it's economically sensible to plant
corn and soybeans on ground that floods frequently. Homeowners and businesses
must ask themselves if it's smart to locate in a flood-prone area. Voters are
forced to consider whether it makes sense for their community to spend more of
its limited resources on flood prevention projects.

As is often the case, a well-meaning government has stepped in to fix perceived
problems with a private market. Economic efficiency has been the victim.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

EDITOR-NOTE: Robert E. Hoyt is a professor of insurance at the University of

                  Copyright 1993 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 164 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Managing Flood Waters in China

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 423 words


This summer's floods on the Yangtze River in central China and the Songhua River
in northeastern China have already left nearly 14 million people homeless,
indirectly affected 240 million more and damaged more than 50 million acres of
land. The flood season is not yet over, but the death toll, estimated at 2,000
by Chinese authorities, shows that flood management has improved since the 1954
floods that claimed 30,000 lives. In the past four decades, the Government has
built extensive dike systems and created emergency overflow areas to divert
water from densely populated urban centers.

There is now growing concern that maintenance of these flood management systems,
particularly in the Yangtze region, may be neglected as the Government pours
billions of dollars into the ill-conceived Three Gorges Dam. When completed in
2009, the dam will create a lake nearly 400 miles long, displace 1.2 million
people and inundate important archaeological sites. Chinese authorities have
long cited flood control on the Yangtze as a primary justification for the
project. The latest floods, they say, prove the need for the dam. But analysts
with the International Rivers Network, a conservation group, argue that much of
the flooding has taken place in the lower reaches of the Yangtze, fed by
tributaries whose waters would not be controlled by the Three Gorges project.

In fact, the presence of the dam might actually result in worse flooding
disasters in the future. By creating a false sense of security, the dam could
attract more development to flood-prone areas and lead to reduced investment in
downstream dikes. If the dam failed to control a large flood, the fatalities and
economic loss could be worse than if it had not been built.

After the Mississippi floods in 1993, the United States Government rethought its
flood-management strategies. Hydrologists and geologists now consider large dams
only marginally useful in flood control because the reservoirs are typically
kept high for power generation, with only limited capacity to accommodate
surging flood waters. Instead, many argue that restricting development on
flood-susceptible land, carving out more overflow areas for flood waters and
making buildings flood-resistant are smarter ways to protect lives and property.

The Chinese have been battling floods on the Yangtze for centuries. A single
mammoth dam would probably not have averted the recent disaster. But its
construction could siphon resources from more effective flood management
strategies.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 165 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   October 4, 1993, MONDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

HOW TULSA BATTLED THE RIVER, AND WON

BYLINE: William Allen Post-Dispatch Science Writer

SECTION: WAR PAGE; Pg. 11B

LENGTH: 1867 words


AFTER DECADES OF devastating floods in Tulsa, Okla., city officials decided in
1984 that the time had come for a change in flood-control policy.

But first, they had to stare down federal officials.

It happened after a major flood that year, which killed 14 people and caused $
180 million in damage to 7,000 homes and businesses.

"The federal government was getting repair money back in the hands of people
before we even got our own plan going," said Ronald Flanagan, a land-use planner
who worked with Tulsa officials.

Because the city wanted to avoid future flood damage, local officials put a
moratorium on repairing and rebuilding in the flood plain of the Arkansas River.

Since then, they have cleared 300 houses and more than 200 mobile homes from the
flood plain. They built a system of open space greenbelts, channels, sewers and
stormwater detention basins that store water during floods and release it
slowly.

Tulsa was out of range of the Great Flood of 1993, but for years the
flood-control system has handled heavy rain with only minor damage - where major
damage would have occurred previously, city officials say.

"If it's going to be done, it has to be done on the local level," Flanagan said
last week at a three-day conference here of flood-plain and wetland experts.
"Rather than continuing to respond to the pain and cost of flooding, we must use
what little funding we have wisely and remove the problem from the flood plain."

That sentiment brought strong applause from about 300 people who attended the
conference at the Henry VIII Hotel. It was sponsored by the Association of State
Wetland Managers and the Association of State Flood Plain Managers.

Flanagan and many other experts hammered home the point that improved
flood-protection policy must come from the grass roots, not state or federal
governments.

But the Tulsa example is a rare one. So the experts also lamented what they
viewed as a rapid return to the flood plain by residents throughout the Upper
Mississippi River Basin and a rush by the Corps of Engineers to rebuild levees
without considering alternatives.

"The gun has gone off, the gates are open, and guess whose horse is out front -
the Army Corps of Engineers," said Connie Hunt of the World Wildlife Fund, in
Washington.

The corps was prepared with plans, legislative support and money to go into
action to rebuild levees damaged by this year's flood.

Flood-plain and wetlands experts don't discount the importance of levees and
other structural methods to protect cities from floods. But they believe that
these attempts to constrain rivers have destroyed natural flood-carrying
capacity, making floods worse.

And they feel that, once again, in the aftermath of a major flood, government
officials at all levels are ignoring or are ignorant of nonstructural
flood-protection options. These options include moving people and buildings out
of flood plains and restoring wetlands and other natural sponges for floodwater.

But, they ask, is anybody listening?  Hopeful Signs

Despite that left-in-the-dust feeling, the flood-plain experts point to hopeful
signs that alternatives to rebuilding levees are making at least some headway.
Among the signs:

About 60 towns in nine states in the Mississippi and Missouri valleys are
considering relocating at least some of their buildings out of the flood plain.
Twenty of those are in Illinois and 17 in Missouri.

The administration of President Bill Clinton will soon convene a scientific
panel to gather information on alternatives to levees.

The governors of Wisconsin and Minnesota have called for the federal government
to expand wetlands rather than rebuild every levee. The governors said a 5
percent increase in the two states' wetlands would have reduced the 1993
flooding by 20 percent.  Defining a Mission

Restoring part of the natural river is important for more than flood control,
biologists at the meeting said. Replacing wetlands, backwaters and other natural
safety valves provides greater habitat for fish and wildlife and may improve
chances for finding new medicines in river plants and animals.

"The restoration technology is available and can come into play very rapidly,"
said Don Hey, an independent scientist who runs a wetlands restoration project
along the Des Plaines River near Chicago.

Having the scientific knowledge to make changes doesn't mean they will happen,
cautioned Larry Larson, director of the Association of State Flood Plain
Managers, in Madison, Wis.

"People need to understand the river as a system and realize that what they do
affects others," Larson said. "This is really a social problem, not an
engineering problem."

Many experts worry that landowners feel they have no option other than to
rebuild damaged levees. Others say that rebuilding in the flood plain ultimately
costs more. Still others say they aren't advocating taking land away from
farmers.

"We're not debating whether to restore wetlands or rebuild levees," said Jon
Kusler, director of the wetland managers group. "The question is: What should be
the mix, and in what circumstances?"

Kusler laments that of the more than $ 6 billion in federal money going toward
flood relief, less than $ 100 million is targeted to restoring the natural river
or moving people out of the flood plain.   "And there's no great prospect that
Congress is going to be funding any significant restoration programs," Kusler
said.

Nor has any scientific study been done that identifies sites for restoring
wetlands.

Part of the problem is that government agencies have an "extremely narrow focus"
that keeps them from considering restoration, Kusler said.

"Many people here today say the time is right and we need to move forward," he
said. "But we don't have a common, single, easy-to-understand mission."

The two associations plan to draw up a list of goals and announce them in
Washington in the next few weeks.

The White House "badly needs" the recommendations and "has the will to put them
into place," said William Stelle, of the White House Office of Environmental
Policy.  Local Focus

Several speakers at the meeting dubbed Flanagan "the Rev. Flanagan" and "Father
Flanagan," owing to his fervent description of Tulsa's program to lessen flood
damage. He described how local officials "dragged the federal government kicking
and screaming" into the program.

The 1993 flood provided the same opportunity for other towns, he said.

"We need to have this kind of conference for communities early on, so they can
hear the guys who really know what's going on instead of hearing it filtered
down through 15 layers of bureaucrats," Flanagan said.

Flanagan recalled an argument he had after the 1984 flood with a federal
official. He asked the official why the city couldn't get money to relocate
residents out of the flood plain. The official said he couldn't advocate
spending any more money than the federal government already was spending on
rebuilding structures.

"He said it was his job to protect the federal treasury," Flanagan said. "I told
him he was reinvesting in disaster."

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Photo by Kevin Manning/Post-Dispatch - Philip Williams, an
engineer specializing in flood plain restoration, photographing a break in a
Chesterfield levee. Williams was in St. Louis last week to speak at a conference
of wetland experts.

                  Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 166 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                            April 4, 2012 Wednesday

Take steps to find effective long-term solutions

BYLINE: Ratna Devi Nadarajan

SECTION: Pg. 18

LENGTH: 516 words


LAST Friday, many Klang residents woke up to what was deemed the worst flooding
episode in its history. It led to demonstrations at housing developers' offices
and anger directed at the Klang Municipal Council for a better drainage system
and rubbish collection services.

The Monday morning flash floods in Kuala Lumpur caused a sense of utter
hopelessness to an already hopeless traffic condition on many highways leading
to the city.

The whole of Klang and the Klang Valley faces serious flood problems. We do not
see any long-term plan to curb flash floods in various parts in the country, for
example in states like Kedah, Kelantan, Sabah and Sarawak, towns and cities like
Muar, Kota Tinggi, Kuala Lumpur and other parts of the Klang Valley.

In smaller countries like Singapore, the development of drainage infrastructure
in the last 30 years has reduced flood-prone areas from 3,200ha in the 1970s to
124ha in 2008. The Public Utilities Board will reduce it to less than 66ha
through the development and improvement of drainage infrastructure in Singapore,
the completion of the Marina Barrage, and other flood alleviation projects.

Our National Climate Change Policy does not mention any flood mitigation or
adaptation-related policies, what more on strategy. We need environmentally
sustainable urbanisation policies and strategies.

How many are flood-prone or prone to flooding because of changes to weather
patterns? Do we know how many, where and what kind of structural measures are
needed to control floods? What about the non-structural measures? Do we have
adequate and timely flood forecasting and warning systems in areas known to be
flood-prone?

On a broader scale, what was the outcome of the Natural Water Resources Study?
Which river basins need to be managed for water resources and flood-mitigation
measures?

Do we have a nationwide network of hydrological and flood data collection
stations? Do we have agencies collecting important information on the impact of
floods socially, economically and environmentally?

Does each state have specific flood mitigation goals like Singapore?

More than RM1 billion was spent on government aid alone during the Johor
disaster in 2006. This does not include loss of properties and business.

We do not need multibillion projects while floods wash away billions more. We
need investment in and maintenance of an effective flood-mitigation
infrastructure -- now.

Clogged monsoon drains in urban areas like Klang and Kuala Lumpur are common.

Mattresses, chairs, car bumpers and tyres are found in monsoon drains and
rivers. People who dump rubbish have a serious attitude problem.

Industry should work on less packaging requirements for consumer products and
practice a take-back policy or comply with the polluters-pay principle.

Those who practise recycling should be rewarded while awareness and education
activities are undertaken to ensure environmentally sustainable waste management
among commercial and domestic waste generators.

Ratna Devi Nadarajan, chief executive officer, Malaysian Association of
Standards Users, Petaling Jaya, Selangor

( END )

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2012 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 167 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     June 3, 1987, Wednesday, City Edition

Only flood insurance covers flood damage

BYLINE: WILLIAM FOX

SECTION: TAMPA; HURRICANE: A GUIDE TO WEATHERING THE STORM; Pg. 14E

LENGTH: 708 words



The start of hurricane season is a good time to review insurance    coverage,
experts say.

     Many people mistakenly believe their homeowner policy covers flood
damage, says Robert Ross Jr. of the Florida Association of Insurance    Agents.

     Homeowner policies generally cover damage from wind but not floods,    and
most of a hurricane's destruction is caused by storm surge, the    flood tides
that can be 10 feet or more above normal. Separate flood    insurance policies
must be purchased to cover that hazard.

     All of the Suncoast is eligible for flood insurance, state    officials
say, but another misconception is that you must live in a    designated
flood-hazard zone to buy flood coverage.

     Provided that your community participates in the national program,    l l
"you may purchase flood insurance no matter where ... your property    is," says
David L. Cobb of the Federal Insurance Administration, the    agency that runs
the national flood insurance program.

     "About one-third of the losses paid on flood insurance are in    areas not
declared special flood-hazard zones," Ross adds.

     Heavy rains can cause flooding in areas far from coastal hurricane
hazard zones, and usually only flood insurance will cover losses from    such
storms.

     Many people fail to get coverage for their belongings, Ross says.    "A lot
of people think only in terms of structural coverage - building    damage.
Anytime you've got flood damage, you've got damage to the    contents."

     Flood insurance can be obtained for businesses and condominiums as    well
as homes, Cobb says. A policy can cover the building alone, or    just the
contents or both. Renters also can buy coverage for their    possessions.

        The only requirement is that the community must participate in    the
flood insurance program, which requires that codes be adopted to    regulate
building in flood-hazard zones.

     For many years, flood insurance was written solely by the federal
government, but in 1983 private companies also began issuing policies.

 The program is still backed and administered by the government, which    sets
the rates on a national basis. The average policy carries an    annual premium
of $ 245 for more than $ 60,000 of coverage, Cobb says.

     The federal government requires banks and other companies issuing
mortgages in flood hazard zones to make buyers get flood coverage. If    it
weren't for that requirement, many people would not have coverage,    says
Nelson F. Green, vice president for underwriting at Poe &    Associates in
Tampa.

        The experts offer several tips:         If you're uncertain whether you
are covered for floods, check with    the agent who sold you your homeowner
policy. If you need to buy flood    coverage, that agent probably can sell it or
refer you to someone who    can.

      If you have flood coverage but are uncertain whether it's enough,    check
with your agent.

      Don't wait until there's a hurricane in the Gulf to buy coverage.

 There's a five-day waiting period before a new policy takes effect.

      Do a thorough inventory of your household property and include the
make, model and serial number for major appliances. Take photos in each    room
and take separate pictures of expensive items like antiques and    Oriental
rugs. Store the inventory and pictures in a safe place away    from the home.



   The numbers reflect Florida's special vulnerability to hurricanes,    Ross
says. "Florida writes 30 percent of the total flood insurance    written in the
country. Texas is second and Louisiana is third, but    Florida writes more than
those two states combined."

     Still, the federal government estimates that only about one-fourth    to
one-third of the insurable buildings in high-risk areas carry flood
insurance.

     "We still feel it is undersold and under-bought," Ross says.



LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA; METRO AND STATE; CITRUS TIMES; HERNANDO TIMES; PASCO TIMES

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, TONY LOPEZ, (2); BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, JIM
STEM; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, CINDY BROWN; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, JIM GOFF; a
flooded street in Dana Shores during hurricane Elena (appeared in TP only); Tim
Burns carries wood that floated away during hurricane Elena (appeared in TP
only); Kathy Foulk mops the floor in her father's home on Homosassa River after
hurricane Elena (appeared in CI only); a flooded Weeki Wacchee Marina after
hurricane Elena (appeared in HT and PT only); a flooded home on Sea Ranch Drive
in Pasco County after hurricane Elena (appeared in PT only)

TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

                            Times Publishing Company


                          FOCUS - 168 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                     BBC Monitoring South Asia - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                           September 12, 2014 Friday

Pakistan TV show highlights devastation caused by floods, government's relief

LENGTH: 1137 words


Text of report by Pakistani state-run PTV News

Program: "Sach to Yeah Hai" or The Truth is This

PTV News in Urdu at 1505 GMT on 10 September broadcasts "Sach to Yeah Hai" or
The Truth is This current affairs program aired three times a week and hosted by
anchorman Syed Anwar-ul-Hassan. This talk show tries to explore and understand
the underlying facts and truths behind domestic and international issues with
relevance to Pakistan.

Host:

Syed Anwar-ul-Hassan

Guests:

1. Engineer Khurram Dastgir Khan, federal minister for commerce and trade

2. Retired Major General Saeed Aleem, chairman of the National Disaster
Management Authority, NDMA

3. Hazrat Mir, director general of the Pakistan Meteorological Department

Hazrat Mir (left) and Retired Major General Saeed Aleem.

Introducing the topic of his program, Hassan said that flood had been
continuously wreaking havoc in parts of Pakistan. He said the current flood was
one of the worst floods in Pakistan's history. He said that floodwater was now
moving from central Punjab to southern Punjab. Later, he said, the floodwater
would enter Sindh and then Balochistan. According to a //fact file// prepared by
the NDMA, he said, the flood had claimed 257 lives in Punjab, Azad Kashmir, and
Gilgit-Baltistan so far. He said that 179 people were killed in Punjab and all
36 districts of the province were affected by the flood. He said the flood left
1,337 villages submerged and swept away 265 houses. He said the flood affected
at least 551,159 people and destroyed crops on 435,843 acres. He said the
government had started relief activities in all flood-affected areas. In Azad
Kashmir, he said, the flood claimed 64 lives, affected more than 30,000 people
in 10 districts, and swept away 2,132 houses. He said that 120 villages were
inundated and crops on 21,048 acres were destroyed in Azad Kashmir. He said that
two relief camps had been set up in Bagh and Kotli for the flood affected
people. He said that today's program would highlight the devastation caused by
the flood and a strategy to minimize its impact in future.

About the ongoing //relief and rescue efforts//, Aleem said the River Chenab had
been the primary source of flooding so far and //rescue// efforts were
concentrated in the affected areas along the river. He said that //relief
efforts// were under way in all flood-affected areas from Sialkot to Jhang. He
said the NDMA received information about heavy rains on 3 September and it asked
the Punjab government the same day to evict people from the areas that could be
affected by the flood.

Commenting on effectiveness of the //flood warning system// and evacuation
strategy of the relief agencies, Mir said the meteorological department had
warned the government about the possible //super flood// in its //monsoon
update// released on 6 August. He said the department also issued special
advisories in this regard on 29 August and 1, 2, and 3 September. He said that
his department warned the government agencies about the flood 72 hours before it
was generated.

In response to Mir's response, Aleem said that meteorological department's
advisory issued on 6 August did not mention the threat of a high flood. He said
that a heavy rain and high flood warning was issued on 3 September.

About the //lessons learned// from the super floods of 2010, Khan said that
Pakistan was facing new challenges in terms of flood management every year. He
said the government needed //massive resources// to control the flood. He said
the government would have to develop a strategy to control floods in rivers
Indus, Chenab, and Jhelum. He said the flood warning and relief system was
working effectively. He said it was the //issue of planning of Pakistan's
waterways, which needed to be handled//.

As far as disasters were concerned, Aleem said, //floods// were Pakistan's
//number one problem//. He said that Pakistan had been facing floods every year
since 2010 and the national economy suffered a loss of $16 billion because of
these floods. He said that Pakistan needed to take a lot of measures to
//adapt// to the //global climate change phenomenon//. He said the NDMA
developed the National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy in 2013 to prevent the
preventable disasters, minimize the impact of the unpreventable disasters, and
prepare for the disasters that were completely beyond control. He said that a
10-year national disaster management plan had been developed to implement this
policy and the estimated cost of this plan was $1 billion. He said that 70
percent of this amount would be used to prevent floods. He said this amount
would be spent through the National Flood Protection Plan that was being
developed by the Ministry of Water and Power and the Federal Flood Commission.
He said that Pakistan had no water reservoir over the River Chenab; therefore,
the water coming from catchments in the Indian-administered Kashmir would
overflow and affect the areas along the river. He said that meteorological
department's capacity would be built under the National Flood Protection Plan.

Mir said the people living on the riverbed should be shifted to safe areas and
water reservoirs should be built to curb the losses caused by the floods. He
said it would be catastrophic for Pakistan if India releases floodwater into the
River Ravi.

Khan said that funds for the Dasu Dam had been approved and work on it would
begin soon. He said that //calamities would be more frequent// due to the
//global warming// and the state would have to develop a strategy to fight them.

When asked about district administrations' role in crisis management, Aleem said
that under the National Disaster Management Act 2010 it was district
administrations' responsibility to prevent and fight disasters. He said that
district mayors or district coordination officers were supposed to be heads of
the district disaster management authorities. He said it was provincial
governments' responsibility to provide relief equipment to district
administrations.

Khan said that district administrations were playing a key role in the relief
activities in Punjab.

Mir said the Punjab government effectively responded to the flood warning issued
by the meteorological department.

In response to a question regarding the early flood warning system, Aleem said
that Sindh had been warned about the flood in the River Indus and the provincial
government was evicting people from the areas along the river. He said the NDMA
was supposed to make disaster management policies and the provinces were
supposed to implement these policies.

Khan said that new water reservoirs were a key to flood management and
resolution of water disputes among the provinces.

Hassan thanked his guests and summed up the discussion.

Reception: Good

Duration: 51 minutes

Source: PTV News, Islamabad, in English 1505gmt 10 Sep 14

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2014 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 169 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                            August 6, 2014 Wednesday

Fresh flood alert in Baitarani, panic in Jajpur district

SECTION: BHUBANESWAR

LENGTH: 539 words


KENDRAPADA: A second flood warning in Baitarani in just two weeks has sparked
panic in Jajpur district.

Dasarathpur block bore the brunt of the flood when Baitarani breached at Patapur
inundating scores of villages. "We have been leading a horrible life since July
22 when the first flood came. Another flood would be disastrous," said Paresh
Mallick, panchayat samiti member of Tarapada Gram Panchayat.

"On July 22, my six-roomed thatched house collapsed in the flood after the river
Baitarani breached at Patapur. Since last three days, I along with my three sons
have been trying to rebuild the house . But the flood warning on Monday gave a
blow to my dream to rebuild the house. We are all panicked ", said Sarat
Mallick(56) of Patapur village.

"Heavy rains bringing a risk of further flooding as water runs off from Hirakud
dam has already swollen rivers. Due to incessant rains for last three days
Baitarani, Mahanadi and Bramahani and their tributaries are swelling.

In an emergency meeting on Monday, the district administration assessed the
impact of the flood as very critical as gushing waters threatened to swallow
more villages in vulnerable parts of the district including the flood-affected
villages of Dasarathapur block," said Maheswar Panigrahi, Jajpur sub-collector.
tnn

" We have already warned the flood-affected villagers about another flood after
the river Baitarani swelled on Monday . The breach -mending work is going on
since last week. We engaged 400 workers on Monday to sand-pack the breach at
Patapur to save the flood-affected villagers from another flood, added
Panigrahi.

It is 13 days since the devastated flood hit around one lakh villagers of 60
villages of Dasarathpur block. The relief materials that came was distributed or
grabbed and now everyone is looking forward to reconstruction and rehabilitation
. The focus, of course, in on the worst flood hit Patapur, Gopalpur, Malikapur
and other Gram Panchayats where the transitional phase has began, and amid the
rubble of damaged houses, everything appears to be in a standstill. But many
flood- affected villagers are now worried after the river Baitarni is again in
spate due to three day long incessant rain.

"On 22nd July the river Baitarani breached at Patapurfor which our villages were
marooned. Now an imminent second flood is threatening us", said Sangram Mallick
of Patapur.

Large numbers of flood-hit villagers are still struggling to pick up the threads
of their life when another flood is threatening their lives, added Mallick.

"We have lost everything in the floods and are planning to start life afresh in
our villages ," Mayadhar Mallick of Patapur village whose six-roomed thatched
house collapsed in the flood.

"I decided to rebuild my house on Sunday. But the warning of another flood in
the river Baitarani forced me to abandon my remaking of my damaged house", said
Mayadhar.

"The flood on 22nd July created a very scary situation but what is going to be
even scarier if the river Bairani will breach again in our areas", added
Mayadhar.

"Hundreds of mud-walled homes have been destroyed. Now they're in critical need
of food, clean water, shelter and medical care", said Samir Mallick of Patapur.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 170 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                             National Mortgage News

                                  June 1, 1998

Flood Insurance Program Launches Website to Reach a Wider Audience

BYLINE: By Ted Cornwell

SECTION: SPECIAL REPORT; Flood Services; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 594 words

DATELINE: Washington


The National Flood Insurance Program protects homeowners against rising water
here on Earth, but the NFIP hopes to make its programs more user friendly by
launching a presence in Cyberspace.

The website was created in response to the many requests for information that
the Federal Emergency Management Agency received regarding flood coverage.

Many of the information requests were generated by the El Nino weather
phenomenon.

The NFIP said that the flood insurance program is lucky to be part of the FEMA
Web site, which has won awards for design.  The site has information geared
toward the general public as well as more detailed information needed by
companies that participate in the flood insurance program.

"Being on the FEMA home page makes it possible to provide valuable NFIP
information to the millions of people who access the FEMA website looking for
ways to find protection from disaster," said Amie Ware of the Federal Insurance
Administration.

The site is located at http://www.fema.gov (click on the flood insurance icon to
the left of the main page to go the NFIP's pages).

The website was implemented last fall.

The site allows users to choose a lender page that specifically is designed to
provide information mortgage lenders need to participate in the program along
with their borrowers.

The NFIP site includes recent news releases regarding flood activity, facts
about the flood insurance program, a revised flood insurance booklet,
information about how the NFIP works and how to purchase flood insurance.

It also includes guidelines for what homeowners are required to buy flood
insurance and helps lenders locate an NFIP provider in their area.

In addition to information targeted to lenders and consumers, the site includes
information for insurance agents as well as general information about flood
mitigation and other FEMA projects.

The NFIP site is laced with facts that outline the flood peril faced by
borrowers.  According to the NFIP, "25% to 30% of flood insurance claims
originate in low risk areas."

The site is designed to provide information about the NFIP both the general
public and to companies that participate in the program.  A special customer
path provides information for the general public, including the cost of
obtaining federal flood insurance and eligibility criteria about who can
participate in the program.

The NFIP also has posted a library of flood related information and a search
option on the Web page.

The FEMA is expanding efforts to market the federal government's flood insurance
program after several recent disasters, such as last year's flooding of the Red
River valley in Minnesota and North Dakota, highlighted the fact that many
homeowners in flood prone areas did not have coverage.

Consumers purchase flood insurance through a local insurance agent.  If they are
qualified for the Federal program, premiums are based on risk factors, but the
insurance is generally less costly than private sector insurance would be for
people in areas at high risk for flooding.  In fact, a lack of availability of
affordable flood insurance is the reason the government created the program.

Homeowners in areas that are designated as "flood hazard" areas by FEMA are
required to carry flood insurance as a condition for obtaining a mortgage loan
that is sold to Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, or originated by a federally insured
depository institution or one of its subsidiaries.

Lenders can force place insurance on the borrower if the homeowner does not
voluntarily buy insurance.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 1998 Faulkner & Gray


                          FOCUS - 171 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      August 29, 2005 Monday Home Edition

Storms upset flood forecasts;
Surveyor said safe, but used bad map

BYLINE: RICHARD WHITT

SECTION: Horizon; Pg. 1E;

LENGTH: 1087 words


Sheldon Vick's new home came with a surveyor's certification that the property
wasn't in a flood plain, so he didn't bother with flood insurance.

But when remnants of Hurricane Dennis dumped 9 inches of rain in Cobb County
last month, Vick's home on Clay Road was one of dozens flooded by Sweetwater and
Noses creeks.

"At this point the house is gutted," Vick said. "All the walls and floors had to
be torn out. I won't be back in the house probably until October."

Vick's mess, and others like it, could have been avoided. The surveyor relied,
as many do in Georgia, on outdated Federal Emergency Management Agency flood
plain maps when Vick began construction last year. The builder, surveyor and
Cobb officials checking behind them could have looked at the county's newer,
more accurate Geographical Information System maps that place Vick's home
squarely in the flood plain.

Now, after learning of Vick's problems from an Atlanta Journal-Constitution
reporter, Cobb leaders are considering changing the county code to mandate that
all engineers and surveyors use GIS maps along with the FEMA maps, which are
outdated in most Georgia cities and counties.

In metro Atlanta, Gwinnett and Fulton counties use GIS maps to help determine
flood plains before issuing building permits, according to county officials. "We
use a combination of paper FEMA maps and our GIS for flood zone information,"
said Barry Puckett, Gwinnett GIS manager.

Cobb, DeKalb and Clayton counties have GIS technology, but building officials
are not required to use the maps.

Atlanta uses its own maps or requires the landowner to do a survey if the flood
plain is not well defined. "We use FEMA maps, which are notoriously inaccurate,
only when there is no question that they're correct," said Janet Ward, watershed
management spokeswoman.

Cherokee County is just now conducting aerial mapping and will soon be using GIS
to augment FEMA flood plain data, said Joseph D. Woycke, who heads the county
mapping department.

Homes built within flood plains require higher foundations and flood insurance,
and relying on FEMA maps to determine the flood plain is risky business,
officials said.

"It's very difficult to look at insurance rate maps and make a determination if
something is in the flood plain," said Curt Sumner, executive director of the
American Congress on Surveying and Mapping. "Everybody knows these insurance
rate maps are difficult to read and not very accurate."

Yet they are the only maps that surveyors or lenders are required to use in
determining if property is in a flood plain. The FEMA maps identify properties
in a 100-year flood plain, that is, with a 1 percent chance of flooding in any
given year. Cities and counties use the maps to help regulate development. The
maps are based on engineers' hydrological studies.

Due to rapid development, which causes flood plains to grow, most of the maps
now in use are outdated, state and local officials concede, and are being
updated throughout Georgia.

The GIS images use aerial photography and computer software to create highly
accurate digital maps of roads, water features and contours depicting elevations
of terrain. Counties that have more accurate maps can require their use, FEMA
officials said.

Cobb's GIS setup consists of 478 separate computer maps.

Weaknesses show up

It wasn't until after rains associated with Hurricane Dennis that the size of
the discrepancy between the FEMA maps and GIS maps became apparent, according to
Bill Higgins, manager of Cobb County's stormwater management division. Cobb was
the hardest hit by the July 11 storm, which destroyed 79 homes and damaged 195
others, county officials said.

"Cobb GIS mapping is a relatively new product which became available only two or
three years ago," said Higgins. He recommends that the county change its code to
require use of the new maps.

The county is moving as quickly as possible to address all the flood victims'
concerns, Commission Chairman Sam Olens said. New FEMA maps are due out in
October, and county officials expect them to combine the GIS information with
new data gathered for FEMA. It's anticipated that many more homes will be in the
flood plain.

Surveyors use FEMA's flood insurance maps, even though they know they are
inaccurate, because mortgage lenders require them, said longtime Cobb surveyor
Trenhold Baker.

Baker said it's hard to place blame on any one group, because surveyors,
engineers, developers and county officials all know there's a problem. "The
weakness of the situation caught up with us," Baker said.

County officials responsible for heading off potential flooding problems didn't
review site plans for Vick's home. Clerks in the Department of Community
Development's building permits office approved the permit, said Director Rob
Hosack.

The reviewers followed normal procedure in permitting for Vick's home, Hosack
said, and the clerks rely on surveyors to tell them if a lot is in the 100-year
flood plain.

"The surveyor had a note [on the survey] that said it wasn't in the flood
plain," Hosack said. "When my folks saw that, they went ahead and cut the
permit."

13-year-old FEMA maps

The survey of Vick's property has the stamp of surveyor Richard Tate Grant of
Tate Engineering in Austell and a note stating that the property "is not located
in an area identified as a special flood hazard area per flood insurance rate
maps."

Grant did not return telephone calls requesting comment. A woman who identified
herself as his wife said the surveyor followed all legal requirements in mapping
the property.

Cobb's FEMA maps are 13 years old. Since 1992 the number of housing units in
Cobb has grown from 189,872 to 256,274. The development contributes to runoff
and adds to potential flood problems.

Real estate developer Darryl Jones, who sold Vick the home, said he had the lot
surveyed and checked again with Cobb zoning officials before buying the
property. "I never would have bought land in the flood plain," Jones said.

Jones said he had sent a crew at his expense to help Vick clean up his property.
"It's just a bad situation all the way around," said Jones. "I feel bad for him.
It's pretty much gutted out."

Vick said estimates put the cost of repairs to his home at $30,000, excluding
appliances and furniture.

He has applied for a low-interest federal loan.

"It looks like I'll get all the financing I need," he said, "but it will have to
come out of my pocket."

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ANDY SHARP / Staff Sheldon Vick takes photos of his flooded home in
July. Heavy rain associated with Hurricane Dennis caught Vick, and many others,
by surprise. A surveyor, who used an outdated map, had certified that Vick's
house was not in the 100-year flood plain. ; JOHN SPINK / Staff Developer Darryl
Jones, who sold Sheldon Vick his home, said he had been assured the lot was not
in the flood plain. ABOUT FLOOD INSURANCE The National Flood Insurance Program
makes federally subsidized flood insurance available for all buildings, whether
or not they are in a flood plain.  If the building is in the 100-year flood
plain, the lender, by law, must require a purchaser to have flood insurance.
Flood insurance covers direct loss caused by surface flooding and insures a
building and its contents against damage caused by rivers, lakes, ocean storms
or local drainage problems.  Copies of the flood insurance rate maps are
available for review in most planning departments. Many lenders and insurance
agents also have copies. It is the agency's or the lender's responsibility to
check the flood insurance rate maps. The maximum amount available for a
single-family house is $250,000.  For more information online, go to
www.fema.gov and click or call the National Flood Insurance Program at
1-800-720-1090.

                Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 172 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Wilts and Gloucestershire Standard

                            January 7, 2016 Thursday

Improved flood defences hailed a success in Malmesbury - though more rain
forecast

BYLINE: Callum Chaplin

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 674 words


NEWLY improved flood defences in Malmesbury have kept the town safe during the
recent downpours - and they will be tested again as more heavy rain is on the
way.

Having suffered at the hands of devastating flooding in 2012 and 2013,
Malmesbury has avoided repeat disaster after major new flood defence work took
place in the town this summer that saw the Avon de-silted around the Town
Bridge.

Stones and vegetation that had built up on the river bed were removed which made
the river deeper and faster flowing, reducing the potential risk of future
floods.

Ray Sanderson was town mayor during the floods in 2012 and he subsequently set
up the Malmesbury Flood Working Group, which he chairs.

The group are responsible for manning the sluice gates at Cowbridge that are
helping alleviate flood risks for the town.

He said: "Since the 2012 floods the Malmesbury Flood Working Group has been
operating the sluice gates, which has helped tremendously.

"When closed it holds back the water which means we can control flow of water
away from the town towards Great Somerford.

"You can see the amount of water it's discharging away from the town."

Edward Evans, an expert in flooding from Great Somerford, is a member of the
flood group and has been helping develop ideas for flood defences in the town.

He said: "The area seems to flood pretty regularly so I drew up plan of short
term action, done at modest cost to reduce the flooding situation at the
beginning of 2013.

"This involved operating the Cowbridge sluice. The Cowbridge weir is more like a
high dam than a weir which was backing up water in town.

"When you look at the water flow now, it is moving very smoothly with less
turbulence than before.

"We have been working closely with the Environment Agency (EA), the town council
and Wiltshire Council.

"We have maintained close contact with EA. We met them a few months ago to go
through the results of their mathematical modelling of the 2012 and 2013 floods,
which we were very pleased to see.

"We are now awaiting the final report on this which should signpost the way
forward for reducing flood risk in the town."

Before the recent floods that devastated the north west of England and saw more
than 60,000 homes without power, Wiltshire Council insisted they were ready to
respond if a similar emergency struck the county.

They said flood alleviation plans had been drawn up throughout the summer by
local communities with the help of Wiltshire Council, who spend £1m a year on
the issue.

Jonathon Seed, Wiltshire Council cabinet member responsible for flood
alleviation, said: "We have worked hard on this flood alleviation scheme with
the EA and local partners, however we are yet to see how it will cope with
prolonged and heavy rainfall."

The Athelstan Players, a local amateur dramatic group had their studio flood
during the 2013 floods. They are still fundraising to replace the damaged
equipment and hope Malmesbury will avoid future flood damage.

A member of the group, Malmesbury resident Jackie Peel, said: "For us as a
community group we simply had to use another venue and use de-humidifiers to dry
the building out; we lost carpets and some furniture.

"As far as knowing whether or not the flood defences have worked; yes I guess
so, so far as we haven't flooded since then.

"Certainly work at Cowbridge and elsewhere, plus some dredging, does seem to
have helped."

Many parts of Malmesbury have been under flood alert in recent weeks and with
heavy rain forecast over the weekend in north Wiltshire, flood alerts remain in
place for the area.

The town council released an information booklet on local flooding earlier this
week in anticipation for potential upcoming floods, printed copies of which are
available from the town hall.

The council have also established a flood warden scheme and believe that
everyone in at-risk properties has been visited by a warden.

If residents have serious concerns regarding flooding they can contact the
council by leaving details at wiltshire.gov.uk/mywilts, using the MyWilts app,
or calling 0300 4560105.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2016 NewsQuest Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 173 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        The Augusta Chronicle (Georgia)

                            October 11, 2009 Sunday
                                  ALL EDITION

Not if, when;
The Augusta area is far safer from flooding that it was in 1990, but the danger
remains

BYLINE: By Rob Pavey< Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1432 words


In the weeks before an unforeseen 15-inch rainfall caused Augusta's worst flood
in decades, the city's emergency preparedness office was focused on something
entirely different.

"At the time we were much more into hazardous materials, tornadoes, things like
that," recalled Pam Tuck-er, who was Augusta's emergency management director
during the Oct. 12, 1990, flood.

Before dawn, two tropical storms - Marco and Klaus - converged over Augusta,
turning streets into raging rivers and transforming four counties into a
national disaster area.

"It was an awakening experience," Mrs. Tucker said. "It caught so many people by
surprise."

With Atlanta's catastrophic Sep-tem-ber floods fresh in everyone's memory - and
the anniversary of Augus-ta's 1990 deluge approaching - one simple question gets
asked more often than any other: Could it happen again?

Even with better technology, more than $70 million in flood-mitigation projects,
newly updated flood maps and stricter laws governing development, experts agree
on two things: Columbia and Richmond counties are safer from floods today than
they were in 1990, but if concentrated storms ever dumped 15 inches of rain at
one time, the consequences could be equally devastating.

"A lot of people think if they're not on the FEMA (Federal Emergency Manage-ment
Agency) flood map, then they're safe," Mrs. Tucker said. "But no matter what the
maps say, everyone lives in a flood zone. It's just a matter of how much rain it
takes to get flooded."

James and Jennifer Gray, who moved into their Butler Place home in Augusta in
1997, aren't required to buy flood insurance, but they have a policy anyway.

"We do it as a precaution, even if we don't have to," Mrs. Gray said. Their home
backs up to Rae's Creek, which overflowed into the yard and pool in 1990 and
came dangerously close to the home again in 1997.

Since then, there haven't been any real problems, in part because of the many
flood-control efforts along the creek.

"It's definitely better, but we still worry - enough to have bought flood
insurance," Mrs. Gray said. "It's still a narrow creek, and when we get these
bad rains, 'the cup runneth over,' as they say."

Like Augusta, fast-growing Columbia County has made significant investments to
ward off property damage from flash floods. But for every mitigation project
designed to reduce damage, new development creates more areas that could be
affected.

Nineteen years ago, when floods washed out creek crossings and bridges along
Hereford Farm, Stevens Creek and Hardy-McManus roads, those areas were sparsely
populated. The county's population has since mushroomed from 66,910 in 1990 to
an estimated 110,627 today.

"That's a lot more people, and we've had to build a lot more homes for them in a
lot more places," said Mrs. Tucker, who today is Columbia County's emergency
services director. "We also have more development to support the population
growth - we have Lowe's and Walmart and Home Depot. These are all
multimillion-dollar, long-term projects."

Protecting all the new growth from floods involves both regulation and
prevention. Flood-mitigation projects have been undertaken by Columbia County's
Stormwater Utility, which assesses fees to homeowners to finance projects
designed to prevent flood damage.

One of the most successful projects was the elevation of a portion of Stevens
Creek Road almost nine feet in an area known for frequent, dangerous flooding.
The county used stormwater fees and a FEMA hazard mitigation grant to finance
the work.

"Today, we're looking at a lot more projects that are similar to that one," Mrs.
Tucker said.

Though Augusta hasn't grown as fast as Columbia County, its long history builds
in a very different set of challenges when it comes to preventing floods, said
Terri Turner, Augusta's assistant zoning and development administrator.

"We've done a lot of mitigation and learned a lot of lessons since 1990," she
said. "But if it happened again with that much rain, I'd have to say it would be
catastrophic."

The county and FEMA recently updated and fine-tuned flood-hazard maps that
identify whether property will require flood insurance. Though the maps were
updated with the best available knowledge, they are not a guarantee against
flooding.

"Our new flood maps were accepted by the (Augusta) Commis-sion and went into
effect Sept. 25," she said. "What has happened over time is that, anything in
the white part of the map, people think it's not in a flood zone, and that isn't
a correct assumption."

The new maps show areas that are not part of the formal regulatory floodplain
but remain subject to flooding.

One such area, known to flood but not in the "official" flood zone, is the Hyde
Park community off Dan Bowles Road. Its history of floods goes back decades, and
the area continues to experience problems today, despite improvements that
include enlarged, paved drainage ditches.

"It's like a big saucer," said Charles Utley, a veteran member of the Hyde Park
and Aragon Park Improvement Committee. "They have made improvements, but the
low-lying areas still flood."

Part of the problem is runoff from as far away as Gordon High-way. Flash
flooding and overflowing ditches still affect homes in the Clara Jenkins School
area and along Leona and Goldenrod streets.

"It's not going in the houses like it used to, but it will come up to the steps
or it will cover the street," Mr. Utley said.

Ms. Turner said it would be impossible for any map or modeling to predict all
consequences in all areas.

"Too much rain in such a short period of time is just bad, wherever it falls,"
she said. "And each event is unique. One will never mirror another. It may
intensify on another side of town, or rain over a longer period of time. But no
two are alike."

Augusta-Richmond County's population has grown by only 10,307 since 1990,
according to Planning Director Paul DeCamp. But many of the areas that were
flood prone 19 years ago remain equally vulnerable today.

Will Augusta flood again? Rain events that drop 15 to 20 inches in a
concentrated area are statistically rare - but history has shown they do occur,
and can recur, said Georgia State Climatologist David Stooksbury.

"You can expect a 24-hour, 8-inch rainfall to occur about once every 100 years,"
he said. "Normally, floods don't occur from one day of rain. It is usually
several days preceding it. So the antecedent moisture conditions of the soil are
quite critical to flooding events also."

Since the big flood, more than $70 million in flood mitigation projects have
been completed along major creek and drainage areas in the county. Many more
remain in the planning stages, especially along the Augusta Canal, which
overflowed in 1990 and helped intensify flood damage downtown.

Because the historic canal is a direct route for water to enter downtown, it is
a main focus of ongoing evaluation by the Army Corps of Engineers, which is
cost-sharing flood risk studies to recommend improvements to reduce future
damage.

"From our perspective, we're concentrating on the Augusta Canal at this point,"
said Alan Garrett, the chief of project management and civil works for the
corps' Savannah District.

The corps has recommended flood projects totaling $17.5 million, according to a
2008 status report on the plan, of which $5.8 million would be needed for canal
modifications. The rest would be allocated to flood control along Rocky Creek.

Specifically, consultants have suggested automation of four of the canal
floodgates so they could be opened rapidly if needed, and the creation of a
750-foot spillway to redirect rising water into the Savannah River instead of
downtown.

"Under the current laws, those projects would be cost-shared 65 percent federal
and 35 percent nonfederal," Mr. Garrett said. Thus, the total package (including
Augusta Canal and Rocky Creek improvements) would qualify for $9.5 million in
federal dollars and $8 million in matching funds.

Flood hazard mitigation is an ongoing process that can save more money than the
projects cost, he said.

Residents, however, must make their own decisions on whether to buy flood
insurance - regardless of whether their property is identified as vulnerable on
federal flood maps.

Mrs. Tucker said 30 percent of flood-related insurance claims involve property
that does not appear in FEMA flood maps.

"The lesson is, given enough rainfall, anywhere can flood," she said.

"If you're considering buying a property, try to go to that location during a
downpour," Mrs. Tucker said. "You need to know where the water goes."

Reach Rob Pavey at 868-1222, ext. 119, or rob.pavey@augustachronicle.com

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2009 Southeastern Newspapers Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 174 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                Evening Gazette

                           September 6, 2011 Tuesday
                                  1st Edition

Counting the cost of proper flood strategy;
Jeff Roberts, who heads up the GVA Environmental Services unit for the
North-east, looks at flood-risk policy

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 526 words


OVER the last decade the catastrophic consequences of flooding have been
highlighted by happenings in the Wye Valley, Dorset, and closer to home in West
Cumbria and Morpeth.

Around 5.2 million properties, or one in six, are at risk of flooding. A
risk-based approach to flood and coastal risk management is essential to limit
the distress, damage and loss of life that flooding can cause.

As a result of climate change and increased pressure on land use flooding will
continue to grow in importance as a public policy issue. The impact of flooding
will be felt in both urban and rural areas as a result of freak weather
conditions and the expected sea level rises.

ADVICE: Jeff Roberts Planning Policy Statement 25 sets out Government policy on
development and flood risk. Its aims are to ensure that flood risk is taken into
account at all stages in the planning process to avoid inappropriate development
in areas at risk of flooding, and to direct development away from areas of
highest risk. Where new development is exceptionally necessary in such areas,
then the policy aims to make it safe, without increasing flood risk elsewhere
and where possible reducing flood risk overall.

The Environment Agency is a statutory consultee on planning applications for new
building or development in flood and coastal risk and therefore can influence
applications to limit future flood risk. This is borne out by the fact that 96%
of new proposals to which they object on flood risk grounds do not obtain
approval.

The main concerns of homeowners and businesses are that the increased risk of
flooding can both reduce property values and difficulties can arise regarding
the securing of insurance cover. The Association of British Insurers, through a
statement of principles on the provision of flood insurance, commits insurers to
make flood insurance widely available until 2013. The Government is also working
to ensure long-term affordable flood insurance beyond this date.

While the Environment Agency provides flood risk standing advice, publishes
flood maps and a flood warning service it remains the responsibility of local
planning authorities to ensure that development does not affect future flood
risk. Government guidance highlights the need to consider flood risk early in
the planning process. This is done via a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) which
addresses how flooding might affect development on an 'at risk' site.

This involves consultations with the Environment Agency to confirm the
particular requirements for the site to establish how the development will
change the level of flood risk, bearing climate change in mind.

A report is prepared to present a recommended approach to achieving the proposed
development to ensure a minimum level of flood risk impact. The report will
demonstrate how flood risk will be mitigated and managed over its lifetime, for
example by the adoption of a sustainable urban drainage system.

Even though floods are part of nature, it is neither technically feasible nor
economically viable to prevent all properties from flooding. Therefore, a
risk-based approach is taken to achieve the best results.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  ADVICE: Jeff Roberts

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: gz


                    Copyright 2011 Gazette Media Company Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 175 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Austin American-Statesman (Texas)

                              July 27, 2008 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

City redraws flood plain maps

BYLINE: Sarah Coppola AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 890 words


New flood plain maps for Austin are set to take effect Sept. 26 , and city
officials are urging homeowners in affected areas to buy flood insurance by
mid-August .

The maps are the result of a five -year effort by the city and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to gather up-to-date hydrological data and reassess
flood risks citywide.

City officials don't have an exact number, but they said that a few hundred
properties will move in or out of a flood plain based on the new maps. Some of
the city's existing maps are 30 years old.

Property owners who will soon be in a flood plain who are not currently should
get flood insurance soon, said Ray Windsor , a flood plain administrator in the
city's Watershed Protection and Development Review Department .

By applying 30 to 45 days before the new maps take effect, those residents are
likely to get lower rates because they essentially would be grandfathered in
under their current status as less of a flood risk, he said. It also usually
takes a month for flood insurance to take effect, he said.

Windsor said the watershed department did not have the resources or technology
to notify every affected property owner, so it is asking the public to look at
the new maps online.

Residents can also view the maps at the department's offices at One Texas Center
, 505 Barton Springs Road ; or at the Ruiz and Windsor Park branch libraries.

Some areas being moved into a flood plain in the new maps are: part of the
Williamson Creek watershed, including properties between South Congress Avenue
and Emerald Forest Drive; properties near Dalton Lane and Jet Lane in the Carson
Creek watershed; and properties near Berkman Drive and Rogge Lane in the Fort
Branch watershed.

Areas that will no longer be in a flood plain include: the area in the East
Bouldin Creek watershed roughly bounded by South Congress Avenue, South First
Street, Ben White Boulevard and the Colorado River ; the Crystalbrook
subdivision, near Walnut Creek; and the Creek Bend subdivision in the Williamson
Creek watershed.

Some of those properties were removed from a flood plain based on fresh
hydrological and topographic data; others were taken out because the city
completed flood-control projects, such as building flood walls to protect about
300 homes in the Creek Bend and Crystalbrook subdivisions, Windsor said.

Central Texas is prone to flash flooding, and identifying flood plains helps the
city restrict development in those areas and alert property owners to the flood
risk, he said.

Austin's last major flood was a Nov. 15, 2001 , storm in which one person died
and $27 million worth of public and private property was damaged, Windsor said.

The maps show areas most in danger of a "100-year flood," defined as a flood
level that has a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded each year.

Homes in a 100-year flood plain have a 26 percent chance of getting flooded over
a 30 -year period, about five times greater than the risk of a serious fire.

Planning for the new boundaries began in 2003 . The city and FEMA unveiled
proposed new maps in March 2006 . The city held public meetings, and residents
had three months to propose changes to the maps.

The council is scheduled to hold a final public hearing and vote on whether to
adopt the new maps at 6 p.m. Aug. 7.

scoppola@statesman.com; 912-2939

Flood plain changes
 New Austin flood plain maps take effect Sept. 26 . City officials are
encouraging homeowners within the new boundaries to buy flood insurance by Aug.
 1 1. Residents can view the new maps at
www.cityofaustin.org/watershed/floodplain_newmap.h tm
 Some areas being moved into a flood plain:
 Williamson Creek watershed: Area of Oak Hill Pond and Covered Bridge Drive;
near Fletcher Lane; along Fair Valley Trail; and between South Congress Avenue
and Emerald Forest Drive.
 Carson Creek watershed: Near Dalton Lane and Jet Lane.
 Country Club East and West watersheds: Area roughly bounded by East Oltorf
Street, South Pleasant Valley Road and Burleson Road.
 Fort Branch watershed: Near Berkman Drive and Rogge Lane.
 Slaughter Creek watershed: Near Canon Yeomans Trail.
 Tannehill watershed: A few commercial structures near Highland Mall.

Some areas being moved out of a floodplain:
 Boggy Creek watershed: Along Clarkson Avenue.
 Dry Creek North watershed: Area north of Dry Creek Drive, close to Camino Seco
 and Mountainclimb Drive.
 East Bouldin Creek watershed: Roughly bounded by South Congress Avenue, South
First Street, Ben White Boulevard and the Colorado River.
 Fort Branch watershed: Area between Norwood Hill Road and East 51st Street.
 Little Walnut Creek watershed: Area along Colony Creek Drive, bounded by
Hunter's Trace and Galewood Drive.
 Shoal Creek watershed: Area along Millway Drive from Stanwood Drive to
Benbrook Drive; a few homes along Ullrich Avenue.
 Slaughter Creek watershed: Along Tecate Trail.
 South Boggy Creek watershed: Along Shiloh Drive, between Manassas Drive and
Caisson Circle; another few homes along Seminary Ridge Drive.
 Tannehill Branch: Some properties southeast of Springdale Road.
 Waller Creek: Area near Chesterfield Avenue, north of Koenig Lane.
 Walnut Creek: Crystalbrook subdivision, from Crystalbrook Drive to Pecan Brook
 Drive, north of Loyola Lane.
 Williamson Creek watershed: Creek Bend subdivision, bounded by South Pleasant
Valley up to Creek Bend Drive.


LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 The Austin American-Statesman
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 176 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Austin American-Statesman (Texas)

                             July 16, 2015 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Let May floods lift building standards

BYLINE: American-Statesman Staff

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 941 words


Fast growth can have dramatic consequences, especially when it comes to flood
control. As Central Texas cities continue to expand, they need to give greater
consideration to flood control when approving new development.

The city of San Marcos learned this lesson the hard way during the recent
Memorial Day floods, when within a matter of hours a raging downpour caused
flooding that killed 12 people, devastating communities along the Blanco River
and causing millions of dollars in damage.

Despite a history of flood events, the city has continued to approve dozens of
projects every year in the 100-year flood plain, a federally designated area
which has a 1 percent chance of experiencing a major flood in any given year.
According to American-Statesman reporter Sean Collins Walsh, city officials
describe their approach as "pretty much on average" compared with other cities
in Texas.

But San Marcos' growth is anything but average. And the human and financial
costs of not taking a more conservative approach to floodplain development in
that city could be substantial.

Climate change appears to be exacerbating the boom-bust rain cycle that
characterizes Flash Flood Alley. If you combine that with the pressures of rapid
population growth, arguments for not holding development to higher flood-control
standards are harder to make. Floods like the one Central Texas experienced in
May are not examples of an "extreme situation," as some residents suggest.
Rather, they are the new normal, and as such, regulation by the City Council and
city officials must be more strategic.

Central Texas floods may seem random, but in fact, such events are largely
predictable, University of Texas expert David Maidment says.

To make his case, the civil engineering professor points to the 2013 Halloween
flood in Austin that killed five people and damaged more than 500 homes in the
Dove Springs and Onion Creek areas. Many of those affected homes lay outside a
high-risk flood zone identified by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, but they
were still within a 25-year flood plain, meaning there is a 4 percent chance
they will flood each year. To attempt to mitigate the risk of future
devastation, the Austin City Council authorized more than $90 million last year
to buy out almost 475 properties in the flood plain area. Federal studies show
that some of those homes should have never been built.

Bad development decisions have costs, but proactive responses to major flooding
events have paid off for Austin and serve as a good model for San Marcos. After
the 1981 Memorial Day flood that killed 13 people, the city of Austin spent $200
million to buy and raze 450 flood-prone homes along creeks, build flood walls
and retention ponds, expand creeks for more water-carrying capacity, and improve
storm drains in older neighborhoods. Those improvements have been credited with
reducing the damage from floods over the past 30 years, especially in the
central area of the city.

Still, Central Texas is always going to be prone to flash flooding because of
its rocky soil, steep terrain and its location in the path of storms from the
Gulf of Mexico and Pacific. As fast-growing cities like San Marcos continue to
build, officials would be wise to be conservative with permitting development in
the flood plain and invest in proactive flood control measures where development
already exists.

San Marcos is among the 22,000 communities that participate in the voluntary
National Flood Insurance Program, which requires jurisdictions to regulate
flood-prone areas so that residents can get reduced-cost federal flood
insurance. The program requires communities to prohibit construction in
"floodways," which are certain to flood on a regular basis.

A San Marcos city ordinance requires buildings in the 100-year flood plain to be
built 1 foot higher than the minimum level set by FEMA. Additionally, major
projects are sometimes required to commission a flood-impact study.

However, despite participating in the federal program, San Marcos officials
regularly approve development projects in the 100-year flood plain, which covers
nearly a fifth of the city.

Complicating matters for San Marcos is the speed at which the area is growing.
For the third consecutive year, the Census Bureau named San Marcos as the
fastest-growing city in the country. More people in a flood-prone area can be a
recipe for disaster if adequate development rules aren't in place.

The U.S. Geological Survey suggests that development, or urbanization, increases
the size and frequency of floods and exposes communities to increasing flood
hazards.

"Development increases runoff. You can mitigate some of it, but cannot fully
take away," Maidment said. "The more development we have, the more runoff there
will be."

Of particular concern are the multifamily developments that have been built in
the flood plain. The city does not require landlords to notify residents - many
of them students - that they live in a flood zone. The city notifies property
owners of their statuses every year, but it's up to landlords to pass that
information on the residents.

San Marcos city leaders should consider thorough flood control evaluation to
help avoid "flood amnesia" that occurs as time goes by after a major disaster.
Aiming for a much higher National Flood Insurance Program community rating would
be a logical first step, as well as identifying cost-effective flood control and
drainage projects. If nothing more, the city should seriously consider steering
new development to less flood-prone areas until more adequate infrastructure
exists to justify the risk of building in the flood plain.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2015 The Austin American-Statesman
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 177 of 380 DOCUMENTS


            Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)

                            January 13, 2014 Monday

Hike In Flood Insurance Rates Will Be Felt Here;
Advice For Property Owners Rate Changes Casey Calls For Halt

BYLINE: Joe Hainthaler

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 988  words

DATELINE: Lancaster, PA


Staff Writer

jhainthaler@lnpnews.com

People with houses, businesses or rental properties near Lancaster County's
waterways are either getting hit with higher costs or will soon.

Lancaster County property owners paying flood insurance on 705 policies - nearly
half of the 1,435 policies written here - are paying or will soon pay between 20
percent and 25 percent more per year.

The increases come as a result of a 2012 federal law that phases out subsidized
flood insurance over five years until all are paying market rates.

"It's a serious issue," according to Nancy Sarley, president of the Lancaster
County Association of Realtors and an agent for Prudential Homesale Services
Group.

Sarley said the annual premium for flood insurance on a house she sold last year
in East Hempfield Township jumped to $4,400, up from $2,400.

"It's going to affect sellers, too," she said, because home buyers are going to
be watching for flood insurance rates and factoring them into the prices they're
willing to pay.

The 2012 federal law that phases out subsidized flood insurance rates also
requires flood insurance on real estate backed by federally insured mortgages.

Congress' effort to address the National Flood Insurance Program's $24 billion
deficit means other big changes for the owners of properties near the
Susquehanna River and Lancaster County's creeks, streams and tributaries.

Three pieces of advice for the owners of such properties from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, which oversees the NFIP:

nIf you have flood insurance, don't let it lapse.

That's because rates on new flood-insurance policies are losing their subsidies
and being set at market rates.

For people or businesses with existing flood-insurance policies or those whose
properties come into flood-prone areas under changes FEMA's making to its Flood
Insurance Rate Map, subsidies are being phased out.

nKeep an eye on the map-drawing process.

FEMA is well into redrawing its maps of flood-prone areas and expects to
complete its Lancaster County map in October.

Once the map is complete, affected owners will have six months to present
evidence if they believe FEMA erred in putting their property in a flood zone.

nStay tuned for updates from municipal officials.

Municipalities are encouraged, though not required, to figure out who's affected
by changes in the Lancaster County map and let affected property owners know.

Judging by the turnout at a FEMA update on the process held Tuesday at the
Lancaster County Public Safety Training Center in East Hempfield Township,
county officials and officials in its 60 municipalities are on top of the
matter. Between 65 and 70 people signed in for the event, "a much better turnout
than we usually see," according to Kim Dunn with Philadelphia-based Dewberry &
Davis, LLC.

Dewberry & Davis is FEMA's consultant on the mapping process in the region that
includes Lancaster and Philadelphia.

Increases on subsidized flood insurance premiums are capped at 25 percent per
year for business properties, properties on which claims paid have exceeded the
property's value and residential properties other than the one an owner calls
home.

And they're capped at 20 percent per year for primary residences in areas
considered flood-prone as of 2008, and for properties not previously considered
flood-prone but that come into a flood-risk area as a result of changes FEMA is
making to the county's Flood Insurance Rate Map.

"It's impacting just about anybody who has flood insurance or lives near a body
of water," said Dave Bollinger, a mitigation outreach coordinator for FEMA.

Why are rates rising?

Congress passed the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act two years ago to
reduce and stop adding to the 46-year-old National Flood Insurance Program's
deficit.

Biggert-Waters phases out federal subsidies that have kept flood-insurance
premiums in flood-prone areas below the "true risk rate," or what an insurer
would charge based on an actuary's assessment.

U.S. Sen. Robert P. Casey Jr., whose office provided the numbers on policies
affected here in Lancaster County, wants to slow down the flood-insurance
increases permitted under Biggert-Waters.

The Democratic senator is a co-sponsor of legislation that could see action in
the Senate this week. It would, among other things:

nDelay flood insurance rate increases for homes and businesses built to code and
included in flood-prone areas on later FEMA maps.

nDelay increases on policies insuring properties sold after July 6, 2012, and
before flood insurance was required.

nTreat the new owners of homes and business owners the same as the previous
owner unless their property suffers a severe loss or is a non-primary residence.

nAllow FEMA to use the National Flood Insurance Fund to reimburse policyholders
who successfully appeal a map determination.

Casey's office puts the number of Pennsylvania policyholders being hit by higher
rates as a result of the 2012 law at more than 30,000.

"As rate hikes continue to impact a growing number of homeowners, it is
imperative that we provide relief and set a foundation for a sustainable,
affordable flood insurance program," Casey said in a letter to Senate Majority
Leader Harry Reid.

Sen. Pat Toomey and Rep. Joe Pitts, two Republicans who also represent Lancaster
County in Washington, responded cautiously to the bill in emailed comments last
week.

"My staff is examining options that would help mitigate the impact of
Biggert-Waters on Pennsylvania homeowners while still ensuring that the flood
insurance program is put on a sustainable path that protects taxpayers," Toomey
said.

Andrew Wimer, Pitts' communications director, sent the following response:

"According to the staff of the Financial Services Committee, this bill or a
similar one may be considered this year," he said on Pitts' behalf.

"After the committee completes their process and if the bill comes to the House
floor, the congressman will carefully consider it."

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sen. Pat Toomey
Sen. Bob Casey
Rep. Joe Pitts
Staff Above, The Conestoga River Overflows Its Banks Near North Farmersville And
Turtle Hill Roads In West Earl Township In This March 2007 Photo. Below, A
U-Haul Truck Is Parked On Front Street In Marietta As Residents Evacuate Their
Homes In September 2011, In The Aftermath Of Tropical Storm Lee. Vinny Tennis
Staff Ad Crable

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 178 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                 Yorkshire Post

                               September 8, 2006

Bigger flood threat demands more protection

LENGTH: 825 words


Stephen Haddrill

Stephen Haddrill is director general of the Association of British Insurers.

FLOODING remains a fact of life for many homes and businesses throughout
Yorkshire.

I know of the worries of many in the region - last year I visited homes and
businesses in North Yorkshire which had suffered flooding to hear people's
concerns. From the periodical floods that hit York, to the flash flooding in
Helmsley, all the evidence indicates that the flood risk is set to get worse
with climate change.

Despite this, insurers remain able to provide flood insurance protection to all
but a handful of flood risk properties in the region. Without it, many property
owners would simply be unable to cope with the financial cost and the trauma
that a flood brings. But this protection is now under threat.

The Government's announcement that it will be reducing its flood defence budget
this year, will rightly concern many in the region. Ministers have worked hard
in recent years to improve our flood defences. But we must invest more, not
less, to keep pace with climate change. If we do not, many more homes and
businesses will face the trauma and financial nightmare that a flood brings.

Government spending on flood defences is to be cut by £15m this year yet all the
evidence points to the need for more to be spent, not less. Coastal floods and
storm damage will increase significantly over the next 50 years. Bad storms that
currently occur once a century could happen every five to 10 years. More
flooding from rivers will result from increased winter rainfall, and heavier
rainstorms will mean localised floods anywhere in the region.

The Government's own figures show that nationally there are now 570,000 homes
and businesses facing a high risk of flooding, more than double the assessment
in 2002. The Government estimates that annual flood damage now averages £2.3bn,
double the amount in 2004. Yet spending on flood defences has been frozen since
2004, and is now falling in real terms.

This is why the ABI believes that Government spending on flood defences needs to
rise by 10 per cent a year to £750m by 2011.

In Yorkshire, the stakes are high. In Hull, over 50,000 people live in areas
with either a moderate or high risk of flooding. While most of these homes are
currently protected by flood defences, these need to be maintained by continuous
investment. How will these cuts impact on the flood protection the city needs?

The recent warning from flood defence experts that Hull is one of the three
British cities most likely to face a major flood reinforces the need for more
flood defence investment.

Yorkshire's many miles of coastline face an increasing risk of coastal flooding.
As sea levels rise the danger of catastrophic coastal flooding becomes much more
likely. The horrific pictures from New Orleans this time last year illustrate
the devastating impact that such flooding can cause.

The ever-increasing demand for new homes is adding to the problem. People need
homes, but suitable land is becoming increasingly scarce. Too many developments
have been built in areas against the advice of the Environment Agency. These
flood vulnerable homes may be insufficiently protected, and also uninsurable.

Our economy benefits from managing the flood risk better. Damage and disruption
are reduced. Without adequate flood management, the taxpayer would have to bear
a much greater burden. Quite rightly, the Government continues to invest in
front line services such as schools and hospitals. Yet many schools and
hospitals are in the floodplain. So our education and health systems will suffer
from inadequate flood defences.

Homeowners and businesses throughout Yorkshire rely on the financial protection
flood insurance provides.

Flood damage is an expensive and traumatic experience. The average flood claim
can be up to £30,000. Over the last five years, insurers have paid out £2.5bn as
a result of severe storms and flooding.

Britain remains the only major developed country where flood insurance is
offered as standard under private insurance. Despite the rising flood risk, ABI
members are able to provide flood cover to the vast majority of homes and
businesses. Insurers want this to continue, as do our customers.

But we need Government to commit to a long-term flood defence programme. This
requires sustained investment, targeting resources to areas most at risk, and a
robust planning process to reduce the risk of inappropriate developments in
flood risk areas.

Insurers agreed this approach with the Government back in 2002, and to date it
has worked well.

The reduction in flood defence spending for the next financial year must be
reversed.

The Government has committed to managing the flood risk, and recognises the
challenge climate change brings.

The progress made in recent years in increasing spending on flood defences,
improving how that money is used, and tightening up on the planning process will
be undone if we ease up now.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 179 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                     The Chronicle (Centralia, Washington)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            November 20, 2009 Friday

Flood Authority Asks for $2.3 Million: Money Running Out; Funds Only Cover
Expenditures Through Mid-2010

BYLINE: Marqise Allen, The Chronicle, Centralia, Wash.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 816 words


Nov. 20--Faced with the options of canceling projects, closing up shop or asking
for money, the Chehalis River Basin Flood Authority has asked the Governor's
office for $2.3 million to continue its work.

The group charged with finding a basin-wide solution in 2008 is estimated to run
out of its initial $2.5 million by the middle of next year. Without the extra
funding, the Authority would not be able to cover its consulting fees or pay
staff, among other things.

"As we look at our budget, we will have it all obligated by June 2010, and it
doesn't look like we'll have a flood district or a flood zone district by then,"
said Ron Averill, chairman of the Authority.

The $2.5 million would come from a $47.5 million state appropriation meant to
help fund the Army Corps of Engineers' Twin Cities levee project.

Bruce Mackey, lead agent with the consulting group ESA Adolfson for the
Authority, said $1 million of the money requested will go to help form a flood
district or flood zone district. Another $1.2 million will help pay for
consulting services, studies and projects. The rest will be spent on salaries,
benefits and supplies.

Chehalis City Council member Chad Taylor, the city's representative on the
Authority, said it's a good idea to request the money and called acquiring the
$2.3 million a "step forward." However, he's hoping to see some progress.

"I'm still disappointed," he said. "And I'm going to be disappointed until a
shovel of dirt is turned. But you have to do the studies to get things done."

Averill said the chances of Gov. Chris Gregoire's office approving the
supplemental budget request were "pretty good."

"... we've provided a letter to the governor of the progress that has been
made," he said.

Since receiving funding in 2008, the Authority, comprised of 11 jurisdictions in
Lewis, Thurston, and Grays Harbor counties, has spent the majority of its money
on studies into a water retention project, hydraulic model of the lower stretch
of the Chehalis River and the basin ecosystem.

Just over $900,000 has or is scheduled to be spent on consulting services
through its facilitator ESA Adolfson through the middle of next year.    About
$250,000 was invested in the Lewis County PUD's study into building dams at two
points along the river, in addition to the $75,000 spent to study the
ecosystem's resources.

Flood Warnings and Flood Watch Lifted

By The Chronicle

Flood warnings and watches have been dropped for Lewis County, with rivers
cresting well below flood stage levels.

A flood watch is a precautionary stage, with conditions favorable for flooding
but not imminent, while a flood warning advises people not to drive cars or
trucks through flooded areas.

The Chehalis River at Grand Mound is expected to crest at midnight Saturday
night at 1.5 feet below flood stage.

The Newaukum River near Chehalis is expected to crest at noon on Sunday at about
3 feet below flood stage, according to the National Weather Service Web site.

Flood Authority to Weigh Option of Flood Zone District

By The Chronicle

The Chehalis River Basin Flood Authority is mulling over whether to seek the
formation of a flood control district or flood zone district to become a source
of income.

Ron Averill, Lewis County commissioner and chairman of the 11 jurisdiction
council, said new information has been presented to promote the possibility of
creating a flood zone district. However, he said he needs more information if he
is to change his mind about choosing to create a flood control district instead.

"The door is still partially open," he said. "I can be convinced, but I need
more convincing."

He said the biggest drawback of a flood zone district would be that the county
commissioners would sit on the board, potentially leaving the county responsible
in the event that something happened.

"We would rather not have the county be liable for an independent municipal
corporation," he said.

There also are questions about how the flood zone district would be able to
generate tax revenue compared to a voter-approved flood control district.

A flood zone district would also not have to be put before voters.

Averill said a flood control district would already be multi-jurisdictional and
could cross county lines. However, a zone district would have to form interlocal
agreements with other counties' flood zone districts.

King County has a flood zone district and is expected to make a presentation to
the Chehalis River Basin Flood Authority soon.

Marqise Allen: (360) 807-8237

To see more of The Chronicle or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.chronline.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, The Chronicle, Centralia, Wash.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20091120-1CE-Flood-Authority-Asks-for-2.3-Million-1120

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CE


                                 Copyright 2009


                          FOCUS - 180 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                     January 20, 2015 Tuesday 12:16 AM GMT

Flood defences 'need £1bn a year'

SECTION: UK

LENGTH: 645 words


Flood defence spending must rise to £1 billion a year over the next decade to
cope with the rising threat of flooding, insurers and campaigners have urged.

There should also be an end to building new homes in flood-risk areas, to
prevent communities living in "constant fear of flooding", the Association of
British Insurers (ABI) said, as it launched the Flood Free Homes campaign.

Despite planning rules, some 20,000 new properties are being built on the
floodplain each year, including 4,000 in places where there is significant risk
of flooding, the ABI warned as it called for a "zero tolerance" approach to the
problem.

Stopping house-building in the floodplain has high support, with nine out of 10
people (90%) believing residential housing developers should be completely
banned from building in high-risk areas, according to a poll carried out for the
launch of the campaign.

The Flood Free Homes campaign, which is supported by Friends of the Earth, the
National Flood Forum, the Know Your Flood Risk campaign and the Property Care
Association's Flood Protection Group, aims to raise the issues of long-term
flood defence investment and land and water management.

It comes a year after parts of the UK were hit by devastating flooding as the
country was battered by a series of extreme winter storms.

The survey of 2,500 people by YouGov for the ABI found that flood defences
topped the list of environmental issues that should attract Government spending,
with more than a third (36%) saying it was the most important recipient of
funding.

And almost three-quarters (73%) thought that local authorities were primarily
responsible for ensuring new homes are built in suitable locations, with an
acceptable level of flood risk.

The campaign is calling for spending of £1 billion a year on flood defences by
2025, a zero tolerance approach to inappropriate new developments in flood-risk
areas and cross-party political consensus on long term solutions for tackling
flooding.

Huw Evans, deputy director general at the ABI, said: "The need for this campaign
to address the UK's rising flood threat has never been more important. No action
is not an option.

"Last winter's floods highlighted the trauma and devastation flooding brings.
How we manage our land and water has to become central to government
decision-making across the UK, whoever is in power.

"Without adequate long-term investment in flood defence protection that reflects
the increasing threat, a zero tolerance approach towards building in flood risk
areas and political agreement, too many communities will continue to live with
the constant fear of flooding."

Guy Shrubsole, Friends of the Earth climate campaigner, said: "With climate
change pushing up flood risk, it's vital that the Government ramps up its
investment in flood defences and stops building homes on floodplains.

"It's not right that the human and economic costs of climate change are pushed
onto those most vulnerable to flooding - we need to tackle this huge problem
together."

A spokeswoman for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said:
"It's crucial that people and property are protected as far as possible from
flooding.

"That's why we are spending more than £3.2 billion over the course of this
parliament on flood management and protection from coastal erosion - half a
billion pounds more than in the previous parliament.

"We will also be making record levels of capital investment, spending £2.3
billion over six years in improving defences right up to 2021.This is in line
with the Environment Agency's estimation of annual optimum investment need for
flood defences.

"We are also taking action to protect people in the highest flood risk areas
from spiralling insurance premiums. For the first time, we will ensure access to
affordable flood insurance for people in high risk areas."

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2015 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 181 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Globe (Worthington, Minnesota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           September 24, 2010 Friday

Update: Flood warnings continue for the area

BYLINE: The Daily Globe, Worthington, Minn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 579 words


Sept. 24--SIOUX FALLS, S.D. -- The National Weather Service's current flood
warnings for the area are:

--Pipestone Creek at Pipestone

--Updated 9:40 p.m. Friday: Rock River at Luverne

--Des Moines River near Windom

--Des Moines River at Jackson

--Redwood River at Russell

--Updated 9:40 p.m. Friday: Rock River at Rock Rapids, Iowa

--Ocheyedan River near Spencer, Iowa

--Little Sioux River at Spencer, Iowa

Pipestone Creek at Pipestone: At 8 a.m. Friday the stage was 20.4 feet. Flood
stage is considered to be 16.0 feet. At stages near 20.5 feet, water reaches the
bottom of the bridge one mile west of Indian Lake, and the bridge on U.S. 75
north of Indian Lake is overtopped.

Rock River at Luverne: The flood warning has been extended until 5 a.m. Sunday.
At 8 a.m. Friday the stage was at 11.9 feet, and flood stage is 10.0 feet. The
river will continue to fall below flood stage by Saturday. At stages near 12.0
feet, the Luverne City Park will be under 5 to 6 feet of water.

Des Moines River near Windom: The flood warning is extended until 6 p.m. Monday.
At 9 a.m. Friday, the stage was 22.8 feet, and flood stage is considered to be
19.0 feet. The river crested at 23.0 feet at 3 a.m. Friday, and will continue to
fall below flood stage by Sunday. At stages near 21.0 feet, Island Park floods,
as does agricultural land outside Windom.

Des Moines River at Jackson: At 9 a.m. Friday the stage was 14.6 feet, and flood
stage is considered to be 12.0 feet. The river is predicted to crest near 15.5
feet by Saturday and then begin to fall. At stages near 17.0 feet, the lower
levees in Jackson are overtopped, flooding parks and ballfields.

Redwood River at Russell: At 9 a.m. Friday the stage was 18.4 feet, and flood
stage is considered to be 14.0 feet. The river crested at 18.62 feet at 9 p.m.
Thursday, and will continue to fall below flood stage by Sunday. At stages near
19.0 feet, water reaches the bottom of the bridge on County Road 60 two miles
southwest of Russell.

Rock River at Rock Rapids: The flood warning has been extended until 2 a.m.
Monday. At 7 p.m. Friday, the stage was 19.8 feet. Flood stage is 13.0 feet. The
river will continue to fall below flood stage by Sunday. At stages near 19.0
feet, the highest banks on the right side of the river will be overtopped.

Ocheyedan River near Spencer: The warning has been extended until 5 a.m. Sunday.
At 8 a.m. Friday, the stage was 8.0 feet, which is considered flood stage. The
river rose above flood stage Friday and is expected to crest near 8.3 feet by
Friday and fall below flood stage Saturday. At stages near 8.0 feet, minor
flooding of pasture land begins.

Little Sioux River near Spencer: At 7 a.m. Friday the stage was estimated at
11.4 feet, and flood stage is considered to be 10.0 feet. The river rose above
flood stage Thursday, and is expected to crest near 11.8 feet by Saturday,
falling below flood stage Tuesday. At stages near 10.0 feet, the right bank
overflows and minor flooding of the Spencer City Park and some rural
agricultural areas begins.

To see more of The Daily Globe, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.dglobe.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Daily Globe, Worthington, Minn.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or
call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100924-QG-Update-Flood-warnings-continue-for-the-area-0924-20100924

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QG


                         Copyright 2010 The Daily Globe


                          FOCUS - 182 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 30, 2015 Thursday

Three Reasons Why New Flood Protection Standards Are a Good Idea

LENGTH: 598  words

DATELINE: New York


Natural Resources Defense Council has issued the following news release:

President Obama recently updated federal flood protection standards. These are
the criteria government agencies use when building their own facilities, as well
as when they decide whether to finance large public projects, such as train or
bus terminals, electric transfer stations, or wastewater treatment plants. New,
more protective flood standards are smart, and they're necessary. Here's why:

floodingMO_FEMAStevenZumwalt.jpg

Flooding along the Mississipi River near Portage des Sioux, MO, June 6, 2013

(FEMA/Steven Zumwalt)

1. Hundred-Year floods are not what they used to be

A rule of thumb for flood protection is that a structure should be able to
weather a 100-year flood--a flood that has a one-in-a-hundred chance of
occurring in any given year. That seems sensible, but many scientific studies
show that in some areas, the 100-year floods of the past are now more like 50,
or 20, or even 10-year floods. Yet flood standards still rely on old, outdated
projections.

One study of Hannibal, Missouri (hometown of Mark Twain), found that the
supposed 100-year flood stage might more correctly be called a 10-year flood
stage, based on how frequent large floods have been along the Mississippi River.
That means there would be a one-in-ten chance of flooding in any given year, not
a one-in-a-hundred chance. That's a much bigger risk that towns like Hannibal
need to be prepared for.

Not only do projections get today's risks wrong, they fail to account for
tomorrow's flood risk. The amount of land that lies in riverine flood risk zones
across the country is expected to increase, on average, 45 percent by 2100,
largely due to climate change--this is according to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) itself. If flood standards fail to take a warmer, more
flood-prone future into account, more people and vital infrastructure could end
up in harm's way.

2. Floods are expensive, and taxpayers foot the bill

Between 1980 and 2014, floods cost the U.S. economy an estimated $260 billion.
Iowa alone gets hit with a $1 billion flood bill every year, on average.
Taxpayers nationwide end up paying the price, as states draw upon federal
disaster relief funds and property owners make claims to the overdrawn National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), which taps into the U.S. Treasury on a regular
basis to avoid insolvency. The NFIP is currently $23 billion in debt. Truly, an
ounce of prevention here can save taxpayers a pound of pain.

3. Nobody wants a flooded wastewater treatment plant

This is about protection. Flood standards should keep communities safe from
rising waters as well as the power failures, water contamination, road closures,
and other disruptions that flooding can cause. After Sandy, billions of gallons
of untreated wastewater were released to Long Island Sound, New York Harbor, and
waters across New York and New Jersey. That's why both states moved quickly to
update their flood standards for water infrastructure that was rebuilt after the
storm, ensuring that these facilities would be more resilient. New Jersey even
made those standards permanent.

Today, more than half the population of the United States lives in a state or
local community that's adopted similar flood protection standards. Updating
federal standards is a common sense move that will protect life and property. We
know flood risks are rising--it makes sense to build stronger and out of harm's
way.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 183 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          The Journal (Newcastle, UK)

                              April 4, 2016 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Flood insurance scheme boost for homeowners

BYLINE: Craig Thompson

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 986 words


THOUSANDS of North East homes at risk of flooding are to be better protected
under a new scheme.

A new flood insurance scheme to help at-risk households get more affordable
cover is being launched today.

Flood Re aims to re-energise the home insurance market for households living in
flood-prone areas of the region - and it could mean that for the first time in
years, some highrisk households have a choice of providers.

The scheme works with insurance firms so people who own and live in properties
that are most likely to flood can shop around more easily. It is hoped that the
increased competition will help drive down premiums for those affected.

It is estimated that over time around 350,000 UK households could benefit -
including 8,489 in the North East.

Heavy rain last December brought misery to thousands of residents living in
Northumberland after homes in flood-prone areas like parts of Corbridge were
swamped by Storm Desmond.

So far, the firms are offering policies backed by Flood Re represent over half
of the home insurance market - and more are expected to come on board. The list
so far includes Admiral, Aviva, Churchill, Direct Line, LV= and More Than.

Brendan McCafferty, chief executive of Flood Re, said he is "delighted" that the
scheme is now live.

He said: "This should make flood cover more affordable and accessible to those
in high flood risk areas over time.

"Consumers should check the Flood Re website to see which insurers are signed
up, speak to their current insurer and be prepared to shop around. When buying a
policy they should make sure it is the best one for them, not just the
cheapest."

Mr McCafferty continued: "If you're in a high flood risk area then Flood Re may
also mean having a choice of insurance provider for the first time in many
years. Again, shop around and see what cover and prices you are offered."

The scheme is funded by an annual levy on insurers. The initiative removes the
flood risk element of insurance for an insurer and so keeps the cost of the
policy down.

The Association of British Insurers (ABI) said some insurers will be contacting
customers directly to tell them about how Flood Re can make a difference.

Consumers can also call their insurer to find out if they can offer new options.
The ABI also said it is also a good idea to shop around, as the existence of
Flood Re should, over time, mean more choice of affordable flood cover.

It also emphasised that there is no need for customers to take any action now if
their policy is not due for renewal yet, and they may find an even greater
choice of cover when they are ready to renew in a few months' time.

The ABI said fully drying out, repairing and restoring a flooded home often
costs between £20,000 and £45,000, so buying insurance for properties likely to
flood a lot often costs more, and people who live in these properties have not
generally had as much choice of provider.

Insurers have put the flood damage bill for storms Desmond, Eva and Frank during
December and over the new year at around £1.3 billion, including commercial
customers and some vehicle claims as well as domestic property. The average
estimated payout for each domestic flood claim for these storms was put at
£50,000.

Huw Evans, ABI director general, said: "Being flooded is devastating, not only
because of the immediate damage which is caused to homes and belongings but
because fully drying out, repairing and restoring a flooded property can take
months or even years.

"It is important as many people as possible have access to home insurance so
they can get the money and expertise they will need if the worst happens.

"Insurers have worked flat out to design and fund Flood Re specifically to
address the problem of high home insurance premiums.

"April 4 marks the start of a process which will re-energise the home insurance
market in flood-prone areas and help ensure as many people as possible have
access to effective, affordable cover for their properties."

More information about how the scheme can help is at
www.floodre.co.uk/customer-info.

THE FACTS ON FLOOD RE FOR the first time in years, some households at high risk
of flooding could now get a choice of home insurance providers, thanks to the
new Flood Re scheme.

What is Flood Re? The scheme aims to give people more affordable insurance cover
and a wider choice of policies.

It should mean that even after a flood claim, households can still find
insurance with affordable premiums and excesses.

As far as consumers are concerned, Flood Re sits in the background, alongside
existing insurance companies. Consumers do not need to deal with the scheme
directly as they will still deal with their insurer. Flood Re does not set
prices - this remains a decision for insurers to make.

Who will it help? Only people who live in flood-risk areas will benefit from
Flood Re, and even then it will depend on how much they pay for the flooding
part of their home insurance.

The scheme will help people who buy the buildings or contents insurance for
properties which are at risk of flooding, providing they own and live in them.

It is estimated that, over time, around 350,000 UK households could benefit.

How does the scheme work? The insurance industry paid more than £20 million to
set up Flood Re. The pool of money to cover claims made on policies in the
scheme will come from the charge for each policy which is passed into Flood Re
as well as an additional annual £180 million levy on UK home insurers.

Flood Re, which has been authorised by regulators, also has its own reinsurance
policy in place to ensure it can cope with signifi-cant or multiple floods.

Which insurers are on board the scheme? So far, the brands listed represent more
than 50% of the home insurance market and more are expected to come on board.
Those on the list so far include Admiral, Aviva, Churchill and Direct Line. The
insurers taking part can be found at www.floodre.co.uk/customer-info.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: <BRelief is at hand for owners of Northumberland homes at risk of
floodingThe new scheme is expected to benefit residents in places like
Corbridge, which is susceptible to flooding

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TJN


               Copyright 2016 Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 184 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                           The Sunday Times (London)

                            November 6, 2016 Sunday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Washed off the Flood Re database;
At-risk homes denied insurance due to errors in addresses. By Ali Hussain

BYLINE: Ali Hussain

SECTION: MONEY;BUSINESS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 914 words


HOMEOWNERS at risk of flooding are being denied affordable insurance because
their properties are wrongly listed by the very scheme designed to help them.

About 350,000 homes were thrown an insurance lifeline in April with the launch
of the government-backed Flood Re scheme. It will raise £180m a year to cover
flood claims through a levy on all buildings insurance policies, equal to about
£10.50 per household.

Buildings insurance is compulsory if you have a mortgage but properties can
become unsellable if the cost of cover is too high, such as for homes in
flood-prone areas. Insurers are reluctant to take on at-risk properties, though,
as water damage can be costly to repair: the average payout for last winter's
floods was about £48,000.

Flood Re was meant to bridge the gap between the two sides. However, some
householders have been unable to take advantage of the scheme because of how
their addresses are recorded.

The insurer Direct Line, which owns the Churchill and Privilege brands, said it
had found discrepancies on three occasions. The problem, it said, involves homes
with a name not a number, as names can be recorded incorrectly.

For example, a house might be called Cromwell but be listed as Cromwell House by
Flood Re. Insurers would be unable to offer affordable premiums and excesses
under Flood Re because they would not be able to find the property listed on
Flood Re.

Since April, about 53,000 homes have obtained a policy subsidised by Flood Re.
Fortyfour insurers, representing more than 90% of the market, have signed up to
the scheme.

It is not just Direct Line that has encountered the problem. Paul Cobbing of the
National Flood Forum, which offers advice to homeowners and communities, has
come across two similar cases.

"For the individuals, being told they cannot get cover under Flood Re can be
stressful and cause anxiety," he said. "As this will probably be a problem with
the next insurance company they call, it's something that the [first] insurer
should take up with Flood Re, or provide a clear solution to the caller."

Last month Brendan McCafferty, head of Flood Re, said the public needed more
clarity over how the scheme works. He is leaving to join the insurer Axa in
February.

HOW WAS THE PROBLEM DISCOVERED? A Sunday Times reader, who does not want to be
identified, was told by Direct Line that he was not eligible for a policy under
Flood Re even though his property is close to the River Dee and flooded in 2002
and 2014.

The reader, who lives in Kirkcudbright, Dumfries and Galloway, approached Direct
Line because it was listed on the Flood Re website. He hoped it would be able to
cut his annual premium of about £2,900 to something closer to the £780 it cost
before the most recent flood.

He was shocked when Direct Line said it was not able to insure him at all
because his home, in a high-flood-risk area, was not listed by Flood Re. He
asked Money for help because there is no way for the public to contact the
scheme. To check if you are in a flood-risk zone, see
www.tinyurl.com/FloodRiskMap.

The householder said: "Flood Re was set up to ensure people who have been
flooded can continue to get insurance. It has had the opposite effect, with an
insurer now saying I cannot get cover at all. As well as not understanding how
we got missed off the [Flood Re] database, there seems to be no way to appeal."

Last week the reader was offered a policy costing £1,300 after asking a broker
to find a company that would cover him under Flood Re.

Direct Line said: "The address provided by [the reader] was found in our
database. However, the Flood Re data hub incorrectly added 'house' to the name.

"As the customer's home had recently flooded and there was no match to the Flood
Re data hub to be able to cede the risk, we declined cover. As we are unable to
update the data held by Flood Re, we ask that customers contact [it] directly."
The insurer later said it would inform Flood Re.

WHAT DOES FLOOD RE SAY? Flood Re said it had obtained the addresses of all homes
in the UK from Land Registry data or local authorities. It said: "A clear list
of eligibility requirements are set out on the website (www.floodre.co.uk),
where householders can also access a list of providers.

"If someone believes they have not been able to obtain a quote because of
inconsistencies in their address, they should ask their existing insurer to
raise this issue with us.

"Your reader's case shows the need to shop around. The availability of insurance
cover in flood-risk areas has markedly improved since Flood Re started."

HOW DOES FLOOD RE WORK? Insurers pay the scheme between £210 and £1,200,
depending on the council tax band of the property, to take over the flooding
element of buildings cover from them. This and the £180m annual levy provides a
pot that subsidises the cost of insurance for householders.

Flood Re uses the money to buy reinsurance, which is sufficient to cover damage
up to £2.1bn in a year. That should normally be enough to cover most floods -
though since 1981 there have been four occasions when insurers have paid out
more than this because of "major weather incidents".

The storms and flooding of January and February 1990 led to payouts of £4.3bn.

Flood Re excludes buy-tolet and business properties. Also, to discourage
construction on flood plains, it does not cover homes built on or after January
1, 1990.

Your story Have you managed to find affordable insurance for your home in a
flood-risk area? Email money@sundaytimes.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A lifeline is being denied to some people at high risk of flooding

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STS


                    Copyright 2016 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 185 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                  China Daily

                              July 18, 2016 Monday

Counting the costs of floods in China

BYLINE: Asit K. Biswas and Cecilia Tortajada

LENGTH: 1676  words


Currently, global average annual flood losses are estimated at $104 billion. The
country incurring the highest losses is China, followed by US and India. These
losses do not include disruptions to global supply chains when industries
located in flood plains are often affected by floods.

Trucks loaded with stones fell into the gap of a broken dike in Huarong county,
Hunan province, on Sunday. Drivers had to jump seconds before their vehicles
were engulfed by the water. LI GA/XINHUA

It is a little-known fact among general public and politicians that floods cause
more damages each year globally than any other form of natural disasters.
According to the United Nations, over the 20-year period between 1995 and 2015,
157,000 people died due to floods and another 2.3 billion were affected.

Currently, global average annual flood losses are estimated at $104 billion. The
country incurring the highest losses is China, followed by US and India. These
losses do not include disruptions to global supply chains when industries
located in flood plains are often affected by floods. The 2011 flood in Thailand
first brought this problem to global attention. However, the country which has
the potential to disrupt the global supply chains the most because of floods is
China, followed by Brazil, Russia and India.

Because of topography, high population, urbanization and tremendous economic
growth during the past decades, China has had three of the 10 most costly global
floods since 1950. Equally, because of population density, all the three Chinese
floods resulted in high fatalities compared to the other seven floods elsewhere
where deaths were in hundreds.

At global number two is the July-August flood of 1998, which resulted in 3,656
deaths and an economic loss of $43.7 billion in 2014. The sixth costly global
flood was also in China, during July-August 2010. It caused 829 deaths and
losses of 31.1 billion in 2014. In the 10th place is the flood of June-July 1996
which caused 2,775 deaths and an economic damage of $19 billion in 2014.

Flooding has been a perennial problem in China. Earlier one of the important
tests of good rulers was their ability to protect the citizens from the ravages
of floods. This requirement continues even today.

The good news is that death toll from floods in China has steadily declined due
to government actions such as construction of dams, dikes and levees, early
warning systems and prompt evacuation measures. The bad news is, economic costs
of floods are steadily increasing and are likely to rise in foreseeable future.

It appears that the 2016 floods are likely to enter in Chinese record books as
one of the most severe ones. The floods season is not yet over. Damages incurred
are already significant. This is primarily because rainfall in China this year
has been 21 percent higher than average. In Yangtze Basin, it has been 27
percent higher than average.

Yangtze is the longest river of China and the third-longest in the world. It is
also the most important water artery in terms of economy and development. Thus,
a serious Yangtze flood has major implications not only for China but also for
the world by disrupting manufacturing and transportation links as well as the
global supply chain.

According to the Office of State Flood Control and Drought Relief Headquarters,
as of July 3, 32 million people in 26 provinces have been affected, 186 have
died, 26 are missing, and 1.4 million people have been relocated. Some 73,000
homes have collapsed and crops have been lost in 700,000 ha. Direct economic
losses already exceed $10 billion. Flood season does not end until August.

The severe flood this year was not unexpected. Vice-Premier Wang Yang had warned
in June that El Niño this year was likely to increase flooding risks
significantly in Yangtze and Huai basins. In 1998, another El Niño year, the
death toll reached 3,556. With better preparedness, human losses this year are
likely to be significantly less.

In terms of national policies, flooding was recognized to be a major problem
during the post-1995 period when each of the two floods in 1996 and 1998 caused
several thousand deaths and billions of dollars on economic damages. While
floods became a serious concern, the solutions then proposed went only part way
to solve the problem. This main policy was to construct large dams which could
effectively store flood waters. After the flood seasons, stored excess water
could be used during months of no, or limited, rainfall to generate
hydroelectricity and then used for agriculture, industrial and domestic
purposes. Major dams like Three Gorges were constructed, having flood control as
an important objective.

There is absolutely no doubt that had the Three Gorges and other dams not been
constructed, flood damages in China during high rainfalls years, including this
year, would have been significantly higher.

Paradoxically, in the Chinese social media, major dams have been accused of
contributing to high flood damages. Nothing is further from truth. Well designed
and managed, large dams invariably ameliorate floods damages. They do not add to
them.

Storage dams, however, are not enough. When high rainfalls occur over the
Chinese cities, they currently do not have adequate infrastructure to drain away
excess waters. Cities have grown much faster than drainage works could be
planned, executed and managed. Consequently, the number of cities that are
seriously affected by floods has more than doubled during the past 7-8 years. At
present, routinely more than 200 Chinese cities are waterlogged each year during
each monsoon season.

Breakneck expansions of major cities, poor planning, endemic corruption and
absence of good land use planning, have further exacerbated the problem.

Take Wuhan, capital of Hubei province at the confluence of Yangtze and Han
rivers. It is historically known as the "city of 100 lakes". However, it has
lost more than 2/3rd of its lakes,from 127 to 40, during the period 1949-2015.
Lakes and wetlands were filled to make way for construction projects. These
lakes and wetlands used to store water during the flood years, reducing adverse
impacts on the city. The 40 remaining lakes are not enough of a buffer to store
flood waters. Furthermore, their storage capacities have been impaired by heavy
sedimentation due to poor land use practices and construction activities.

Corruption and wasteful spending have further aggravated flood problems in China
for decades. For example, Premier Zhu Rongji coined a phrase to describe a badly
constructed crumbling dike in Jiujiang City in 1998 as a tofu-dregs and turtle
egg project. Tofu dregs are pieces left over after making tofu.

The situation still has not improved that much. According to local media
reports, the person responsible for the construction of 1 billion RMB drainage
project in Wuhan was accused of accepting 1.6 million RMB bribes between 2005
and 2013.

Bad planning and shenanigans have ensured that Wuhan's subway line built only
four years ago was badly inundated. People's Daily reported last month that
Wuhan allocated RMB 13 billion, in 2013, for a three-year programme to improve
its drainage. Only RMB 4 billion has been disbursed so far, and completion date
has now been delayed to 2018.

National Development and Reform Commission noted on July 10 that fruits and
vegetables prices in some flooded areas have "risen significantly". They
instructed local authorities to "closely monitor prices". Flooding is likely to
increase annual consumer prices by 0.2 percent, to over 2 percent. It would also
have a negative impact on China´s GDP growth in the third quarter. Equally,
construction and rebuilding activities may increase aggregate demand. Thus
growth in the fourth quarter, after a weak July-August period, likely be higher.

Chinese leadership is well aware of the economic and social risks imposed by
floods. Premier Li Keqiang has already noted, the "government is better prepared
than ever". It has taken several measures and is fully prepared againstpossible
floods since July-August are "key periods for floods". Similarly, President Xi
Jinping has ordered array of measures to step up relief actions.

China has made considerable progress in recent decades to reduce fatalities due
to floods. However, a new mindset is needed at all levels of decision-making,
central, provincial and municipal. It has to be realized that improper
developments can contribute to floods, and floods do affect development.
Policy-makers need to realize that floods are both developmental issues and
humanitarian concerns.

There are systemic problems that need to be overcome. Water bodies and wetlands
in and around cities have been filled up for construction activities, thus have
seriously disrupted natural drainage patterns. Lakes, as in Wuhan, have steadily
been shrinking. Governments at provincial and municipal levels have mostly
turned blind eyes to construction activities in flood-prone areas. Cities have
not kept up with the construction and proper operation and maintenance of storm
drainage systems. Dikes protecting the cities may be working but drainage
systems in many cities are grossly inadequate.

Technically and economically, floods in China cannot be completely eliminated.
However, their impacts can be significantly reduced by proper land use planning
and flood management. For the Chinese leaders at all levels, floods are a
challenge that needs to be overcome to deliver good living conditions for the
society.

Finally, many poor decisions taken over the past 50 years on urban development
cannot be eliminated overnight. It will take political will, time, money, and
good holistic planning and implementation before flood damages in China can be
significantly reduced.

Asit K. Biswas is Distinguished Visiting Professor at Lee Kuan Yew School of
Public Policy, National University of Singapore; Cecilia Tortajada is Senior
Research Fellow at the Institute of Water Policy, in the same School.

http://imgs.syndigate.info/498/1493/92/146885592095.jpg

f8bc126d982018f68cbb01.jpg

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1493


                    Copyright 2016 China Daily Information.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 186 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                          China Daily - Africa Weekly

                                 July 18, 2016

Counting the costs of floods in China

BYLINE: Asit K. Biswas and Cecilia Tortajada

LENGTH: 1663  words


Currently, global average annual flood losses are estimated at $104 billion. The
country incurring the highest losses is China, followed by US and India. These
losses do not include disruptions to global supply chains when industries
located in flood plains are often affected by floods.

Trucks loaded with stones fell into the gap of a broken dike in Huarong county,
Hunan province, on Sunday. Drivers had to jump seconds before their vehicles
were engulfed by the water. LI GA/XINHUA

It is a little-known fact among general public and politicians that floods cause
more damages each year globally than any other form of natural disasters.
According to the United Nations, over the 20-year period between 1995 and 2015,
157,000 people died due to floods and another 2.3 billion were affected.

Currently, global average annual flood losses are estimated at $104 billion. The
country incurring the highest losses is China, followed by US and India. These
losses do not include disruptions to global supply chains when industries
located in flood plains are often affected by floods. The 2011 flood in Thailand
first brought this problem to global attention. However, the country which has
the potential to disrupt the global supply chains the most because of floods is
China, followed by Brazil, Russia and India.

Because of topography, high population, urbanization and tremendous economic
growth during the past decades, China has had three of the 10 most costly global
floods since 1950. Equally, because of population density, all the three Chinese
floods resulted in high fatalities compared to the other seven floods elsewhere
where deaths were in hundreds.

At global number two is the July-August flood of 1998, which resulted in 3,656
deaths and an economic loss of $43.7 billion in 2014. The sixth costly global
flood was also in China, during July-August 2010. It caused 829 deaths and
losses of 31.1 billion in 2014. In the 10th place is the flood of June-July 1996
which caused 2,775 deaths and an economic damage of $19 billion in 2014.

Flooding has been a perennial problem in China. Earlier one of the important
tests of good rulers was their ability to protect the citizens from the ravages
of floods. This requirement continues even today.

The good news is that death toll from floods in China has steadily declined due
to government actions such as construction of dams, dikes and levees, early
warning systems and prompt evacuation measures. The bad news is, economic costs
of floods are steadily increasing and are likely to rise in foreseeable future.

It appears that the 2016 floods are likely to enter in Chinese record books as
one of the most severe ones. The floods season is not yet over. Damages incurred
are already significant. This is primarily because rainfall in China this year
has been 21 percent higher than average. In Yangtze Basin, it has been 27
percent higher than average.

Yangtze is the longest river of China and the third-longest in the world. It is
also the most important water artery in terms of economy and development. Thus,
a serious Yangtze flood has major implications not only for China but also for
the world by disrupting manufacturing and transportation links as well as the
global supply chain.

According to the Office of State Flood Control and Drought Relief Headquarters,
as of July 3, 32 million people in 26 provinces have been affected, 186 have
died, 26 are missing, and 1.4 million people have been relocated. Some 73,000
homes have collapsed and crops have been lost in 700,000 ha. Direct economic
losses already exceed $10 billion. Flood season does not end until August.

The severe flood this year was not unexpected. Vice-Premier Wang Yang had warned
in June that El Niño this year was likely to increase flooding risks
significantly in Yangtze and Huai basins. In 1998, another El Niño year, the
death toll reached 3,556. With better preparedness, human losses this year are
likely to be significantly less.

In terms of national policies, flooding was recognized to be a major problem
during the post-1995 period when each of the two floods in 1996 and 1998 caused
several thousand deaths and billions of dollars on economic damages. While
floods became a serious concern, the solutions then proposed went only part way
to solve the problem. This main policy was to construct large dams which could
effectively store flood waters. After the flood seasons, stored excess water
could be used during months of no, or limited, rainfall to generate
hydroelectricity and then used for agriculture, industrial and domestic
purposes. Major dams like Three Gorges were constructed, having flood control as
an important objective.

There is absolutely no doubt that had the Three Gorges and other dams not been
constructed, flood damages in China during high rainfalls years, including this
year, would have been significantly higher.

Paradoxically, in the Chinese social media, major dams have been accused of
contributing to high flood damages. Nothing is further from truth. Well designed
and managed, large dams invariably ameliorate floods damages. They do not add to
them.

Storage dams, however, are not enough. When high rainfalls occur over the
Chinese cities, they currently do not have adequate infrastructure to drain away
excess waters. Cities have grown much faster than drainage works could be
planned, executed and managed. Consequently, the number of cities that are
seriously affected by floods has more than doubled during the past 7-8 years. At
present, routinely more than 200 Chinese cities are waterlogged each year during
each monsoon season.

Breakneck expansions of major cities, poor planning, endemic corruption and
absence of good land use planning, have further exacerbated the problem.

Take Wuhan, capital of Hubei province at the confluence of Yangtze and Han
rivers. It is historically known as the "city of 100 lakes". However, it has
lost more than 2/3rd of its lakes,from 127 to 40, during the period 1949-2015.
Lakes and wetlands were filled to make way for construction projects. These
lakes and wetlands used to store water during the flood years, reducing adverse
impacts on the city. The 40 remaining lakes are not enough of a buffer to store
flood waters. Furthermore, their storage capacities have been impaired by heavy
sedimentation due to poor land use practices and construction activities.

Corruption and wasteful spending have further aggravated flood problems in China
for decades. For example, Premier Zhu Rongji coined a phrase to describe a badly
constructed crumbling dike in Jiujiang City in 1998 as a tofu-dregs and turtle
egg project. Tofu dregs are pieces left over after making tofu.

The situation still has not improved that much. According to local media
reports, the person responsible for the construction of 1 billion RMB drainage
project in Wuhan was accused of accepting 1.6 million RMB bribes between 2005
and 2013.

Bad planning and shenanigans have ensured that Wuhan's subway line built only
four years ago was badly inundated. People's Daily reported last month that
Wuhan allocated RMB 13 billion, in 2013, for a three-year programme to improve
its drainage. Only RMB 4 billion has been disbursed so far, and completion date
has now been delayed to 2018.

National Development and Reform Commission noted on July 10 that fruits and
vegetables prices in some flooded areas have "risen significantly". They
instructed local authorities to "closely monitor prices". Flooding is likely to
increase annual consumer prices by 0.2 percent, to over 2 percent. It would also
have a negative impact on China´s GDP growth in the third quarter. Equally,
construction and rebuilding activities may increase aggregate demand. Thus
growth in the fourth quarter, after a weak July-August period, likely be higher.

Chinese leadership is well aware of the economic and social risks imposed by
floods. Premier Li Keqiang has already noted, the "government is better prepared
than ever". It has taken several measures and is fully prepared againstpossible
floods since July-August are "key periods for floods". Similarly, President Xi
Jinping has ordered array of measures to step up relief actions.

China has made considerable progress in recent decades to reduce fatalities due
to floods. However, a new mindset is needed at all levels of decision-making,
central, provincial and municipal. It has to be realized that improper
developments can contribute to floods, and floods do affect development.
Policy-makers need to realize that floods are both developmental issues and
humanitarian concerns.

There are systemic problems that need to be overcome. Water bodies and wetlands
in and around cities have been filled up for construction activities, thus have
seriously disrupted natural drainage patterns. Lakes, as in Wuhan, have steadily
been shrinking. Governments at provincial and municipal levels have mostly
turned blind eyes to construction activities in flood-prone areas. Cities have
not kept up with the construction and proper operation and maintenance of storm
drainage systems. Dikes protecting the cities may be working but drainage
systems in many cities are grossly inadequate.

Technically and economically, floods in China cannot be completely eliminated.
However, their impacts can be significantly reduced by proper land use planning
and flood management. For the Chinese leaders at all levels, floods are a
challenge that needs to be overcome to deliver good living conditions for the
society.

Finally, many poor decisions taken over the past 50 years on urban development
cannot be eliminated overnight. It will take political will, time, money, and
good holistic planning and implementation before flood damages in China can be
significantly reduced.

Asit K. Biswas is Distinguished Visiting Professor at Lee Kuan Yew School of
Public Policy, National University of Singapore; Cecilia Tortajada is Senior
Research Fellow at the Institute of Water Policy, in the same School.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1497


                    Copyright 2016 China Daily Information.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 187 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                  China Daily

                             July 19, 2016 Tuesday

Systemic approach can help reduce flood damage

BYLINE: ASIT K. BISWAS/CECILIA TORTAJADA

LENGTH: 730  words


Floods cannot be completely eliminated. But their impact can be significantly
reduced by proper land use policies and flood management

Trucks loaded with stones fell into the gap of a broken dike in Huarong county,
Hunan province, on Sunday. Drivers had to jump seconds before their vehicles
were engulfed by the water. LI GA/XINHUA

Floods cause more damage each year globally than any other natural
disaster[#xff0d]the United Nations says 157,000 people died in floods and
another 2.3 billion were affected between 1995 and 2015. The current global
average annual flood loss is estimated at $104 billion, and the country
incurring the highest loss is China, followed by the United States and India.
And these losses do not include disruptions in global supply chains.

Floods have been a perennial problem in China, although the death toll in floods
in the country has steadily declined due to construction of dams, dikes and
levees, and installing of early warning systems. Still, economic costs of floods
have been increasing.

This year's floods could be one of the worst in China, primarily because
rainfall in the country this year has been 21 percent higher than
average[#xff0d]the Yangtze River Basin has received 27 percent more rain than
average.

As of July 14, according to the Office of State Flood Control and Drought Relief
Headquarters, 60 million people in 28 provinces had been affected by floods,
which had claimed 237 lives and left 93 people missing. Also, some 147,200
houses damaged and crops on 5460,660 hectares lost. The direct economic loss has
already exceeded $20 billion.

China recognized floods as a major economic problem about two decades ago and
decided to build large dams like the Three Gorges Dam. And had the Three Gorges
Dam and other large dams not been built, floods would have caused significantly
higher damage. But social media in China still accuse big dams of increasing the
damage from floods.

Chinese cities, in general, don't have good enough sewerage to drain away excess
rain water, because their expansion has been much faster than that of their
drainage systems. As a result, the number of cities seriously affected by floods
has more than doubled in the past seven to eight years, with over 200 Chinese
cities being waterlogged each year during the rainy season.

Poor planning and corruption have exacerbated the problem. Wuhan in Central
China's Hubei province, for example, was known as the "city of 100 lakes". But
it lost 87 of its 127 lakes between 1949 and 2015. And the 40 remaining lakes
are not enough to store the rain water during heavy downpours.

Floods could increase annual consumer prices by 0.2 percent, to over 2 percent.
They could also have a negative impact on China's GDP growth in the third
quarter.

But construction and rebuilding activities may increase aggregate demand and
therefore growth in the fourth quarter could be higher.

Chinese leaders are well aware of the economic and social threats posed by
floods, and President Xi Jinping has ordered an array of measures to prevent and
fight the effects of floods.

China has made considerable progress in reducing the effects of floods. But it
needs a new approach at all levels of governments to fight the menace of floods.
For instance, policymakers need to realize floods are a developmental as well as
a humanitarian issue. This means systemic problems have to be overcome.

Many water bodies and wetlands in and around cities have been filled up for real
estate development, seriously disrupting natural drainage patterns. Lakes, as in
Wuhan, have been steadily shrinking. Since governments at provincial and
municipal levels have more or less turned a blind eye to construction activities
in flood-prone areas, the drainage systems of cities have failed to keep pace
with the urban construction boom.

Floods cannot be completely eliminated. But their impact can be significantly
reduced by proper land use policies and flood management, and it will take
political will, time, money and holistic planning and implementation to
significantly reduce flood-related damage in China.

Asit K. Biswas is distinguished Visiting Professor at Lee Kuan Yew School of
Public Policy, National University of Singapore; Cecilia Tortajada is Senior
Research Fellow at the Institute of Water Policy, in the same School.

http://imgs.syndigate.info/498/1493/91/146897782919.jpg

b083fe9fe6d818f7aba302.jpg

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1493


                    Copyright 2016 China Daily Information.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 188 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                          China Daily - Africa Weekly

                                 July 19, 2016

Systemic approach can help reduce flood damage

BYLINE: ASIT K. BISWAS/CECILIA TORTAJADA

LENGTH: 717  words


Floods cannot be completely eliminated. But their impact can be significantly
reduced by proper land use policies and flood management

Trucks loaded with stones fell into the gap of a broken dike in Huarong county,
Hunan province, on Sunday. Drivers had to jump seconds before their vehicles
were engulfed by the water. LI GA/XINHUA

Floods cause more damage each year globally than any other natural
disaster[#xff0d]the United Nations says 157,000 people died in floods and
another 2.3 billion were affected between 1995 and 2015. The current global
average annual flood loss is estimated at $104 billion, and the country
incurring the highest loss is China, followed by the United States and India.
And these losses do not include disruptions in global supply chains.

Floods have been a perennial problem in China, although the death toll in floods
in the country has steadily declined due to construction of dams, dikes and
levees, and installing of early warning systems. Still, economic costs of floods
have been increasing.

This year's floods could be one of the worst in China, primarily because
rainfall in the country this year has been 21 percent higher than
average[#xff0d]the Yangtze River Basin has received 27 percent more rain than
average.

As of July 14, according to the Office of State Flood Control and Drought Relief
Headquarters, 60 million people in 28 provinces had been affected by floods,
which had claimed 237 lives and left 93 people missing. Also, some 147,200
houses damaged and crops on 5460,660 hectares lost. The direct economic loss has
already exceeded $20 billion.

China recognized floods as a major economic problem about two decades ago and
decided to build large dams like the Three Gorges Dam. And had the Three Gorges
Dam and other large dams not been built, floods would have caused significantly
higher damage. But social media in China still accuse big dams of increasing the
damage from floods.

Chinese cities, in general, don't have good enough sewerage to drain away excess
rain water, because their expansion has been much faster than that of their
drainage systems. As a result, the number of cities seriously affected by floods
has more than doubled in the past seven to eight years, with over 200 Chinese
cities being waterlogged each year during the rainy season.

Poor planning and corruption have exacerbated the problem. Wuhan in Central
China's Hubei province, for example, was known as the "city of 100 lakes". But
it lost 87 of its 127 lakes between 1949 and 2015. And the 40 remaining lakes
are not enough to store the rain water during heavy downpours.

Floods could increase annual consumer prices by 0.2 percent, to over 2 percent.
They could also have a negative impact on China's GDP growth in the third
quarter.

But construction and rebuilding activities may increase aggregate demand and
therefore growth in the fourth quarter could be higher.

Chinese leaders are well aware of the economic and social threats posed by
floods, and President Xi Jinping has ordered an array of measures to prevent and
fight the effects of floods.

China has made considerable progress in reducing the effects of floods. But it
needs a new approach at all levels of governments to fight the menace of floods.
For instance, policymakers need to realize floods are a developmental as well as
a humanitarian issue. This means systemic problems have to be overcome.

Many water bodies and wetlands in and around cities have been filled up for real
estate development, seriously disrupting natural drainage patterns. Lakes, as in
Wuhan, have been steadily shrinking. Since governments at provincial and
municipal levels have more or less turned a blind eye to construction activities
in flood-prone areas, the drainage systems of cities have failed to keep pace
with the urban construction boom.

Floods cannot be completely eliminated. But their impact can be significantly
reduced by proper land use policies and flood management, and it will take
political will, time, money and holistic planning and implementation to
significantly reduce flood-related damage in China.

Asit K. Biswas is distinguished Visiting Professor at Lee Kuan Yew School of
Public Policy, National University of Singapore; Cecilia Tortajada is Senior
Research Fellow at the Institute of Water Policy, in the same School.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1497


                    Copyright 2016 China Daily Information.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 189 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                              July 22, 2007 Sunday
                               FIVE STAR EDITION

HOW TO SURVIVE FLOODS WITHOUT TAKING A BATH

BYLINE: Kathleen Lynn, The Record (Hackensack, N.J.)

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. G-12

LENGTH: 501 words


A heavy storm roars into town and suddenly your basement is a murky pool of
water.

The risk of flooding has to be considered by almost anyone buying or selling a
home. Here are some things you need to know to protect yourself, your family and
your belongings:

* I'm buying a home. How can I check whether it's in a flood plain?

The Federal Emergency Management Agency maps flood plains. You can check to see
if the property is in a flood plain by entering the address into a section
called "What's My Flood Risk?" at www.floodsmart.gov, a site of the National
Flood Insurance Program. In addition, if you are working with a real estate
agent, the agent should have access to similar information. You can also check
flood maps at town hall.

Your home inspector should check the house for signs of water incursion, and the
title search should also check to see if the property is in a flood plain.

Ask the sellers if the house has flood problems or is in a flood plain. If they
are not honest, they can be held liable, according to real estate lawyer George
Gunderson of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.

Charlene Barbetta, a broker/sales agent with Burgdorff Realtors in Hillsdale,
N.J., recommends that buyers check the property with First American Flood Data
Services (www.floodcert.com). For as little as $35, this company will certify
whether the property is in a flood plain.

* If I'm in contract or negotiations to buy a home, should I try to check the
place after heavy rains?

Yes. After April storms in New Jersey, many buyers and mortgage appraisers went
back to inspect homes under contract for flood damage. In some cases, sellers
have had to offer financial concessions to pay for clean-up and waterproofing,
according to real estate agents and lawyers.

* Do flood plains change as areas are developed?

Yes, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency tries to revise its flood-plain
maps to keep up with those changes.

* Will my homeowner's policy cover flood damage?

Generally, no. You need separate flood insurance, which is backed by the federal
government's National Flood Insurance Program and sold through many private
property/casualty insurance companies.

You can buy this coverage if you live in a community covered by the flood
insurance program. Check www.floodsmart.gov. To be covered, communities must
agree to restrict development and take other steps to manage flood plains. Most
communities with serious flooding risk have joined the program.

* Will my mortgage lender require me to have flood insurance?

Yes, if your house is in a flood plain.

* How can I choose the right coverage?

You may buy flood insurance that covers up to $250,000 for structural damage to
your home, including damage to your furnace, water heater, air conditioner,
floor surfaces (carpeting and tile) and cleanup. For an additional premium, you
can cover up to $100,000 of flood damage to your home's contents.

There is some private insurance available beyond the federal limits.

For example, Chubb offers coverage of up to $15 million.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.


                          FOCUS - 190 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           January 25, 2007 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Flood coverage tough to enforce

BYLINE: Kathy Chu

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 513 words


Nearly a year and a half after Hurricane Katrina, federally regulated lenders
are still struggling to comply with a requirement that they force homeowners in
high-risk flood zones to buy flood insurance.

By law, homeowners in flood-prone areas -- such as along the coast -- must buy
such a policy if they get a mortgage from a federally regulated lender.
Government-issued flood insurance covers homeowners for up to $250,000 in flood
damage to property and $100,000 to contents. (Unlike homeowners insurance,
though, it doesn't insure against rain or wind damage.)

Katrina raised awareness of the need for flood insurance. While lenders and
regulators have made progress in requiring homeowners to buy polices, "We're
still not there yet," says David Maurstad, an insurance administrator at the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, which oversees the flood-insurance program.

One problem: Some homeowners who buy a flood insurance policy drop it later.
Lenders "do a fairly good job of finding out whether someone is in a flood
plain, but they don't do as good a job of tracking if you lose (flood
insurance)," says J. Robert Hunter, director of insurance at the Consumer
Federation of America.

After Katrina, critics blamed banks' sometimes lax enforcement of the
flood-insurance rule for homeowners' inability to recoup losses. Vicki Vidal of
the Mortgage Bankers Association argues, though, that "lenders who are required
to mandate flood insurance as a condition of making loans are doing so."

Still, last year, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which regulates lenders,
fined banks $297,815 for flood-insurance violations, an 82% increase from 2005.
Other regulators, such as the Office of Thrift Supervision and the Federal
Reserve, levied fewer fines on banks last year than in 2005. Yet, "the (lower)
numbers probably show that ... if anything, the hurricanes significantly raised
awareness for institutions" about the need for flood insurance, says Kevin
Petrasic, an OTS spokesman.

Getting homeowners to buy flood insurance "sounds easy, and it should be, but
you're dealing with customers, and some of them don't understand that they have
to have it," says James Clayton, chairman of Planters Bank and Trust in
Indianola, Miss.

Some lenders are changing their computer systems to more closely track flood
insurance sales. United Bank of Parkersburg, W.Va., says it did so last year to
make it easier to determine whether homeowners had flood insurance on second as
well as first mortgages.

Others are taking advantage of a provision in the law that lets them expand
their flood-insurance requirement. Eureka Homestead, of Metairie, La., now
requires that all homeowners below Interstate 12 -- north of New Orleans -- get
this policy. That includes homes outside flood-prone zones.

As banks increasingly enforce the flood insurance requirement, affected
homeowners will have to pay more to insure their homes. But, "The fact that it's
more expensive to buy an unsafe house is not necessarily a bad thing," Hunter
says. "It's a way of warning a buyer, 'This house has risk.'"

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 191 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              South Coast Register

                                 March 11, 2012

You call that a flood? - Potential is there for another big one

BYLINE: By KATHY SHARPE

SECTION: NEWS - GENERAL

LENGTH: 463  words


Someone who has been closely involved with floods of the past is Woolamia's John
Downey, who was Shoalhaven City Council's flood mitigation engineer from 1966
until 2002.

While Mr Downey said last week's rain event was on the less serious end of the
scale, there was potential for a repeat of the type of flooding Shoalhaven
experienced in the 1970s.

He remembers that when the 1974 flood hit, Tallowa Dam was still being built,
and parts of the wooden form work at the construction site were washed away.

He said the flood that followed in 1978 was actually worse than the 1974 flood.
And to put that into perspective, the great flood of 1870 that basically
destroyed Terara and forced development into Nowra, was one metre higher than
the '78 flood.

"A flood like the 1870 flood would be classed as greater than a 'one in one
hundred year' event, as a measure of the likelihood of it ever happening again,"
Mr Downey said.

Council flood reports characterise the 1870 flood as one in 150 years, the 1974
flood as one in 12 years, and the 1978 flood as  one in 20 years.

Mr Downey said the Tallowa Dam was completed by the flood of '78, but the river
levels still came up higher than in 1974.

"People got a shock in 1974 because it was so long since we'd had a flood," Mr
Downey said.

"It was big enough in both the events of the '70s to flood Terara village, but
the other interesting flood was in 1959.

"The water only got to the top of the banks so it didn't flood Terara, but
because of the nature of the overall river pattern, this flood created the
highest levels ever recorded in the Worrigee Swamp."

He said during his tenure a great deal of flood mitigation work was done to help
the flood basins to drain.

"We commenced mitigation in 1964, and it was basically a drainage scheme.  But
if you look back in history even Alexander Berry had put in a drainage system.

"The concept was a rural scheme to help get the water away more quickly, and to
restore the natural levy."

The work was ongoing, he said, due to erosion of the banks.

He agreed with residents living along the river that many people were complacent
about the potential for the river to flood, because we have such big gaps
between big events.

He also agreed with council's current natural resources and floodplain manager
Isabelle Ghetti, that it was not a good idea for residents to try and manually
open the river mouth at Shoalhaven Heads.

"Opening of the heads only affects flood levels up to about Broughton Creek
anyway," Mr Downey said.

He said last week's heavy rain had potentially set the scene for a more serious
event.

"The fact that the ground is saturated and the rivers and creeks are up - there
is a reasonable risk of it getting more serious if we received very heavy rain
in the Kangaroo Valley catchment."

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2012 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 192 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              India Insurance News

                       March 16, 2015 Monday 6:30 AM EST

Leading Campaigners Call for Flood Defence Spending Ahead of Budget 2015

LENGTH: 791  words


March 16 -- Ahead of the Budget 2015 this Wednesday, the Flood Free Homes
campaign is urging the Chancellor and future Governments to think further ahead
than quick wins, and to increase spending on flood defences and maintenance. Two
million homes in England and Wales are still at flood risk from the rivers and
sea. Yet in both cash and real terms flood defence spending has declined since
2010, with a 500m shortfall between current spending on flood defences and what
is needed.*

The Flood Free Homes campaign was launched by the Association of British
Insurers, supported by Friends of the Earth, Know Your Flood Risk, National
Flood Forum, the Property Care Association's Flood Protection Group and the BRE
Centre for Resilience. The aim of the campaign is to raise the issue of long
term flood defence investment and land and water management. The Budget needs to
set the tone for future Spending Reviews to ensure that protection against
future flooding is a national priority.

The campaign has been supported by more than 80 MPs and prospective
parliamentary candidates who recognise the need to address the UK's growing
flood risk through new and maintained flood defences, sensible planning and long
term solutions.

Flood Free Homes is campaigning for:

* INVEST. By 2025 1 billion per year to be spent managing flood risk in order to
keep pace with climate change.

* ADAPT. A zero tolerance of inappropriate new developments in areas at risk of
flooding.

* PLAN. Cross party consensus on ambitious long term solutions that manage all
types of flood risk.

Flooding has long been recognised as the greatest natural threat the UK faces.
Environment Agency data shows around 2 million homes in England and Wales at
flood risk now from the rivers and sea, with over 500,000 of these at 'moderate'
risk or greater, and around 2.4 million additional homes at risk of surface
water flooding, this is a serious problem facing the country today.

Without action to reduce the risk across the UK, the effect on our homes,
businesses, communities, infrastructure and way of life is potentially
devastating.

Louise Hanson, Director of Advocacy at the ABI, said:

"The UK's increasing flood risk must be a national priority if we are to protect
our communities who live in constant fear of flooding. It is vital that we have
political consensus on how we manage our land and water in order to have the
ambitious long-term solutions we need to effectively manage flood risk. We need
a co-ordinated approach to flood defence investment, much more than just ad hoc
one-off payments."

Mary Dhonau, Chair of the Flood Protection Group Property Care Association and
Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk Campaign, said:

"Having been flooded myself, I know only too well how devastating it can be! It
is essential that spending on flood risk and climate change is prioritised by
the next Government. Our infrastructure is woefully inadequate and needs urgent
investment to make it fit for purpose for both now and in the future!"

Guy Shrubsole, Friends of the Earth climate campaigner, said:

"The Government's flood protection plans remain full of holes - investment lags
far behind what is needed to keep pace with climate change and there's still no
sign of fresh money for flood defence maintenance. With global warming making
our weather more extreme, the Chancellor must use his final budget of this
Parliament to get tough on flooding and tough on the causes of flooding."

Paul Cobbing, Chief Executive of the National Flood Forum, said:

"Flooding affects the very heart of peoples' lives and causes untold trauma and
suffering to individuals and communities.  With flood risk and the impacts of
flooding expected to increase, its important now more than ever to invest in
managing our flood risk for the future.  With an 8:1 economic benefit ratio new
schemes also make sense, whilst maintenance makes sure that we reap the benefits
of our investment."

Stephen Garvin, Director BRE Centre for Resilience, said:

"We are supporting campaign for Flood Free Homes.  It is important that new
developments are constructed responsibly and in appropriate locations. The
campaign will encourage investment in flood defences, and promote greater uptake
of measures at community and property level to improve resilience and reduce the
cost of repairing damage after flood events. Therefore, we encourage government
and industry to invest in appropriate research to encourage greater action in
this area."

How to get involved and find out more information:

* Visit the campaign website www.floodfreehomes.org.uk

* Follow us on Twitter @FloodFreeHomes

* Like us on Facebook Facebook.com/floodfreehomes2025

* Email us floodfreehomes@abi.org.uk

Source: Association of British Insurers

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2015 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 193 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Stirling Observer

                                October 12, 2016
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

'We must protect our homes from flooding';
EXPERT ADVICE

BYLINE: Gareth Jones

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 421 words


It's 10 years since Stirling's worst floods in recent memory caused widespread
disruption and damage.

Water levels peaked in December 2006 when the River Forth rose almost four
metres to the highest level ever recorded.

Michael Cranston was at that time part of the Scottish Environment Protection
Agency flood team and now, a decade on, he has returned to Stirling to head the
new Scottish office of RAB Consultants.

The firm, which specialises in flood early warning, risk and resilience, will be
based at Stirling University Innovation Park.

For the past 14 years, Michael has been working in the development of flood
forecasting and warning services for SEPA. He established the Scottish Flood
Forecasting Service which provides daily flood guidance to emergency responders.

The flood expert remembers the misery caused by the 2006 floods and said that
residents need to be ready in case disaster strikes again.

Michael said: "SEPA has recently published figures that estimate over 3000 homes
in Stirling and the surrounding area are at risk of flooding.

"Because of climate change, these numbers will only increase in time and we need
to be better prepared.

"We all need to be ready for flooding to protect our own homes and businesses.
If anyone needs general advice on how they can be better prepared or what to do
if they are affected by floods, then the Scottish Flood Forum has been set up to
support flood risk communities in Scotland and offers help and advice."

Home owners who think their home may be at risk are advised to heed advice on
how to protect their home on the Scottish Flood Forum's website:
www.scottishfloodforum.org.

Since 2006, a lot has been done to understand the flood issues. SEPA has
published new flood risk maps online and Michael also helped the agency develop
their flood warning systems, which include a free text message service for flood
affected communities such as Cornton, Causewayhead, Bridge of Allan and
Callander.

Michael said: "We will never stop flooding but as individuals we can always be
better prepared for when it might happen and receiving a flood warning is
probably the best way of being prepared.

"SEPA work closely with the Met Office to monitor and predict rainfall and river
levels; when they think there is a risk of flooding in an area they will issue a
flood warning through sending telephone or text messages to anyone registered."

You can register for the free flood warning service by calling 0345 9881188.

Receiving a flood warning is probably the best way of being prepared

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Deluge Forth burst its banks during floods of 2006. Inset, Michael
Cranston

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STO


                           Copyright 2016 MGN Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 194 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       The Mountaineer, Waynesville, N.C.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune News Service

                             July 5, 2006 Wednesday

Flood actions narrowed: Canton, Clyde set to receive $6 million to avert future
floods

BYLINE: Peggy Manning | Senior Staff Writer, The Mountaineer, Waynesville, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1691 words


Jul. 5--After nearly two years of meeting with representatives from four towns
that suffered extreme damage from 2004 floods, the The N.C. Department of
Environment and Natural Resources' Division of Water Resources is prepared to
take a priority list of flood prevention measures to the General Assembly for
approval.

Final recommendations for measures to reduce future flood damages in Canton and
Clyde were approved by stakeholders in both towns Thursday. Water resources
representatives, along with engineers from Carter & Burgess of Raleigh and
Equinox Environmental consultants of Asheville also met with stakeholders in
Biltmore Village and Newland last week.

The stakeholder groups include business owners, town officials and town workers
and others interested in avoiding damages like those caused by back-to-back
storms prompted by hurricanes Frances and Ivan in September 2004.

The groups have been meeting in the four towns since shortly after those floods.

Biltmore Village will receive the biggest chunk of the $16 million remaining in
Senate Bill 7, the state's Hurricane Recovery Act, if the flood damage reduction
plan is approved by legislators. A total of $4.63 million is being earmarked for
the retail village in Buncombe County.

Canton will receive $3.4 million with Clyde to receive $2.8 million and Newland
to get $2 million.

Initially $30 million was supposed to be divided among the four flood-impacted
towns through Senate Bill 7.

"Half of that money is gone," said John Morris, director of the Division of
Water Resources, leaving only $16 million to be used for flood mitigation
efforts in the four towns.

Of that, $3.1 million will be put in a contingency account for unexpected costs
or to complete other smaller projects within the priority list, Morris said.

State legislators allocated $3.4 million of the Hurricane Recovery Act to a new
flood warning system which the N.C. Division of Emergency Management is
coordinating.

"We had to come up with some very practical projects for the remaining funds,"
he said. "All the communities we are working with are interested in a better
flood warning system," Morris said.

Some of the improvements listed in Canton's plan also will benefit Clyde, said
Sandy Slayton of Carter & Burgess.

Town of Canton plan

The top priority recommendations for flood damage reduction in Canton include:

-- Improve flood plain management to reduce damage potential by providing
partial funding to purchase properties along the Pigeon River from Canton to
Clyde. Estimated cost is $2 million.

Many flood plain and flood way properties between Canton and Clyde have been or
are scheduled to be acquired under a variety of programs including the State
Hazard Mitigation Grant Program and Federal Flood Mitigation Assistance.

However, there are remaining properties and/or structures that need to be
acquired to complete the town's vision of a unified protected Pigeon Riverfront
from Canton downstream through Clyde. Haywood County has submitted a Clean Water
Management Trust Fund grant application for acquisition of 164 flood plain and
flood way parcels.

The outcome of this application is not yet known. However, 13 of these
properties currently contain structures, the acquisition of which is not allowed
under Clean Water Management Trust Fund guidelines.

Also, there are 19 additional properties along the Pigeon River the town would
like to acquire to add to the continuity of open space along the Pigeon River
that are not included in the Clean Water application because they are not
eligible for that funding.

This action will provide flood damage reduction benefits by maintaining or
creating open space in the flood plain and floodway through property
acquisition.

The result will be greater flood storage and infiltration and reduction of
flooding caused by floodway constrictions.

-- Town-wide stormwater master plan and correction of existing stormwater
problems. Estimate cost is $1.3 million.

One of the existing problems is the West Canton stormwater that is currently
piped under Blue Ridge Paper property, causing the waste water treatment plant
to overflow during high stormwater flow. flow. The cost of that part of the plan
would cost $800,000.

The other existing problem occurs near the Fibreville Road and Main Street
intersection. The estimated funds required for this portion of the
recommendation is $300,000.

The Town of Canton received $4.5 million from Senate Bill 7 for sewage treatment
repairs and upgrades at Blue Ridge Paper Products' mill. The mill treats the
town's wastewater.

"The town has exhausted that money and needs $1.5 million more from some other
source," Storrow said.

-- Upgrade five Pigeon River stream gages to improve flood warning. The
estimated cost is $45,000.

The U.S. Geological Survey stream gages above Canton currently transmit stream
flow data too slowly to be useful in a flood warning system. This project will
acquire and install upgraded satellite-linked data collection platforms at each
of the Blue Ridge Paper funded USGS stream gages. -- Evaluate Lake Logan for
flood control potential. The estimated cost is $62,000.

Blue Ridge Paper owns and operates Lake Logan, an impoundment on the Pigeon
River upstream of Canton. This project is evaluating the potential use of this
impoundment to reduce flooding in Canton.

The work is being accomplished by the Nashville District of the Army Corps of
Engineers under agreement with the N.C. Division of Water Resources.

Phase one, which is almost complete, is assessing the amount of sediment buildup
in the lake and the extent to which its storage capacity has been reduced.

Phase two will evaluate the amount and frequency of flood flows into the lake,
the amount of water storage capacity in the lake, the nature of the lake's
outlet works, and other relevant information to determine the lake's flood
control potential.

"Would there be more money in other areas to dredge the lake?" asked Joel
Storrow, president of McGill Associates, an Asheville-based engineering firm.

Town of Clyde plan

The top priority recommendations for flood damage reduction in Canton include:

-- Removal of an abandoned bridge which causes flood waters to back up. The
estimated cost will be $350,000.

Removal of the bridge will include the pier, trusses, deck, and span. The
concrete abutments will likely remain.

-- Create off-channel flood storage in the flood way to help alleviate flooding
downstream in the downtown area. Estimated cost is $2 million.

Some riparian areas in the Clyde area have been converted from natural land
cover that stores flood waters (such as wetlands) to developed land uses that do
not store as much water (such as residential and agricultural lands).

This recommendation will create off channel flood storage and a wetland park on
the left (looking downstream) flood plain of the Pigeon River just upstream of
Clyde's downtown area.

Implementation of this action will be done in three phases: a feasibility study,
design and construction, and maintenance.

The feasibility study will determine the flood damage reduction potential of the
site and identify design options. If it is found to be feasible and beneficial
to flood concerns, the project will continue.

-- Town-wide stormwater master plan and correction of existing stormwater
problems. The total estimated cost is $450,000, of which $100,000 would be used
for the master plan. The remaining funds earmarked for stormwater improvements
would be used for stream channel and box culvert improvements adjacent to the
Clyde Fire Station, and stormwater drainage at Spencer Street Park. Morris said
he is confident that eventually funding could be acquired.

Flood waters back up at the box culvert adjacent to the fire station. During the
2004 floods, the stream channel was damaged, and the banks are now eroded and
unstable. Stream channels are slumping along about 400 linear feet.

During heavy rains, stormwater damages private property adjacent to the park on
Spencer Street. "We had a good taste of that on Spencer Street Saturday (June
24), said Clyde Alderman James Mashburn. "That was our first heavy rain since
the 2004 floods."

The homes of several people along Spencer Street received water in their
basements that weekend, Trantham said.

Clyde Mayor Jerry Walker asked if anything could be done to move the water out
of town faster. "There are trees growing out over the river that collect debris
and backs up the floodwaters," Walker said.

Morris said he thinks the town leaders should be more concerned about the water
coming in to Clyde. "It's not a very good strategy watershed-wide," Slayton
said. "It can create other problems downstream."

Alderman Carroll Mease said he thinks plans to develop holding areas for the
floodwaters, which would create off-channel storage and a wetland and would
release the water as the river recedes, will work.

That would be done just up from the old bridge proposed for removal.

What happens next

A draft report of Biltmore Village's flood plans will be submitted to each of
the stakeholders by July 28.

The report will contain a description of the flood events of the fall of 2004,
the damages that happened, and the rationale for recommended measures to reduce
future flood damages.

The report for each community will include both projects that can be funded
through Senate Bill 7 and other measures that will require action or funding by
others.

The report will be shared with Western North Carolina's state legislators to
make sure the project priorities are what they want, Morris said.

From there, the report will go to a General Assembly committee at the end of
August for allocation of the funds to be considered.

"I hope we can accomplish that while the General Assembly is still in session,"
Morris said.

Peggy Manning can be reached at 452-0661, ext. 127, or at
peggy@themountaineer.com.

Copyright (c) 2006, The Mountaineer, Waynesville, N.C. Distributed by
McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20060705-NC-0705-Flood-actions-narrowed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NC


                         Copyright 2006 The Mountaineer


                          FOCUS - 195 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       The Financial Express (Bangladesh)

                           September 7, 2017 Thursday

The rising ferocity of floods, the aftermaths

LENGTH: 1315 words

DATELINE: Bangladesh


Bangladesh, Sept. 7 -- After playing havoc with vast swathes of the country's
north and northeastern regions for more than three months, flood waters have
started receding. However, spells of rain have not stopped altogether. It
continues to pose the threat of onrush of water from rivers upstream. Flood
forecast and warning authorities are not worried much, though; at least for now.
This year's flood has been termed a major one, and is compared with the 1988
calamitous deluge. As per estimates by disaster management coordination
authorities, over 7.5 million people in Bangladesh have been affected by the
recent floods. The worse affected districts include those in the northern,
northeastern and central regions. In fact, the first bout of the calamity struck
the vast Haor areas in the country's north and northeastern zones in May-June.
Excessive rain in the northeast across the border and the overflow of rivers
there and later the onrush of water downstream into Bangladesh largely triggered
this year's monsoon and pre-monsoon flooding.

With the areas gone under water beginning to surface, the flood-stricken people
in millions in the country now find themselves set to embark on the second phase
of the calamity: piecing things together to start life afresh. The government
has asked the departments concerned to extend all-out support to the affected
people to start rehabilitation. Like the onslaught of the floods, their
aftermaths are also filled with scores of woes and hazards. Every major flood
constitutes yet another challenge for the already flood-ravaged people. In
developing countries like Bangladesh, the hazards emerge with menacing
appearances. On the immediate level, the impacts of a protracted flooding are
mostly found in displacements and outbreaks of water-borne diseases. These
abruptly cropped-up problems, in fact, pose a fresh challenge to the already
battered flood-affected people.

There might be a unique aspect to 2017 flood. The deluge this year is part of a
greater flood that has hit two other countries in South Asia. Apart from
Bangladesh, the eastern India including Bihar, West Bengal and the northeastern
Assam was badly hit by flood. The other country, Nepal, experienced unusually
high rainfall that triggered both flood and landslide killing a lot of people.
Apart from the havocs wrought by the long-drawn-out floods causing catastrophic
dislocations, around 1200 people died in the floods. Series of sufferings,
especially displacement-related ordeals, prompted myriad types of miseries among
the affected millions.

Coming to the case of Bangladesh, damages to rural infrastructure appear to be a
major problem. Besides croplands, crudely built dwelling houses, embankments and
dykes have been washed away by the flooding. Apart from hearth and home,
thousands of educational institutions have also been badly damaged by the onrush
of waters. According to official statistics, over 10,000 hectares of cropland
have been damaged by the recent flooding in Bangladesh. Another statistics puts
the number of roads affected by the deluge at 7,130 kilometres. These roads
include national and regional highways and local concrete roads. As disaster
experts view it, the damaged road communication is set to appear as a stumbling
block to taking relief and rehabilitation materials to the remote areas.

Meanwhile, the UN has said recently that long-term food supplies to the affected
areas may be hampered in the post-flood phase. The UN has singled out the vast
areas of farmland destroyed by the flooding. Currently, different UN agencies
are giving food aid to more than 200,000 people in the country.

"Many flood survivors have lost everything; their homes, their possessions,
their crops," that's how the country director of a UN agency in Dhaka has viewed
the situation in a grim observation. With a major part of the country still
under Eid lag, the bad times awaiting the country remain consigned to the
backburner. They are perhaps waiting in the wings, and are set to strike the
nation as food crisis and destitution begin to surface in the flood-hit areas.
As the situation stands now, in spite of the tentative beginning of the
campaigns in the rehabilitation and disease control sectors, the affected people
may have to brace for a long stretch of time before they are bailed out
completely. It is inextricably hinged on ensuring sufficient food supply to the
affected areas. However, dampers keep looming. Irregularities and mismanagement
in the distribution of food have long been haunting the country's post-flood
spectacle. These ills also stand in the way of repairing damaged roads, bridges
and embankments as well as educational institutions.

Miseries have thus been an obstinate reality in the country's post-flood times.
It's true the nation has come a long way from the messy condition of
state-sponsored rehabilitation drives. As decades wore on, Bangladesh kept
mustering the capability to deal with the calamities of flood, and their
aftermaths. Yet it has to put in place well-thought-out disaster management
strategies in order to remarkably cut down on the flood-related losses and
sufferings.

The most glaring impact of floods in the recent decades has been recorded in
agriculture. With the invention of high-yield varieties of crops coupled with
the increase in their acreage, the losses in the agro-sector appear to be
staggering. This is stark reality. Despite the continued reduction in the size
of farmlands, the country is still highly dependent on agriculture. As a
corollary, periodic flooding remains a constant threat to rural farmers in some
flood-prone regions. Unlike cyclones and tropical storms, floods take time to
emerge with their woeful impact on people, agriculture and food stocks. As has
been seen in the aftermath of the country's great floods, the ravages of this
year's flood, too, are feared to cause many a hardship and dislocation to the
flood-hit people. In spite of the small number of deaths, varied types of
ordeals are feared to plague the people for a longer stretch of time this year.
Thanks to the exponential rise in the population of the country, the magnitude
of floods has been more widespread in 2017 than in 1988. Moreover, with the
passage of time the infrastructural development in the rural areas has gained
more speed than in the past. With all these features showing their strong
presence across Bangladesh, the impacts of even short-duration floods these days
are felt quite acutely.

A country with over 700 rivers and tributaries, 54 flowing from across the
border, Bangladesh is increasingly becoming vulnerable to floods. Apart from the
excessive monsoon rain in the country, the overall flood situation is being
aggravated by waters rushing in from the rain-fed rivers in the Indian states
across the border. This monsoon, the eastern and northeastern India has also
experienced excessive rain, the spell of which has later made their onslaught on
the lower areas in Bangladesh. In fact, regular flooding has lately become a
global feature. The countries to which this natural disaster was largely strange
are now going through floods almost regularly. These include countries in the
Americas, the US in particular, and Europe. The severity of floods has also
increased in China and Southeast Asia. Global warming-induced flooding is
increasingly affecting countries irrespective of their geological locations. The
rich nations can cope with the flood impacts with relative ease. But countries
like Bangladesh have few way outs. They watch the rising intensity of deluges
helplessly, and find themselves in positions worse than before.

shihabskr@ymail.com

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from The Financial
Express. For any query with respect to this article or any other content
requirement, please contact Editor at content.services@htlive.com

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 The Financial Express
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 196 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       The Financial Express (Bangladesh)

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday

CPD study estimates flood losses at Tk 150b

LENGTH: 836 words

DATELINE: Bangladesh


Bangladesh, Oct. 19 -- Losses caused by two spells of recent floods in the
country have been estimated to be Tk 150.1 billion, according to a study
conducted by Centre for Policy Dialogue (CPD).

Crop losses, collapse of houses and damage to roads, culverts, embankments and
dams have dealt a severe blow to above 12.87 million people in 38 districts, the
study added.

The findings of the study titled 'Flood 2017: Assessing Damage and Post-flood
Management' were disclosed at a national-level dialogue organised by the
think-tank at the CIRDAP auditorium in the city on Thursday.

The study said flash flood hit six districts in the haor areas during the
March-April period while monsoon flood occurred in August affecting 32
districts.

Flash flood caused an approximate loss of 1.53 million tonnes of rice during the
Boro season worth Tk 53 billion, it added.

The study showed that monsoon flood in August affected 8.2 million people in 32
districts, causing damage to 9 per cent of croplands worth Tk 27 billion. It
also caused damage to houses, roads, culverts and embankments worth Tk 71.0
billion.

"The financial cost of haor flash flood is equivalent to 3.7 per cent of
agriculture crop sector gross domestic product (GDP) while the financial cost of
monsoon flood is likely to be about 0.35 per cent to 0.44 per cent of GDP of the
financial year 2017-18."

The study also revealed that government allocation and incentives were
inadequate for flood-affected people in haor areas.

It said 0.6 million flood-affected people were to receive support to cultivate
one bigha of land each, irrespective of their flood losses.

In terms of area coverage, government incentives covered only 19.2 per cent of
total cultivable land affected by flash flood.

Support coverage was 68 per cent of the total number of farmers affected by
flash flood, the study said.

Out of the total allocation for incentives worth Tk 90 billion, it said, Tk 588
million (in September) and Tk 199 million (in October) were allocated for
flood-affected farmers in 32 districts for seed, fertiliser and cash.

However, the loss has been estimated by CPD excluding financial costs of
fisheries, livestock, and educational institutions etc.

To cope with such disasters, CPD also made some recommendations including
improving service delivery for proper utilisation of relief allocation.

It also assessed the needs for raising efficiency of public food stock
management and recommended a special financial mechanism for rural
affected-people so that they could get access to low-cost formal credit.

Speaking on the occasion, former vice-chancellor of BRAC University Dr Ainun
Nishat said Aman production might witness a 30 per cent fall due to monsoon
flood this year.

The country is still going through a flood-like situation in many districts, he
said, apprehending that money allocated for flood rehabilitation and repair to
roads and embankments might be looted.

Economist Dr M Asaduzzaman said taking care of roads and embankments is more
important than that of establishing new structures in the countries like
Bangladesh.

When asked, he said a recent hike in prices of rice and vegetables has a
correlation with the two spells of flood causing damage to standing Boro crop
and vegetables while existing water-logging is likely to hit Aman farming as
well.

The government should assess the availability of domestic rice, imported grain
and public stock to prepare itself for meeting any possible rice shortage.

Water Resources Minister Anisul Islam Mahmud while speaking as the chief guest
said the government is trying to recoup the losses caused by flooding.

He pointed out that rice varieties like Brridhan-28 or 29 take 150-160 days to
ripe which are not suitable for haor areas.

He said the agriculture ministry is promoting the varieties in haor areas but
they are not taking responsibility for any damage to crops if flash flood hits
the region.

He said dams were damaged by overflow of rivers, onrush of water from the
neighbouring country and heavy rain this year.

CPD distinguished fellow Dr Debapriya Bhattacharya who chaired the programme
said flood is an old phenomena for Bangladeshi people.

"But we will have to adopt some new plans to face the age-old problem," he
added.

He said climate change issue should be included in our flood preparedness
programmes as a newer tool.

Regional, sub-regional and international cooperation will also be needed to
resolve river related issues mostly responsible for floods, he said, adding that
people should be included in flood preparedness plan to establish a most
effective flood resilient method.

Chairman of the parliamentary standing committee on disaster management and
relief Dhirendra Debnath Shambhu and CPD executive director Dr Fahmida Khatun,
among others, were present.

tonmoy.wardad@gmail.com

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from The Financial
Express. For any query with respect to this article or any other content
requirement, please contact Editor at content.services@htlive.com

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 The Financial Express
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 197 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       The Financial Express (Bangladesh)

                           October 19, 2017 Thursday

CPD study estimates flood losses at Tk 150b

LENGTH: 836 words

DATELINE: Bangladesh


Bangladesh, Oct. 19 -- Losses caused by two spells of recent floods in the
country have been estimated to be Tk 150.1 billion, according to a study
conducted by Centre for Policy Dialogue (CPD).

Crop losses, collapse of houses and damage to roads, culverts, embankments and
dams have dealt a severe blow to above 12.87 million people in 38 districts, the
study added.

The findings of the study titled 'Flood 2017: Assessing Damage and Post-flood
Management' were disclosed at a national-level dialogue organised by the
think-tank at the CIRDAP auditorium in the city on Thursday.

The study said flash flood hit six districts in the haor areas during the
March-April period while monsoon flood occurred in August affecting 32
districts.

Flash flood caused an approximate loss of 1.53 million tonnes of rice during the
Boro season worth Tk 53 billion, it added.

The study showed that monsoon flood in August affected 8.2 million people in 32
districts, causing damage to 9 per cent of croplands worth Tk 27 billion. It
also caused damage to houses, roads, culverts and embankments worth Tk 71.0
billion.

"The financial cost of haor flash flood is equivalent to 3.7 per cent of
agriculture crop sector gross domestic product (GDP) while the financial cost of
monsoon flood is likely to be about 0.35 per cent to 0.44 per cent of GDP of the
financial year 2017-18."

The study also revealed that government allocation and incentives were
inadequate for flood-affected people in haor areas.

It said 0.6 million flood-affected people were to receive support to cultivate
one bigha of land each, irrespective of their flood losses.

In terms of area coverage, government incentives covered only 19.2 per cent of
total cultivable land affected by flash flood.

Support coverage was 68 per cent of the total number of farmers affected by
flash flood, the study said.

Out of the total allocation for incentives worth Tk 90 billion, it said, Tk 588
million (in September) and Tk 199 million (in October) were allocated for
flood-affected farmers in 32 districts for seed, fertiliser and cash.

However, the loss has been estimated by CPD excluding financial costs of
fisheries, livestock, and educational institutions etc.

To cope with such disasters, CPD also made some recommendations including
improving service delivery for proper utilisation of relief allocation.

It also assessed the needs for raising efficiency of public food stock
management and recommended a special financial mechanism for rural
affected-people so that they could get access to low-cost formal credit.

Speaking on the occasion, former vice-chancellor of BRAC University Dr Ainun
Nishat said Aman production might witness a 30 per cent fall due to monsoon
flood this year.

The country is still going through a flood-like situation in many districts, he
said, apprehending that money allocated for flood rehabilitation and repair to
roads and embankments might be looted.

Economist Dr M Asaduzzaman said taking care of roads and embankments is more
important than that of establishing new structures in the countries like
Bangladesh.

When asked, he said a recent hike in prices of rice and vegetables has a
correlation with the two spells of flood causing damage to standing Boro crop
and vegetables while existing water-logging is likely to hit Aman farming as
well.

The government should assess the availability of domestic rice, imported grain
and public stock to prepare itself for meeting any possible rice shortage.

Water Resources Minister Anisul Islam Mahmud while speaking as the chief guest
said the government is trying to recoup the losses caused by flooding.

He pointed out that rice varieties like Brridhan-28 or 29 take 150-160 days to
ripe which are not suitable for haor areas.

He said the agriculture ministry is promoting the varieties in haor areas but
they are not taking responsibility for any damage to crops if flash flood hits
the region.

He said dams were damaged by overflow of rivers, onrush of water from the
neighbouring country and heavy rain this year.

CPD distinguished fellow Dr Debapriya Bhattacharya who chaired the programme
said flood is an old phenomena for Bangladeshi people.

"But we will have to adopt some new plans to face the age-old problem," he
added.

He said climate change issue should be included in our flood preparedness
programmes as a newer tool.

Regional, sub-regional and international cooperation will also be needed to
resolve river related issues mostly responsible for floods, he said, adding that
people should be included in flood preparedness plan to establish a most
effective flood resilient method.

Chairman of the parliamentary standing committee on disaster management and
relief Dhirendra Debnath Shambhu and CPD executive director Dr Fahmida Khatun,
among others, were present.

tonmoy.wardad@gmail.com

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from The Financial
Express. For any query with respect to this article or any other content
requirement, please contact Editor at content.services@htlive.com

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2017 The Financial Express
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 198 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                            January 17, 2011 Monday
                                 First Edition

Payout may depend on where you live;
Flood Crisis

BYLINE: Policies Matthew Drummond

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 397 words


The stoush over flood insurance turns on the issue of whether policyholders are
covered by floods caused by rising rivers and creeks.

The insurance industry has long worked under a rule of thumb that if damage to a
house or business is caused by water coming from above, then the policy will pay
out: this is considered a storm and policies do protect against storms.

But if the damage is caused from water coming from below, then this is a flood
and the policyholder will not get a pay-out, unless they have additional flood
insurance. Policies have traditionally never offered automatic cover for floods.

But "flash floods'' tend to be covered as insures see them as intrinsically
linked to a storm. This has added to the confusion among policyholders on
whether or not they are covered for riverine floods.

Holders of a home and contents insurance policy from Suncorp are automatically
covered against riverine floods. That company decided to broaden its type of
cover after the 2008 Emerald flood.

Other insurers like RACQ provide cover for riverine floods as an optional extra.

Brands under Insurance Australia Group, which includes NRMA and CGU, do not
provide any type of protection against riverine flooding in Queensland.

But IAG brands do provide protection against riverine flooding in NSW. NRMA
includes it as standard for home and contents insurance, although customers can
opt out and get a lower premium.

This means two NRMA customers on either side of the Tweed River, between
Queensland and NSW, could be affected by the same flood but receive different
responses from their insurer.

The reason? Insurers point to the lack of flood mapping by local councils
throughout Queensland.

Only 8 per cent of catchment areas have been included in the National Flood
Information Database, a resource shared between insurers allowing them to set
premiums at an individual property according to the risk that property will
flood.

Critically, however, the densely populated south-east corner of Queensland has
been mapped. Brisbane City Council was able to provide residents with regular
advice on which streets in which suburbs would flood .

Disputes as to whether damage is covered by a policy - and there are about to be
many - must be dealt with through an insurer's internal dispute resolution
scheme within two weeks.

After this, the policyholder can complain to the Insurance Ombudsman.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: FIVE PHOTOS: Flood damaged items await collection outside homes in
Rocklea, Brisbane, above. Marie Holswilder and her dog Suzie Q get some
attention from the Gold Coast Meter Maids yesterday after seeking shelter at the
Brisbane showgrounds, far left. Volunteers help clean up in St Lucia, Brisbane,
left. In Skipton, Victoria, Luke Peters plays while a bobcat removes sandbags
from the front of a supermarket, right. Photos: GLENN HUNT, ANDY ZAKELI, DEAN
LEWINS, MELANIE FAITH DOVE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2011 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 199 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                           January 19, 2011 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

Insurance fog must be cleared

SECTION: NEWS; Leaders; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 886 words


Treasurer Wayne Swan and his assistant, Bill Shorten, will be going down the
wrong track entirely if their Â­solution to the unseemly stoush over flood
insurance isto implement a national scheme. The lack of a clear Â­definition of
what constitutes a flood for the Â­purposesof insurance policies is creating
confusion and Â­heartache, and financial loss.

As estimates of the cost of the Queensland, NSW and Â­Victorian flooding mount,
it's becoming apparent that many people had no flood insurance, and many of
those who did may not have been covered for "riverine" floods, only flash
floods.

Even the chairman of the Insurance Council of Australia, Robert Whelan, admits
that policyholders could have been confused by the fact that although their
policies stated they would be covered for floods, in fact there would be no
payouts for the damage that was done to their property. Insurers say that while
storm and tempest is covered - and the "flash flooding" that results from storms
- flooding from rising rivers or creeks is not. However there is no standard
definition in contracts that makes this clear. The insurance industry and the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission tried in 2008 to come up with a
standard definition but unfortunately the ACCC, urged by consumer groups that
argued that the definition was too restrictive, rejected the insurance
industry's terms.

Suncorp decided after the floods at Emerald, Queensland, in 2008 to widen its
flood coverage and as the dominant insurer in Queensland (and given that
Brisbane is built on a flood plain) it decided to do its own flood mapping in
order to assess the level of risk it was taking on with the expanded
Â­definition. Holders of a home and contents insurance policy from Suncorp are
thus automatically covered against riverine floods. In contrast, NRMA, which
insures for flood in NSW under an expanded definition, does not include all
floods in its policies in Queensland or Victoria. It appears that the reasons
for this are that NSW has better flood mapping than Queensland or NSW. So, while
some policyholders in Queensland would have been Â­covered by Suncorp for floods
in the past few weeks, those who are not covered by Suncorp might not be paid
out.

This is one of the situations in financial markets where Â­information asymmetry
can be solved. There is a lot to be said for better information being required
in two specific areas.

First, it is absolutely vital that better flood mapping is done throughout
Australia and made public. The fact is that housing has been located in areas
that, based on flood mapping, it should not have been. Local councils and flood
plain management authorities are responsible for flood mapping but the
information is not generally available. The Insurance Council has also, based on
these maps, determined the flood risk of about 11.4 million properties in its
national flood information database. Insurers use that database to set premiums
at an individual property according to the risk that property will flood.

Local authorities and state governments must restrict the amount of development
in flood-prone areas. The public, through better flood mapping, could choose
whether they really wish to spend $500,000 building a house on a flood plain
that is expected to flood every 30 years. This may not sound often but, from the
perspective of an insurance company, the back-of-the-envelope premium required
to cover this risk is $16,666 a year. If insurers charged the appropriate flood
insurance premium for such a property, it is unlikely it would be built.

The other information asymmetry that must be addressed is to devise a standard,
agreed, easily understood and explicit Â­definition of flood for the purposes of
insurance policies. That would make the distinction between flash floods and
Â­inundation from steady and inexorable flooding a "distinction without a
difference" in the eyes of flooded-out householder.

One option that has been floated instead of addressing the information
deficiencies is to make flood insurance compulsory through a national scheme. It
may mean that fewer taxpayer funds would be used to compensate people who failed
to look after their own interests by getting adequate insurance. However, if a
national flood insurance scheme were set up and every household was levied $200
to cover it, this could encourage home owners to build in more flood-prone areas
and not to properly insure themselves. The New Zealand government decided to set
up a national earthquake scheme because NZ is such a big Â­earthquake risk that
the insurers could not cover it, so there is market failure. That's not the case
with Australian floods. At least not yet. Given that a more informed
private-sector solution is available, such a scheme is not necessary. However,
local Â­councils and state governments need to take responsibility for ensuring
that flood-plain building is minimal.

In addition, the insurance industry must come to the party incases where its own
documentation and sales have allowed Â­confusion to reign. It must settle on a
common definition of flood coverage that is clear and easily understood. If it
does not,it will be inviting the government to adopt a more Â­interventionist
approach and will possibly lose the part of the business it regards as
lucrative.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2011 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 200 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                           February 2, 2011 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

Leaks appear in definitions argument

BYLINE: Matthew Drummond.

SECTION: FINANCIAL SERVICES; Pg. 52

LENGTH: 691 words


Arriving at a standard for 'flood' may not remove policy confusion, writes
Matthew Drummond.

Anyone who did high-school debating will remember the advice that one should
avoid becoming bogged down in an argument over definitions.

Tackle the substantive issues behind the topic, affirmative and negative teams
are urged, and steer clear over fights as to what the topic actually means.
Definition debates are not really debates at all.

In the wake of the floods in Queensland and Victoria, considerable steam is
building up behind the push for a standard definition of "flood". Those who have
put the issue at the top of their insurance reform wish-list include Queensland
Premier Anna Bligh, Prime Minister Julia Gillard, the Consumer Action Law Centre
and the Insurance Council of Australia. On Sunday, the chief executive of
Commonwealth Bank of Australia Ralph Norris added his name to the list.

But insurers concede that a standard definition of flood is unlikely to make a
jot of difference to the substantive issue of whether people have adequate
insurance cover.

"Having a standard definition will not mean we have more insurers underwriting
the risk against river floods," says Insurance Council of Australia chief Rob
Whelan.

"A definition doesn't mean the insurance companies will underwrite that risk."

Like the definition of floods itself, there is confusion over what a standard
definition of floods would achieve.

Listening to some leaves an impression that a standard definition of floods will
mean standardised flood cover.

The point is being missed that, if a standard definition gets agreed, it will be
promptly added to the list of things that most insurers exclude, rather than
what they provide cover for.

Insurance policies differentiate between damage caused by flash floods and
damage caused by rising rivers. Flash floods are associated with storms and are
always covered by insurers. River floods are generally not covered.

The push for a standard definition stretches back to the Wollongong floods of
2000, when a mix of flash and river flooding revealed the seemingly inequitable
situation of people who suffered from the same disaster getting different
treatment from their insurers. A report by the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission following the floods recommended insurers "simplify and
harmonise the drafting of insurance policies so that the availability or
exclusion of flood insurance ... is made clear."

Eight years later, that definition got submitted to the Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission for approval - it needed approval because insurers were
in effect seeking to collude on a contract term.

The commission refused to accept the definition. ACCC chairman Graeme Samuel
recently explained part of the commission's reason for doing so was that "on one
analysis it was a clause designed to limit cover rather than provide cover."

Such a characterisation slightly misses the mark. A standard flood definition
will not be designed to limit flood cover "on one analysis" - it will be
designed to limit flood cover on the only analysis.

Nicole Rich of the Consumer Action Law Centre sees a standard definition of
floods as a number one issue but agrees that it won't solve the issue of
underinsurance. For the reform to have any use, it needs to be coupled with a
further reform of making the exclusion clearer on insurance contracts, she says.

Having previously focused on the need for a standard definition, Assistant
Treasurer Bill Shorten now seems to be on the same page, saying yesterday that
insurance contracts ought to be more accessible in allowing consumers to know
what they've got.

Mr Whelan yesterday agreed clearer up-front exclusions were an idea worth
considering. He added that he wants the standard definition issue dealt with to
make room for more pressing issues, like the lack of flood mapping which limits
the amount of flood insurance on offer.

And that is the real substantive issue. Floods account for about a third of
natural disaster costs each year. Yet more insurers don't cover them; an
unfortunate look for an industry built on the promise of protecting people's
assets.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Policies differentiate between damage caused by flash floods and
damage caused by rising rivers. Photo: Glenn Hunt

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2011 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 201 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Sun Herald

                             August 5, 2005, Friday

All homes on Coast need flood insurance, agents say

BYLINE: By Eba Hamid

LENGTH: 480 words



In a hurricane season that has already seen seven named storms, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and area insurance companies are warning residents
to prepare for possible flood damage.

Flood insurance is vital to all South Mississippi residents, local insurers say.
Hurricanes, heavy rains and rising water from the many area rivers and creeks
all are risk factors to homes on the Coast.

"It's extremely important," said Kathy Rogers, an agent at Rogers Insurance in
Gulfport, "because standard homeowners insurance doesn't cover flooding or
rising water of any type. If your roof blows off and the rain comes in, it
covers that. If it rises from creeks, rivers or ditches, homeowners insurance
doesn't cover that."

FEMA said many people do not buy flood insurance because of some widely spread
myths. Regardless of whether a home is located in a floodplain, flood insurance
is available to people in all 50 states, even if not required by the mortgage.
People who live in low-to-moderate flood-risk areas may receive insurance at a
lower rate.

"I think the biggest myth is that people think they don't need it," Rogers said.
"They don't realize their homeowners insurance doesn't cover it. And a lot of
people say they aren't in a flood zone. Everyone is in a flood area. It's just
what flood area you're in that matters."

Rogers said location in different flood zones affects insurance costs. Residents
looking to buy flood insurance policies should contact their insurance agents
for pricing information.

Because it takes 30 days for insurance plans to go into effect, FEMA is urging
residents to prepare now for this hurricane season.

For more information on flood insurance or to find a flood insurance agent near
you, visit www.floodsmart.gov.


FLOODING FACTS

The Federal Emergency Management Agency's National Flood Insurance Program is
helping millions of people in 20,000 communities receive flood insurance. The
following facts are from FEMA's flood insurance Web site.

Total flood policies in force in 1978: 1,446,354

Total flood policies in force in 2004: 4,670,531

Mississippi flood policies in force in 2004: 42,320

Florida policies in force in 2004: 1,873,521.

Yearly property flood damage in U.S.: $ 2 billion

Homes in high-risk flood areas have a 26 percent chance of flood damage while
under a 30-year mortgage.


Source: Federal Emergency Management Agency, www.fema.gov/nfip/, National Flood
Insurance Program, www.floodsmart.gov


-----

To see more of The Sun Herald, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.sunherald.com.

Copyright (c) 2005, The Sun Herald, Biloxi, Miss.

Distributed by Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News.

For information on republishing this content, contact us at (800) 661-2511
(U.S.), (213) 237-4914 (worldwide), fax (213) 237-6515, or e-mail
reprints@krtinfo.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

KR-ACC-NO: BI-FLOOD-INSURANCE-20050805

JOURNAL-CODE: BI

               Copyright 2005 Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News
                         Copyright 2005 The Sun Herald


                          FOCUS - 202 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 11, 2015 Wednesday

Flood Protection is Topic of Conversation in Virginia and California

LENGTH: 886  words

DATELINE: New York


Natural Resources Defense Council has issued the following news release:

On Wednesday, March 11 two of my NRDC colleagues, Joel Scata and Ben Chou, will
be attending listening sessions on the updated federal flood protection
standards that President Obama wisely put in place with his January 30th
executive order.

With our climate and precipitation patterns changing, floods become much more
likely than previously understood. That's why it's so important to ensure that
when the federal government funds bridges, roads, schools, water treatment
systems, and other critical infrastructure, they ensure that these facilities
are built to a more protective standard.

Joel will be attending the meeting in Norfolk, Virginia while Ben will be at the
meeting in Mather, California. Neither state is a stranger to floods.

On Wednesday, March 11th two of my NRDC colleagues, Joel Scata and Ben Chou,
will be attending listening sessions on the updated federal flood protection
standards that President Obama put in place with his January 30th executive
order. Joel will be attenVirginia experiences flood risks from every imaginable
angle. Flash floods can affect small streams in the mountainous western part of
the state, while the larger rivers in the eastern portion of the state
experience larger flooding. But the scariest flood risks may be those associated
with sea level rise. Virginia's coastline is experiencing some of the fastest
rates of sea level rise in the world. This is particularly bad news for the U.S.
Navy, since the largest base it owns on the planet is located in Norfolk, so in
a very real sense, sea level rise and future flood risk have national security
implications.

While drought is the main problem on the minds of Californians these days,
floods are still an all-too regular occurrence. According to the state's
disaster preparedness plan (also known as a hazard mitigation plan), there were
49 federal disasters declared in California for flood-related disasters alone
between the years 1954 and 2011. And the state has a lot at risk from future
floods. More than $575 billion worth of property is located in areas defined by
the 500-year floodplain. One in five Californians lives within the 500-year
floodplain, either along the state's long coastline or its rivers, many of which
tend to be flashy, high-gradient streams susceptible to flash floods.

The new standard is a big improvement. It gives federal agencies the flexibility
of selecting one of three benchmarks when evaluating project designs or deciding
whether to fund public infrastructure projects: elevating infrastructure based
on a projection of how much higher flood elevations may rise in response to
climate change; the 100-year flood level plus at least two additional feet of
elevation; or the 500-year flood level.

Reliance on the current 100-year flood elevation as the standard is predicated
on two faulty assumptions.

First is the assumption that flood frequency projections made by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and FEMA mirror reality. In fact, these projections often
underestimate the true risk of flooding. One study found the 100-year flood
stage calculated for Hannibal, Mo. - Mark Twain's historical Mississippi River
hometown - should more realistically be defined as the 10-year flood stage.
Researchers at University of Iowa recently published a study that found floods
are occurring with increasing frequency throughout the Midwest, confirming what
most of us already realized -- that floods are happening more often.

Second, the way flood frequencies and elevations are calculated is based
exclusively on past historical experience and our present knowledge of land use
and hydrology. No accounting is made for future conditions, particularly those
conditions that will arise in response to climate change. Currently, FEMA's
flood maps and the Corps' projections of flood elevations fail to take into
account the likelihood of more frequent extreme precipitation events, future sea
level rise on our nation's coasts, and other conditions that may contribute to
floods being more likely or more severe.

Critics wrongly claim that the new standards will raise premiums for the
National Flood Insurance Program and will dramatically increase the costs of
public projects -- but they're wrong. The new standards should have no impacts
on how flood insurance premiums are calculated. And as far as project costs go,
it's often far cheaper to either build outside the floodplain or build to a
higher level of protection, than to rebuild a school, water treatment plant, or
bridge that's damaged repeatedly by flooding.

The new standards will require federal agencies to use a more conservative
estimate of flood risk when making decisions about what to build, where to
build, and which local and state projects receive federal funding.

This is exactly what we need. Climate change is dramatically increasing flood
risks, and it's time we help communities in Virginia, California, and beyond
prepare.

Image Franklin, Va., September 22, 1999 -- Aerial view of flooded downtown
Franklin, VA, shows oil contamination resulting from propane tanks and cars
under water. Photo by: Liz Roll/ FEMA News Photo

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 203 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           September 24, 2012 Monday

Shickshinny needs flood plain ordinance

BYLINE: Elizabeth Skrapits, The Citizens' Voice, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 739 words


Sept. 24--If Shickshinny officials don't soon pass an updated flood plain
ordinance, the borough could be in deep water when it comes to flood insurance
and federal funding.

Council is aware of the potential impact on the borough -- residents could lose
their ability to buy federally funded flood insurance or get a buyout of their
flood-damaged properties, for example -- but critics say the new flood plain
designation isn't fair to some residents.

Tropical Storm Lee, on Sept. 8-9, 2011, devastated Luzerne County municipalities
not protected by the levee system, including Shickshinny, and led to the first
update to the county's flood maps in approximately 30 years.

The county, as well as all its municipalities, with the exception of a handful
the federal government does not consider flood-prone -- including Warrior Run,
Hughestown, Yatesville, Freeland, Jeddo and Hazleton -- are required to update
their ordinances to reflect the changes, Luzerne County Planning Director Adrian
Merolli said.

"They wanted the maps and everything to take effect by Nov. 2," he said.

The county is on track to pass its ordinance, Merolli said.

Shickshinny is not. Its ordinance has been updated, but during the September
meeting, council rejected it. Councilman Barry Noss was the sole vote in favor.
Councilman Mike Steeber abstained, and councilmen Kevin Morris, Jim Wido and
President Rosalie Whitebread voted against it.

Morris said he believes the flood map changes are arbitrary.

"I only voted 'no' because the flood plain ordinance included the new flood
levels that are imposed on the people just because they can," he said. "The
county can say, 'Now the flood plain is this.'"

The change means some people who weren't in the flood zone are now, Morris said.

He said that means those residents could have to buy flood insurance, or might
not be able to build something on their properties because it isn't allowed
under the ordinance.

To be eligible for the National Flood Insurance Program and any type of disaster
relief, all municipalities have to adopt a flood plain ordinance that is up to
date and reflective of the current flood map, Federal Emergency Management
Agency spokesman Nick Morici said.

West Pittston's was not updated and not enforced, and FEMA put the borough on
probation. If the borough ends up being suspended, residents would be ineligible
for the National Flood Insurance Program or any type of federally funded flood
relief.

West Pittston has until Dec. 1 to ensure a new ordinance is in place and borough
officials are enforcing it. They are in the process of doing so.

"Right now they're working hard, I'm sure, to fix any deficiencies they have,"
Morici said.

If Shickshinny officials don't update their flood plain ordinance, they could be
in the same position as West Pittston, even though Shickshinny officials are
enforcing their current ordinance.

"Yes, you're enforcing it, but at the same time, there's a different situation,"
Morici said.

Any community that has a new flood map has to have an ordinance to match to
ensure the community is safeguarded and protected, he said.

And Shickshinny was devastated by the Lee flooding, with most of its businesses
and a big portion of its homes affected.

"They're no stranger to risk," Morici said.

Morris blames the levee system in Wilkes-Barre for increased flooding in areas
like Shickshinny. The river was always predictable until the levee was put in,
Morris said.

"I just think we need more questions answered," he said. "And they have to look
out for the people of Shickshinny."

Shickshinny Borough secretary Melissa Weber said she will re-advertise the new
flood plain ordinance and put it in for reconsideration at council's next
meeting.

"It is imperative that Shickshinny borough, which is such a flood-prone
municipality, have this ordinance in place so people can receive disaster relief
funding," she said.

Morris said council doesn't want residents to lose flood insurance or federal
funding.

"We don't want that to happen. Absolutely not. But at the same time, people have
to come talk to us. They can't just wave magic wands (and change the flood
maps)," he said. "I hate to blame the dike system, but I can't find any other
reason that explains the water levels."

eskrapits@citizensvoice.com, 570-821-2072

___ (c)2012 The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Citizens' Voice
(Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at citizensvoice.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120924-YC-Shickshinny-needs-flood-plain-ordinance-0924-20120924

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: YC


                       Copyright 2012 The Citizens' Voice


                          FOCUS - 204 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                             Assam Tribune (India)

                           September 25, 2012 Tuesday

Coming Assembly elections

LENGTH: 567 words

DATELINE: Guwahati


Guwahati, Sept. 25 -- The flood situation in the State has worsened, with the
current wave of floods leaving a trail of death and destruction in 16 districts.
Over 14 lakh people have been hit by the catastrophe, which has also caused
extensive damage to cropland and infrastructure, including roads and bridges.

While the spate in the Brahmaputra and its tributaries has been attributed to
incessant rains in Arunachal Pradesh, the breach of many embankments exemplifies
the shoddy nature of their construction and maintenance. The age-old network of
embankments in the State is in urgent need of a revamp, and their utility
further eroded by substandard repair works highlighted frequently in the media.
This raises legitimate questions on the sincerity of the Water Resources
Department, which is primarily responsible for executing flood control projects.
Similarly, the flood devastations also make one wonder what purpose the
Brahmaputra Board entrusted with the management of the Brahmaputra is serving.
Flood control work in the State has earned notoriety for widespread corruption,
and unless the funds are spent in the desired manner, the overall situation is
unlikely to improve. The latest wave of floods has rendered thousands of
families homeless, many of whom are still awaiting makeshift shelters and
relief. The absence of a quick and effective response to floods remains another
perennial constraint, multiplying the sufferings of the flood-hit. Despite their
recurring nature, floods invariably catch the administration and the Government
unawares, and this has to change for restoring some semblance of normalcy in the
post-flood situation.

The peculiarities of the State's floods and erosion warrant ' besides short-term
measures ' a long-term, scientific strategy. In order that the measures bear
fruit, scientific study and proper planning must precede the intended
interventions. Over the years, substantial amounts have been wasted in the name
of flood and erosion control because the projects had been far from scientific.
Assam, with its vast network of inter-State and international rivers, and a
prolonged monsoon, has been one of the worst flood-affected zones in the world
but still we do not yet have adequate scientific data on various aspects of the
problem. The scientific community believes that embankments often cause abnormal
rise in the riverbeds and add to the severity of the floods once an embankment
is breached or overtopped. Widespread deforestation along riversides as also in
the upstream areas, too, is having an aggravating impact on floods and erosion.
The possibilities of dredging the Brahmaputra, which is much shallower than what
it was 50 years back, need to be explored. A long-term, holistic approach
involving different components of flood control such as afforestation,
canalization of rivers, proper monitoring of rivers, sharing of flood prediction
intelligence with neighbouring States and countries, an well-organized flood
relief distribution system, etc., is an urgent need. All this, however, will
materialize only when the authorities wake up to the fact that flood control is
intrinsically linked to the development process of the State. Published by HT
Syndication with permission from Assam Tribune. For any query with respect to
this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 Assam Tribune (P) Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 205 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                             Assam Tribune (India)

                           September 25, 2012 Tuesday

Devastating floods

LENGTH: 567 words

DATELINE: Guwahati


Guwahati, Sept. 25 -- The flood situation in the State has worsened, with the
current wave of floods leaving a trail of death and destruction in 16 districts.
Over 14 lakh people have been hit by the catastrophe, which has also caused
extensive damage to cropland and infrastructure, including roads and bridges.

While the spate in the Brahmaputra and its tributaries has been attributed to
incessant rains in Arunachal Pradesh, the breach of many embankments exemplifies
the shoddy nature of their construction and maintenance. The age-old network of
embankments in the State is in urgent need of a revamp, and their utility
further eroded by substandard repair works highlighted frequently in the media.
This raises legitimate questions on the sincerity of the Water Resources
Department, which is primarily responsible for executing flood control projects.
Similarly, the flood devastations also make one wonder what purpose the
Brahmaputra Board entrusted with the management of the Brahmaputra is serving.
Flood control work in the State has earned notoriety for widespread corruption,
and unless the funds are spent in the desired manner, the overall situation is
unlikely to improve. The latest wave of floods has rendered thousands of
families homeless, many of whom are still awaiting makeshift shelters and
relief. The absence of a quick and effective response to floods remains another
perennial constraint, multiplying the sufferings of the flood-hit. Despite their
recurring nature, floods invariably catch the administration and the Government
unawares, and this has to change for restoring some semblance of normalcy in the
post-flood situation.

The peculiarities of the State's floods and erosion warrant ' besides short-term
measures ' a long-term, scientific strategy. In order that the measures bear
fruit, scientific study and proper planning must precede the intended
interventions. Over the years, substantial amounts have been wasted in the name
of flood and erosion control because the projects had been far from scientific.
Assam, with its vast network of inter-State and international rivers, and a
prolonged monsoon, has been one of the worst flood-affected zones in the world
but still we do not yet have adequate scientific data on various aspects of the
problem. The scientific community believes that embankments often cause abnormal
rise in the riverbeds and add to the severity of the floods once an embankment
is breached or overtopped. Widespread deforestation along riversides as also in
the upstream areas, too, is having an aggravating impact on floods and erosion.
The possibilities of dredging the Brahmaputra, which is much shallower than what
it was 50 years back, need to be explored. A long-term, holistic approach
involving different components of flood control such as afforestation,
canalization of rivers, proper monitoring of rivers, sharing of flood prediction
intelligence with neighbouring States and countries, an well-organized flood
relief distribution system, etc., is an urgent need. All this, however, will
materialize only when the authorities wake up to the fact that flood control is
intrinsically linked to the development process of the State. Published by HT
Syndication with permission from Assam Tribune. For any query with respect to
this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 Assam Tribune (P) Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 206 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                             Assam Tribune (India)

                             October 2, 2017 Monday

Goalpara flash floods

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: Guwahati


Guwahati, Oct. 2 -- Even as the State was recuperating from the devastations of
the recent floods ' the worst in decades to have hit it ' the districts of
Goalpara, Lakhimpur and Karbi Anglong have once again been hit by another wave
of deluge. Goalpara happens to be the worst affected as it was hit by a flash
flood originating in the Meghalaya hills.

Intriguingly, and something that puts our government authorities in poor light,
the exact cause behind the flood is not yet known, with several unconfirmed
theories ranging from a cloudburst in Meghalaya to the blockage of a hilly river
by landfall doing the rounds. All this goes to show how lackadaisical we
continue to be in our treatment of a vital issue like floods, especially flood
forewarning, flood preparation and flood control. Indeed, floods are now being
accepted as an inescapable reality with little meaningful intervention or
foresightedness forthcoming from the authority even as the flood-hit continue to
languish in makeshift, ill-equipped relief camps. Significantly, this is not the
first time that Goalpara which borders the Meghalaya hills has been hit by a
flash flood. The devastations of a similar deluge a few years back that
extracted a heavy toll of lives is still fresh in public memory. Had there been
proper study of rainfall data and sharing of flood-related information with the
neighbouring State, the calamitous impact of such sudden floods could have been
averted.

With experts increasingly attributing the shifts in rainfall patterns and
intensity to global climatic changes, the time has come to prepare ourselves
with an appropriate redressal mechanism. Floods occurring as late as in October
are a reality of late and this calls for enhanced levels of preparedness. Lack
of crucial flood-related data invariably hinders adequate flood forecasting in
the downstream areas, which aggravates the flood situation manifold. On many
occasions, the sudden nature of the floods hampers timely initiation of flood
control and post-flood measures, including relief and rehabilitation. Given that
the State surrounded by hills has a large network of rivers including the mighty
Brahmaputra, it is critical that we share rainfall data and all other
flood-related information with the neighbouring States and nations. Having
access to hydrological information relating to water level, discharge and
rainfall in the upstream areas of the Brahmaputra and other rivers can improve
our flood forecasting and timely warning for mitigation measures in the lower
reaches of the rivers. Floods in Assam have their own peculiarities, and a
permanent solution being only a distant possibility, the best course of action
for the authorities is to ensure that we have an effective disaster
preparedness, mitigation and relief mechanism. Given the widespread damage
caused to cropland, infrastructure, and human lives and property by floods, the
State Government needs to come up with a long-term strategy to deal with the
menace. Among other things, the strategy should give proper thrust on
environmental aspects, as growing desecration of the natural environment is
worsening the seasonal floods.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Assam Tribune. For
any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at content.services@htlive.com

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Assam Tribune (P) Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 207 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                This Day (Lagos)

                                October 12, 2012

Counting Transport Losses As Flood Ravages More States

LENGTH: 1882 words

DATELINE: John Iwori


As flood submerges more communities across the country, transporters have
continued to count their losses, writes John Iwori

That the flood that has ravaged many communities across the country has caused
enormous loss to Nigerians is an understatement. In fact, the direct and
indirect loss arising from the flood is so enormous that it is virtually
impossible to calculate it in naira and kobo.

Houses and other properties, farmlands, food and cash crops have been ravaged by
the flood. Besides, many peoples' means of livelihood has been destroyed or
hampered by the ravaging flood. Thousands of people, if not millions, have been
displaced.

Experts said the flood was caused by a disruption in the ecosystem popularly
called "climate change" and the opening of the dams in the Republic of Cameroun
a few weeks ago. This made River Niger to overflow its banks.

In Kogi State alone, over 600,000, according to the state government, have been
displaced. No fewer than 400,000 persons have been displaced by the flood in
Delta State. Indeed, yet-to-be estimated residents of several communities across
the country have been rendered homeless as a result of the flood.

Nevertheless, transporters are among those that have been worst hit by the
flood. This is due to the fact that many highways, particularly inter-state
roads have been submerged by the flood.

The worst hit road is the Lokoja-Abuja Road. The road which has remained under
construction for years, despite its division into three segments with three
different contractors handling it was submerged in the flood. This made the road
impassable for days. Commuters were stranded. As a way out, canoes and other
makeshift river crafts were used to ferry commuters and their luggage from one
side of the road to the other.

The flood is not limited to Kogi State. Benue, Kwara, Delta, Anambra, Rivers,
Bayelsa and many other states across the country have also come under severe
flooding in recent times. Many have also lost their lives or injured in the
ravaging flood. This is totally not unexpected as River Niger and River Benue,
as well as their numerous tributaries pass through these states.

As if this is not enough, more floods are expected in the days and weeks ahead.
Already, the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) has warned that there
will be more floods in the days ahead. It is not only NEMA that is issuing the
warnings.

Experts from Jebba Dam Authority have also warned that people living on the
plains of River Niger and one of its tributaries, River Kaduna are to expect
more flooding until February 2013. The experts explained that what is being
experienced so far across the country is white flood. According to them, white
flood which is often associated with more devastating destruction is yet to
start.

In spite of the fact that the flood has not fully subsided in many parts of the
affected communities in the country and with the fear of more flooding imminent,
many people have been gripped by fear; fear of the unknown.

The anxiety over what will follow another heavy rain or flooding is palpable as
Nigerians go out to eke a living daily. In Lagos, many residents have resorted
to studying the weather regularly to make appointments and take decisions on
where to go and when.

Motorists and pedestrians literally went through hell in their quest to get to
their various destinations across the country. A popular television presenter,
Miss Nancy Iloh, said she spent days on the road in her attempt to get to the
Ondo State capital, Akure for the recent gubernatorial live debate in the state.

She stated that she was caught up in the flood as the vehicle she was travelling
with could not wade through the flood and take her to her destination. According
to her, at a point, she thought of getting to Benin City and take flight to
Akure.

However, flights to Akure unlike Lagos, Abuja and Port Harcourt are irregular.
Besides, she wondered how she can successfully get to Benin City with the flood
virtually everywhere on the route to her destination.

Iloh is not alone. Many other Nigerians suffered many losses and pain. In fact,
there was pain and sorrow as Nigerians wade through the flood to get their
various destinations. To say the least, the heavy rains which resulted in the
flooding of several parts of the country have caused hardship to many Nigerians
in the affected areas.

Road users were overwhelmed by the ills that trailed the heavy rains and
flooding across the country. Metro roads and highways have been taken over by
the flood, resulting in long traffic snarls. Some expressways were almost
completely cut off. In many cases, it is impossible to link up to these roads
and highways.

This is unconnected with the fact that these roads have been virtually washed
off by the heavy rains and flood. For a country which infrastructural facilities
are grossly inadequate even in few areas that they exist, the flood has
succeeded in making the situation worse.

The dilapidated roads, which have suffered neglect and comprehensive regular
maintenance over the years, have become worse with the ravaging flood across the
country.

A Lagos-based transporter, Mr. Johnson Nwachukwu said his business has been
crippled by the heavy rains and flood. Nwachukwu who said he is yet to ascertain
the loss he has incurred in his transportation business since the heavy rains
and flood set in explained that what he has so far lost to the flood is
enormous.

His words: "My brother, I have been seeing flood since I was born but I have not
seen one with this magnitude. All my buses going to Akure, Okene, Lokoja, and
Abuja have been grounded. It is not that we do not have passengers. We have a
lot.

"In fact, since the unfortunate incident of the Dana Air crash on June 3, 2012,
there is a steady increase in our passengers going to Abuja. Most of them prefer
our fully air-conditioned executive buses. But with the heavy rains and flood,
we have been finding it difficult to meet the needs of our customers,
particularly our passengers who want to go to Abuja.

"The buses are there but I cannot take the risk of putting them on the road,
especially on Lagos-Lokoja-Abuja road. This is because if any of them is
grounded in the flood, the loss will be enormous if at all one succeeds in
recovering the vehicle.

"Ordinarily, we normally send another vehicle to evacuate our passengers and
take them to their destinations whenever any of our vehicles breaks down. But
with the flood, we cannot do so because there is no road for the driver of the
vehicle to pass and get to the one that has broken down. That means our business
is at a standstill.

"That is one of the reasons I am yet to put a figure on the loss I have incurred
so far. But you can do a simple Arithmetic of what we have lost by counting the
total number of passengers we take to Abuja everyday and multiply them by the
number of trips we make in a day.

"This is the only way you can appreciate the enormity of the losses we have
incurred since the flood make it impossible for us to ply the road the way we do
in the past. My brother, the cost is very huge and it is impacting negatively on
our business," he added.

A passenger, who spoke to THISDAY on the condition of anonymity at Jibowu, Yaba,
a popular bus terminus in Lagos, said it has not been possible for him to make
ends meet since the flood started.

"I am self employed. I make money by moving from one point to another to render
services which I am paid for. With the flood, I have not been able to meet any
of my clients. I am broke. That is why I decided to travel and see one of my
relations in Abuja but I cannot do so because there are no buses.

"The cost of the fare for the few ones that are plying the roads are very high.
I cannot afford it. That is why I am here. You would have not met me here if I
had the right fare because I would have gone with the last bus", he said.

Is there a way out of the malaise that has plagued transportation as a result of
the flood? What are the remedies? In what ways can the plight of victims be
ameliorated? Already, President Goodluck Jonathan has in a nationwide broadcast
to Nigerians highlighted the challenges faced by the country as a result of the
heavy rains and flood.

He announced the setting up of a 34 member committee to raise funds for the
flood victims across the country. He revealed that the committee is headed by
business mogul and President of Dangote Plc, Alhaji Aliko Dangote. President
Jonathan also disclosed that N17.6 billion would be provided as direct financial
assistance to the flood victims.

Moreover, NEMA has said it has so far spent N1.3 billion for the provision of
relief materials to those affected by the flood across the country. Not a few
have however expressed concern on the modalities for the disbursement of the
funds and relief materials to the victims.

As Nwachukwu put it: "The real victims across the country must be identified and
given succour. Otherwise, the funds will end up in the pockets of government
officials and their cronies. It has been happening in the past and I do not see
an exception in this case.

"Out of every case you watch on television, listen in the radio or read in the
newspapers and magazines, there are thousands, if not millions of unreported
cases of where money meant for certain people are diverted by those saddled with
the responsibility of administering it. I do not need to mention any name. They
are so many. You know it," he added.

How effective are the strategies put in place to disburse the funds and relief
materials to the victims? Will it not end up in the hands of the wrongs persons
instead of the real victims of the flood across the country?

What measures have President Jonathan outlined to ensure that the right thing is
not only done but also seen to be done to ameliorate the plight of the flood
victims in the affected communities? Genuine answers to these and many more
questions begging for answers will help in no small measure in providing
remedies for the victims of the flood in the affected areas.

Since flooding is an annual phenomenon, the Federal Government must come up with
concrete measures to mitigate the plight of victims, particularly in the flood
prone areas. To ensure effective implementation, these measures must be broken
into immediate, medium and long terms.

"We must learn from countries that have mastered the means and ways to tackle
flood. There is nothing wrong in admitting that one does not know something and
learn from those who know it. The Federal Government must also muster the
political will to implement the measures it has put in place to address the
challenges posed by heavy rains and flood across the country.

"Relevant government agencies must be made to be alive to their statutory roles
and responsibilities in addressing the plight of flood victims across the
country. If they are not meeting up, questions must be asked and answers
provided.

"For instance, what are problems NEMA is facing in meeting needs of victims of
flood and how can they be tackle in future? Is money budgeted for NEMA enough?
When was the funds statutorily approved for it released to it? Does NEMA has the
right personnel to meet its mandate? That is the way to go in addressing the
challenges posed by flood in the country", he added.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 208 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                This Day (Lagos)

                                 April 27, 2013

31 States to Experience Devastating Flood in 2013, Says Report

BYLINE: Yemi Akinsuyi and Tunde Sanni

LENGTH: 796 words


Apart from Ekiti, Enugu, Katsina, Imo, Abia States and Federal Capital Territory
(FCT), all other states in Nigeria will experience a devastating flood this
year.

The states are Zamfara, Yobe, Sokoto, Rivers, Taraba, Plateau, Oyo, Ogun, Osun,
Ondo, Niger, Nasarawa, Lagos, Kwara, Kogi, Kebbi, Kano, Kaduna, Jigawa, Gombe,
Edo, Ebonyi, Delta, Cross Rivers, Benue, Bayelsa, Bauchi, Anambra, Akwa Ibom,
and Adamawa.

This was contained in 2013 Annual Flood Outlook (AFO) for Nigeria presented by
the Director General, Nigeria Hydrological Services Agency (NIHSA), John
Shamonda.

Speaking after a three-day programme on the flood outlook, organised by the
NIHSA, Shamonda, said efforts were being geared towards ensuring that the effect
was less felt in these areas.

The DG explained that 156 Local Government Areas would experience the
devastating flood, while other areas might not be affected at all.

"Floods and associated hazards may be inevitable, but they can be minimised and
turned into an opportunity to transform society into a higher level of
sustainability. This requires pro-activeness and a change of paradigm from
emergency management to flood risk management in order to avert a disaster," he
said.

The DG said his agency came to the conclusion of the flood forecast based on the
earlier report by the Nigerian Meteorological Agency (NIMET), which led his team
to assess flood outlook that came out with the report.

He said: "The 2012 NIMET SRP drew the attention to high rainfall which led to
devastating floods across Nigeria. NIMET's 2013 Seasonal Rainfall Prediction
(SRP) has again indicated that high rainfalls are to be expected in some parts
of the country in 2013. In response to this prediction, the Nigerian
Hydrological Services Agency set up a Technical Committee to assess the Flood
Outlook for 2013 in Nigeria.

"In the absence of a reliable model adapted for flood forecasting for the
country, the committee adopted simple empirical techniques of relating flood
factors referenced to 2012 data and flood extent in combination with spatial
analysis using our own method to assess the flood outlook for 2013 based on
NIMET's 2013 SRP data.

"The analysis of deviation in annual rainfall and length of season, together
with 2012 flow discharges observed at selected stations led to the outlook of
greater flooding scenario across the country than occurred in 2012. A digital
map of the country showing the spatial extent of flooding to be expected in 2013
is a major output of the assessment."

Shamonda said the expected areas of worse scenario of river flooding were
located in the Komadugu Yobe Basin and the Niger and Benue troughs.

"The peak floods at the confluence of Rivers Niger and Benue to the Niger Delta
are also expected to be as high as the 2012 floods. The worst scenario are
expected in Kogi, Edo, Delta and Anambra States, the Coastal Delta States of
Bayelsa, Rivers and Delta and some States in the Southwest such as Ondo, Ogun,
and Lagos are expected to have coastal flooding.

"Also flash floods are expected in major urban centres of Lagos, Port Harcourt,
Kano, Yola, Onitsha, Oshogbo, Ibadan, except where urban drainage facilities may
have been cleared of debris and waste dumps.

As part of efforts in cushioning the effect of the flood, the NIHSA boss
recommended that the major reservoirs on the Komadugu, Yobe Basin and the Niger
and Benue basins should be lowered of storage in May and June in order to
accommodate flood water arriving from July.

Continuing, he said: "Governments at all levels should create awareness on the
need for communities to relocate to safer terrain. The need to develop flood
modelling and early warning systems cannot be overemphasized with current trends
in climate and weather change.

"There is also need to carry out a comprehensive flood hazard map for all areas
considered at risk of flooding in the country".

While commending the NIHSA for the early warning given to Nigerians concerning
flood in 2013, Minister of Water Resources, Mrs. Sarah Ochkepe urged the people
to incorporate risk management principles in water resources management, prevent
flood hazards turning into disasters, as well as increasing multidisciplinary
approaches in flood management.

Ochekpe also enjoined Nigerians to improve information on integrated flood
management approaches, alleviate poverty through preventive and response
strategies for flood vulnerable sections and finally enhance community
participation in irrigation and appropriate adaption.

"The 2013 Flood Outlook is a flood risk management element which entails
multidisciplinary contributions to improve information that will promote
preventive and responsive strategies in mitigating the impacts of floods through
informed decisions by relevant authorities and agencies

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 209 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                              June 20, 2008 Friday
                                  Main Edition

The wave of the future;
Developers and homeowners need to plan for more extreme floods.

BYLINE: TERRI TURNER; For the Journal-Constitution

SECTION: @ISSUE; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 724 words


I doubt that there are many of us who have not seen the photos of houses being
torn apart and washed downstream by flood waters in the Midwest. I have to sit
and wonder, were those people in the path of the flood prepared? More aptly
stated, did the people whose homes were flooded know their flood risk?

The flooding that is flashing across our TV screens is not unheard of, beyond
belief or unpredictable. Nationwide, flooding is increasing for a number of
reasons.

Changes in rainfall patterns are occurring. It makes no difference if you think
it is caused by global warming or some other phenomenon. The reality is that
while average yearly rainfall may remain fairly constant, rain events are less
frequent but involve more intense storms. It is not uncommon to hear reports of
a storm that dropped enormous amounts of rain in an area in a short period of
time, or about storm events that caused dams or retention ponds to overflow for
the first time. Also not uncommon are reports of major flooding, dam failures
and community devastation where levees breach or fail or where raging rivers
overtop their banks.

As development brings about vast changes to watersheds by converting farmland
and forest to rooftops and big-box parking lots, less water soaks into the earth
and more rain runs into our creeks, streams and rivers. This increase in
stormwater runoff --- the amount of water from each rainfall event --- into our
streams results in an increase in flood heights during even the smallest of
storm events.

It is very important that we regulate development so that it is on higher ground
than tomorrow's flood, not yesterday's flood. Flood heights are increasing and
will continue to increase. When a new flood map is produced for any given area,
it will likely show higher flood levels. This is reality, and it is important
that communities use that better data for regulation. Property owners should be
made aware of the increased flood levels so that they know their true risk.

Further, while many people seem to think it can only flood within the boundaries
of that 100-year floodplain on the flood map, there is flood risk above and
beyond that relatively common and often small floodplain.

Just ask the folks who have lost their homes in areas that are outside the
mapped floodplain --- areas that may have been above the 100-year flood level
but were not safe from a larger, more intense storm. Larger storms are occurring
now and will continue to occur in the future. Each and every property is subject
to some risk of flooding. It just depends on how big the flood must be to impact
each of them.

It is important to note that nationally, more than one-third of the flood
insurance claims in recent years were outside the 100-year floodplain shown on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map.

There are ways that property owners can protect their lives and property:

* Buy flood insurance. Anyone, anywhere, can buy flood insurance as long as
their community has joined and complies with the minimal requirements of the
National Flood Insurance program. A primary responsibility of your community is
public safety. Flood safety is no different than fire or police safety. Insist
that your community leaders join and comply with the NFIP.

* If you live in or anywhere near water, know your flood risk. Also, know how to
evacuate. Homes and possessions can be replaced, but life is precious and
cannot.

* Avoid building in floodplains. Plan wisely and develop wisely.

* Don't build in a way that pushes flood water on other people's property. That
is not a good neighbor policy and may potentially create liability for you as a
property owner.

* Do not drive through floodwater. Driving through floodwater causes the most
deaths from floods. Please remember that as little as 6 feet of water can float
a vehicle. Do not walk through floodwater, either --- moving water can and will
sweep people off their feet.

After the water recedes from these most recent floods, communities and property
owners will consider what they can do to reduce the loss of property and life
from the next flood.

Only by accepting personal and community responsibility now, and effectively
planning for the future, will we reduce the adverse impacts of flooding for
ourselves and generations to come.

* Terri Turner is chair of the Georgia Association of Floodplain Management.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Terri Turner is chair of the Georgia Association of Floodplain
Management./ImageData* ImageData*
Graphic: JORDIN ISIP / United Features Syndicate/ImageData*

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2008 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                          FOCUS - 210 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              Western Daily Press

                            January 20, 2015 Tuesday

Billion a year to keep flood waters at bay

BYLINE: By Emily Beament

SECTION: NEWS:OTHER; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 542  words


news@westerndailypress.co.uk

Flood defence spending must rise to £1 billion a year over the next decade to
cope with the rising threat of flooding, insurers and campaigners have urged.

There should also be an end to building new homes in flood-risk areas, to
prevent communities living in "constant fear of flooding", the Association of
British Insurers (ABI) said, as it launched the Flood Free Homes campaign.

Despite planning rules, some 20,000 new properties are being built on the
floodplain each year, including 4,000 in places where there is significant risk
of flooding, the ABI warned as it called for a "zero tolerance" approach to the
problem.

Stopping house-building in the floodplain has high support, with nine out of 10
people (90 per cent) believing residential housing developers should be
completely banned from building in high-risk areas, according to a poll carried
out for the launch of the campaign.

The Flood Free Homes campaign, which is supported by Friends of the Earth, the
National Flood Forum, the Know Your Flood Risk campaign and the Property Care
Association's Flood Protection Group, aims to raise the issues of long-term
flood defence investment and land and water management.

It comes a year after parts of the UK were hit by devastating flooding as the
country was battered by a series of extreme winter storms.

The West Country was the worst hit and residents of the Somerset Levels are
understandably nervous of a repeat of the floods that forced some residents out
of their homes for an entire year.

The survey of 2,500 people by YouGov for the ABI found that flood defences
topped the list of environmental issues that should attract government spending,
with more than a third (36 per cent) saying it was the most important recipient
of funding.

And almost three-quarters (73 per cent) thought that local authorities were
primarily responsible for ensuring new homes are built in suitable locations,
with an acceptable level of flood risk.

The campaign is calling for spending of £1 billion a year on flood defences by
2025, a zero tolerance approach to inappropriate new developments in flood-risk
areas and cross-party political consensus on long-term solutions for tackling
flooding.

Huw Evans, deputy director general at the ABI, said: "The need for this campaign
to address the UK's rising flood threat has never been more important. No action
is not an option. Last winter's floods highlighted the trauma and devastation
flooding brings. How we manage our land and water has to become central to
government decision-making across the UK, whoever is in power.

"Without adequate long-term investment in flood defence protection that reflects
the increasing threat, a zero-tolerance approach towards building in flood-risk
areas and political agreement, too many communities will continue to live with
the constant fear of flooding."

Guy Shrubsole, Friends of the Earth climate campaigner, said: "With climate
change pushing up flood risk, it's vital that the Government ramps up its
investment in flood defences and stops building homes on flood plains.

"It's not right that the human and economic costs of climate change are pushed
onto those most vulnerable to flooding - we need to tackle this huge problem
together."

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2015 Localworld
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 211 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 22, 2016 Thursday

SYNOPSIS OF AMENDING THE CODE OF SOUTH BETHANY, CHAPTER 145, ZONING, ARTICLE III
"DEFINITIONS," ARTICLE X," DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS," AND ARTICLE XI, "SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS" ORDINANCE 184-16 (SECOND READING)

LENGTH: 796  words

DATELINE: New York



 Dover: Delaware Department of Transport has issued the following news release



 This ordinance amends Chapter 145, "Zoning", §§ 145-3, 145-35, and 145-38 to:

 [#xfffd][#x201a][#xfffd] Add a definition for the "bottom of the lowest floor"
and the "ground floor" in a house in South Bethany.



 [#xfffd][#x201a][#xfffd] Clarify the definition of "Flood Insurance Rate Maps."


 [#xfffd][#x201a][#xfffd] Allow an increase in the maximum height of houses by
one foot from 32 feet to 33 feet.

 [#xfffd][#x201a][#xfffd] Allow the way the height of houses is measured from
both the Center line of the road and the Base Flood Elevation.

 [#xfffd][#x201a][#xfffd] Change the allowed height of house and the way the
height is measured in the AE and AO Zones.
 AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND the Code of the Town of South Bethany, Chapter 145,

 Zoning, Article III, "Definitions", Article X, "Dimensional Requirements", and
Article XI,

 "Setback Requirements".

 BE IT HEREBY ENACTED by the Council of the Town of South Bethany, Sussex

 County, a majority thereof concurring in Council duly met, that Chapter 145
("Zoning")

 be amended as follows (additions are highlighted and deletions marked through):


 ARTICLE III

 Definitions

 § 145-3. Definitions and word use.

 A. For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, certain terms are

 herein defined as applicable within the corporate limits of South

 Bethany. Words used in the present tense include the future. The

 singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The

 term "occupied" or "used," as applied to any building, shall be

 construed as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged

 or designed to be occupied or used."

 B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the

 meanings indicated:

 FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - An official map on

 which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated

 special flood hazard areas to indicate the magnitude and nature of

 flood hazards, and to designate applicable flood zones. [Amended

 2-13-2015 by Ord. No. 177-14]

 (1) Zone A: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the onepercent

 annual chance flood; base flood elevations are not

 determined.

 (2) Zone AE: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation

 by the one-percent annual chance flood; base flood

 elevations are determined; floodways may or may not be

 determined. The base flood elevation in an AE Zone is

 equal to the number that follows AE in feet NAVD.

 (3) Zone AO: Areas of shallow flooding, with or without a

 designated average flood depth. The base flood elevation

 in an AO Zone is equal to the number that follows AO

 Ordinance 184-16 3

 plus the Highest Adjacent Grade (to the building) in feet NAVD.

 (4) Zone VE: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the
one-percent annual chance flood and subject to high velocity wave action (also
referred to as coastal high hazard areas). The base flood elevation in a VE Zone
is equal to the number that follows VE in feet NAVD.

 (5) Limit of Moderate Wave Action (LiMWA): The inland limit of the area
affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood. Base flood
conditions between the Zone VE and the LiMWA will be similar to, but less severe
than, those in the Zone VE.

 (6) Zone X (shaded): Areas subject to inundation by the five-hundred-year flood
(0.2% annual chance); areas subject to the one-percent annual chance flood with
average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less
than one square mile; and areas protected by levees from the base flood.

 (7) Zone X (not shaded): Areas determined to be outside the one-percent annual
chance flood and outside the five-hundred-year floodplain.

 GROUND FLOOR - This is the floor of an area below the lowest floor that is used
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.

 HEIGHT LIMITATION - The height of a structure shall be measured from the base
flood elevation (BFE) or the center line of the street on which the structure
fronts between the two side property lines, if extended, to the uppermost point
of the structure, except as provided in § 145-38E(2). Such projections as
chimneys, television and radio antennas, flagpoles and weather vanes shall not
be included in the calculation of the height limitation. [Amended 3-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 95-00]

 LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an "enclosure below the
lowest floor" which is an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the lowest floor.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 212 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       The Southland Times (New Zealand)

                           October 4, 2006 Wednesday

Councils adopt flood strategy

BYLINE: DEUCHRASS Andrea

SECTION: NEWS; NATIONAL; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 662 words


QUEENSTOWN -- The Queenstown Lakes District and Otago Regional councils
yesterday adopted a flood risk management strategy designed to "live with
flooding" in the district.

A consequence of dramatic floods in Queenstown, Wanaka, Kingston and Glenorchy
during the 1990s, the strategy moved away from major works to reduce lake levels
during a major flood and instead focused on managing risks to the community.

The last major flood, in 1999, caused extensive damage and cost the local
economy an estimated $56 million.

Otago Regional Council chairman Stephen Cairns said communities that chose to
live in a physical environment such as the Queenstown Lakes district could not
anticipate, assume or expect to control it.

The strategy was about learning to live "within the reality" of the situation,
he said.

The two councils took the unusual step of holding concurrent meetings at the
district council chambers, which Mayor Clive Geddes said was a rare event.

Formalities aside, several members of the public spoke in opposition to the
perceived lack of physical action provided in the strategy to mitigate the
effects of another major flood.

Opposition focused on work that could be done to alleviate the imbalance between
the capacity of the Kawarau River as the lake outlet and the huge inflows during
heavy rainfall.

Sediment in the Shotover River, which is deposited in either the Shotover Delta
or the Kawarau River, was also cited in the strategy as reducing flows.

Former district councillor Ian Kirkland said there was no solution to flooding
in the area but there were ways to mitigate it, including removing a large
amount of rock from Smith Falls in the Kawarau River to improve flows.

"If you sit here and do nothing, where the hell is the level going to be in 20
years' time?" Queenstown resident and regular submittor on flood issues Hector
Boyd said studies had been going on to his knowledge for 47 years. "We don't
need more studies on this area -- we need action." Mr Boyd told the council to
"roll up your sleeves and get on with the river works" .

Skyline Enterprises chief executive Ken Matthews said the "big scare" for the
community was having to sit and watch a similar flood to that of 1999.

Councillor Rick Pettit said the inevitability of another flood had been
established.

"It's not a question of when, it's a question of how big it's going to be." Cr
Pettit said Lake Wakatipu was being used as a reservoir to protect communities
downstream and outflows needed to be improved.

While the Insurance Council of New Zealand had provided figures for the cost of
the 1999 flood, he said, those figures omitted costs incurred by businesses that
could not afford to take out insurance after floods in 1994 and 1995 raised the
premiums.

"How do you possibly make assessments for flood mitigation measures if you have
no idea what your real costs are," he said.

Flood mitigation project manager Hanna Taylor said the damage to business in a
flood now would be less than 1999 because many had installed flood protection
measures. WHO DOES WHAT Queenstown Lakes District Council roles: Managing land
use and development that do not worsen the flood hazards Keeping the community
safe during and after a flood Helping private business or homes Public safety
and protection of utility services Otago Regional Council roles: Hazard
identification and information of a likely flood Monitoring rain and river flow
gages and analysis Responding to flood risks arising from future development The
ongoing investigation, valuation and consultation of flood mitigation measures
Community roles: Ensuring their own safety, protection of dependants and
property Awareness of flood hazard and risks and managing those risks To
contribute to a relief effort

--------------------

CAPTION:

Meeting talks: Otago Regional Council chairman Stephen Cairns and Queenstown
Lakes District Mayor Clive Geddes in discussion at the start of a joint council
meeting yesterday.

Photo: 85511 JOHANNA PARSONS

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 Fairfax New Zealand
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 213 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                      January 25, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST

A Guide to Flood-Resistant Building Terms

BYLINE: DAVID W. DUNLAP

SECTION: NYREGION

LENGTH: 1640 words



HIGHLIGHT: The world of resilient design has its own specialized vocabulary.
This glossary will help you navigate it.


Everyone talks about extreme weather. (Or denies it.) But many people are also
doing something: designing and constructing flood-resistant buildings and
infrastructure. The New York Times is presenting case studies that highlight how
the built environment is being made more resilient in New York City and other
nearby coastal areas.

"You've got to think like a marine architect," said Richard J. DeMarco, a
principal in Montroy DeMarco Architecture, which has worked in West Chelsea, a
flood-prone area of Manhattan.

Here are terms you are likely to encounter as The Times explores ways to ensure
that homes, workplaces and communities can better withstand and recover from
storms.

100-YEAR FLOOD PLAIN

This isn't as benign as it sounds. It means an area that has a 1 percent chance
of flooding in any given year -- not an area that will flood only once in a
century. Several 100-year floods may follow one another in rapid succession.

500-YEAR FLOOD PLAIN

An area that has a 0.2 percent chance of flooding in any given year.

APPENDIX G

A 2014 addition to New York City's Building Code that regulates construction and
substantial building improvement in flood hazard zones.

ARTICLE 6, CHAPTER 4

This provision in the New York City Zoning Resolution modifies requirements like
building design and permitted obstructions to allow developers to meet resilient
design standards.

A.S.C.E. 24

Design and siting standards set by the American Society of Civil Engineers for
buildings and structures in flood hazard areas. The Federal Emergency Management
Agency deems the A.S.C.E. 24 standards to meet or exceed the requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program.

BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (B.F.E.)

The height of flooding that might be expected in a 100-year flood. It is not
measured from ground or sea level, but from a benchmark called the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988. It can be found on flood insurance rate maps.

DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION (D.F.E.)

In new or substantially renovated buildings, the minimum height at which
residential units may be constructed and utilities like the boiler, the water
heater and electrical equipment may be located. It also sets the minimum height
for dry or wet flood-proofing measures for buildings generally. The margin
between this and the base flood elevation is called freeboard.

DRY FLOOD-PROOFING

Under this design approach, buildings are made as watertight as possible through
the use of impermeable materials and flood barriers. Its corollary is wet
flood-proofing.

EVACUATION ZONES

These differ from flood zones. New York City has six hurricane evacuation zones,
moving upland from the coast or shoreline, depending on the severity of the
storm.

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA)

Among its many responsibilities, FEMA, a unit of the Department of Homeland
Security, runs the National Flood Insurance Program and issues flood insurance
rate maps, showing where and what flood hazards exist.

FLOOD GATES, FLOOD LOGS, FLOOD PANELS

A growing number of buildings have installed the hardware needed for a temporary
flood dam, given enough notice. (And there usually is enough with big storms.)
Vertical posts are inserted into anchors in the pavement, then horizontal slats
are stacked up between the posts. FEMA officials in the New York region
cautioned that a large number of these kinds of protection systems failed during
Sandy.

FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM)

These maps, produced by FEMA, are the go-to source for information on special
flood hazard areas and base flood elevations. A map service center allows users
to look up flood maps by address, place name or latitude and longitude. The
location of boundaries between safe, moderately hazardous and hazardous zones
has a huge impact on homeowners, landlords and developers. Preliminary maps, or
Pfirm, exist for New York, but the city successfully challenged their accuracy.
In 2016, FEMA announced a revision process that would create two new maps for
the city; one guiding construction and renovation along the waterfront, the
other affecting how much flood insurance homeowners will be required to carry.

FLOOD VENTS

Openings in a building facade that allow for the entry and exit of floodwater,
allowing for the equalization of hydrostatic pressures. They are used in wet
flood-proofing.

FLOOD ZONES

Flood insurance rate maps break riverine, coastal and shoreline areas into zones
of special flood hazard. The designations can get very fine-grained, but the
basic three levels are areas that are at risk of waves higher than three feet
(Zone V), areas subject to 100-year floods (Zone A) and areas subject to
500-year floods (Zone X).

FLOODPLAIN

An area susceptible to inundation.

FREEBOARD

A safety margin, generally one to three feet, between a base flood elevation and
the design flood elevation.

HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE

Besides the threat posed by moving water, structures built in an area with a
high water table (at or near a waterfront, for instance) may be at risk of
long-term damage from the pressure exerted by the water in the soil around them,
which can crack concrete foundations.

LIMWA

Not the alternate title of "The Lion Sleeps Tonight," but an acronym for limit
of moderate wave action, as shown on the flood zone map above.

NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM OF 1929 (NGVD29)

An outdated measurement benchmark, but you may come across it. This refers to
what was once called the Sea Level Datum and was used until recently by the
federal government for mapping projects. Its relation to the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 varies from place to place. In New York City, the new
datum is generally 1.1 feet below the old datum.

NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (N.F.I.P.)

Congress created this program in 1968 to reduce the cost of flood insurance
premiums paid by homeowners, renters and business owners in communities that
adopt and enforce floodplain management practices that meet or exceed federal
standards. The program, run by FEMA, is more than $20 billion in debt and faces
reauthorization this year.

NOR'EASTER

Cyclonic storms along the East Coast are so called because the winds blow from a
northeasterly direction. They can bring heavy rain, snow, wind and flooding.

NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD88)

A base from which consistent height measurements can be taken throughout the
United States, Canada and Mexico. These are not points in physical space, but a
computed series of coordinates. They are far more precise than sea level, in
part because the surface of the sea is not level. At the tip of Manhattan
Island, mean sea level is about two-and-a-half inches below this datum. At the
Washington Navy Yard, it is three-quarters of an inch above the datum.

OVERWASH

Waters carried upland, especially after surges, may be prevented by intervening
structures from flowing directly back to the sea. This mass of water is called
overwash.

RIVERINE

Related to a river.

SEA LEVEL RISE

Billions of tons of land ice are melting or sliding into the ocean. The sea is
also absorbing most of the heat trapped by human emissions. Those factors are
causing the ocean to rise at what appears to be an accelerating pace. Sea level
rise increases the depth and extent of floods.

SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (S.F.H.A.)

Where 100-year floods and damaging waves can be expected. It includes Zones V
and A. It is based on surge levels in coastal and tidally influenced areas, and
on large lakes.

STILLWATER ELEVATION

The height of coastal or tidally influenced floodwater, undisturbed by waves,
from a given datum.

STORM WATER MANAGEMENT

Storm water runoff is not the same as a flood, though it can cause localized
flooding. Most of New York's sewers are combined, meaning they handle both storm
water and sewage on its way to treatment plants. When too much rain water or
melting snow and ice washes over impervious paving and into the sewer system, it
can lead to overflows and the discharge of sewage and pollutants into
surrounding waterways. Permeable paving, swales and dry wells can temporarily
capture runoff and reduce combined sewer overflows.

SWALES

Areas of soil or absorbent material, like a bed of gravel, that are designed to
trap storm water runoff and hold it until it can be safely emptied into a
municipal storm sewer or into the soil. Bioswales refer to landscaped strips of
plantings along sidewalks or buildings' edges.

SURGE

An abnormal rise of water generated by a storm, as a result of atmospheric
pressure changes and wind. They are especially damaging if water is already at
high astronomical tide.

WET FLOOD-PROOFING

A method that allows floodwaters to pass through parts of a building without
endangering structural stability. Wet flood-proofed areas can be used only for
parking, storage or access, or as crawl spaces. The FEMA officials in the New
York region said that wet flood-proofing, if employed correctly, could
substantially reduce flood risk and lower flood insurance costs. The corollary
is dry flood-proofing.

Case Studies in Resilient Design

New apartment towers on the riverfront ("Building to the Sky, With a Plan for
Rising Waters," Jan. 26).

A 120-year-old tenement with tenants of modest means ("A Humble Basement Boiler
Gets a Penthouse, Above Flood Level," Feb. 16).

A flood barricade to protect businesses ("Flood Barrier in Brooklyn: A 7-Foot
Wall, Erected in Hours," March 3).

The most comprehensive overview of challenges facing the city is A Stronger,
More Resilient New York, issued in 2013. Other resources include Waterfront Edge
Design Guidelines, by the Waterfront Alliance; Ready to Respond: Strategies for
Multifamily Building Resilience, by Enterprise Community Partners; Coastal
Climate Resilience: Designing for Flood Risk and Coastal Climate Resilience:
Retrofitting Buildings for Flood Risk, by the New York City Department of City
Planning; and a glossary by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 214 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                   Inland Valley Daily Bulletin (Ontario, CA)

                          September 17, 2005 Saturday

Crucial data missing, experts say

BYLINE: Guy McCarthy, Staff Writer

LENGTH: 1528 words


San Bernardino County's most recent flood plain maps for Upland north of the
controversial Colonies development show the massive Cucamonga Flood Control
Basin.

They also show a 100-year flood zone inside the basin. But the maps do not show
the 210 Freeway, the Colonies or a flood control basin at the heart of the
development -- features that radically change flood paths below Cucamonga
Canyon.

The Federal Emergency Management Agency's flood insurance rate maps intended to
guide emergency assistance agencies, inform homebuyers about flood dangers and
help insurance carriers set rates are so out-of-date they are virtually useless,
flood plain scientists say.

Furthermore, flood plain experts warned last week the level of flood protection
used by Southern California communities to identify where acceptable risk begins
the 1 percent annual flood chance is inadequate for densely-populated urban
areas.

Although scientists and flood plain managers agree the concept of 100-year flood
protection is imprecise and inadequate, it may be months or years before land
use decision-makers in San Bernardino County have to take this information into
account.

That means thousands more homes can legally be built in the way of foreseeable
flood hazards, where they may or may not be protected if worst-case storms
overwhelm existing flood control facilities.

"In certain situations, in urban areas with flood control structures and levees,
100-year protection is not enough," said Ricardo Pineda, flood insurance
coordinator for the state Department of Water Resources. "In New Orleans, they
had 250-year protection. But over 50 years, that works out to an 18.2 percent
chance."

Confirmed storm deaths from Hurricane Katrina topped 500 last week, various news
agencies reported. And it is still unknown how many corpses have yet to be
recovered.

Hurricanes in Southern California are all but unheard of, but the region is
vulnerable to its own brand of catastrophic flooding. Storms killed more than 40
Southern Californians earlier this year.

Pineda and more than 200 flood plain experts from three states met last week in
Sacramento to focus on structural and non-structural solutions to flood control.
First on the agenda was the inadequacy of FEMA's 100-year flood maps and the
question of using the 1 percent flood chance as a demarcation for public safety
and development.

"In most cases, people do not know the consequences if their flood control
system gets overwhelmed," Pineda said Monday. "They need to know the
consequences. Do they have evacuation maps?"

San Bernardino County has inundation maps that show what could happen if Seven
Oaks Dam, San Antonio Dam or Prado Dam fail. But they do not have maps showing
what happens if individual flood control basins are overwhelmed.

"In San Bernardino County, we hope and pray the dams, Prado and Seven Oaks,
don't fail," Pineda said. "The next question is, what happens if the basins are
overwhelmed? Are you putting homes in those areas?"

It remains to be seen what effect state questions about 100-year flood
protection could have on the county's appraisal of 1,137 acres of spreading
grounds that may be part of a settlement with an Upland developer.

David Ford, a Sacramento-based consulting engineer, said San Bernardino County's
erosive flooding is particularly difficult to plan for.

"The problems down there are related to alluvial fans and sediment transport and
erosion," Ford said. "It makes it especially hard to map the flood plains. Down
there the flood plains go where they want to go. The channels change location."

Ford is optimistic that scientists have the tools and knowledge to deal with
alluvial fan flooding. It's up to local elected leaders and land use
decision-makers to put it to use, Ford said.

"The technology exists, but the question is, "Does the political will exist to
put the technology to use?' " Ford said. "Whether politicians pick up on this
and decide it's the right thing to do is up to them."

Since county officials do not know what a worst-case flood could look like on a
map, they don't know what it could do to individual houses or neighborhoods. The
only reliable visual evidence that shows how bad flooding can be here are photos
from previous events.

The Federal Emergency Management Agency and the county Flood Control District
have mapped estimated 100-year flood plains in all local communities. In late
2003 and early 2004, FEMA also tried to map what a 100-year flood could look
like in post-fire conditions.

Omissions of key information render both sets of maps useless, FEMA officials
and scientists said. In addition, weather and storm-flow data used for
estimating and mapping flood risks are almost 40 years old, state flood plain
managers said last week in Sacramento.

"Many of the maps are based on older data," county Public Works director Patrick
J. Mead said last week.

"Our general plan, development code and county ordinances require us to design
for a 1 percent chance of a 100-year flood," Mead said. "FEMA maps are based on
a 100-year flood and are a resource we utilize."

A 100-year flood has a 1 percent chance of occurring each year. They can occur
back-to-back or once in a thousand years. There is no way to predict such
events, but authorities and developers can plan for them.

Homeowners should know that a 100-year flood has a 26 percent chance of
occurring during a typical 30-year mortgage, state flood plain managers have
warned.

Weaknesses in the flood insurance rate maps and the post-fire maps include but
are not limited to the following:

Maps distributed to the public by the flood control district and FEMA do not
include the principal element that makes Southern California flooding so
dangerous.

Alluvial debris flows water-borne avalanches of sediment, boulders and trees are
not factored into the maps or mentioned in their accompanying text. The maps
show clear water flood estimates only, said county Hydrologist Michael Fox.
Alluvial flooding has accounted for at least 17 local deaths since Christmas
2003.

The maps are so out-of-date they don't show key public works projects that have
radically changed local floodplains. Features missing from the most current maps
include the 210 Freeway in Upland and Rancho Cucamonga and Seven Oaks Dam, the
nation's largest earthen flood control structure.

Some maps are based on disputed rainfall data. One of the most heated disputes
involves the omission of catastrophic flooding measured in 1969 in Day Canyon
north of Rancho Cucamonga.

No maps take into account what a 100-year storm on a record snowpack in the
mountains could unleash in the valleys below.

Since the 100-year flood and post-fire flood maps are touted by FEMA and the
flood control district as the most current available, the maps' limitations
should be factored into any discussion of the region below Day Canyon and Deer
Canyon, scientists say.

The two massive watersheds already loom above densely populated neighborhoods of
homes and schools.

Now the county is appraising an 1,137-acre strip of land below the canyons for a
potential settlement with Upland developer Colonies Partners LP. The land in
question overlaps one of the largest marked flood zones on the FEMA flood
insurance rate maps.

The state's two U.S. senators, Barbara Boxer and Dianne Feinstein, recently
called for the Army Corps of Engineers to re-assess public safety threats below
Deer Canyon.

In a 2002 report titled "Alluvial Amnesia: How Officials Imperil Communities by
Downplaying Flood Risks," the nonpartisan, nonprofit Center for Governmental
Studies noted a key dispute in estimating the safety of the Deer Canyon basin
involves the Corps' omission of 1969 flood data recorded in Day Canyon.

The floods of January and February 1969 were among the most severe of the past
century in local records, eclipsed only by the floods of March 1938. The fact
that data from these floods was omitted in calculating a 100-year flood event in
Deer Canyon is ludicrous, some scientists said.

Similar data may have been omitted from calculations used in designing other
flood control structures in San Bernardino County, including the Cucamonga
Canyon flood control structures above the Colonies development in Upland.

New laws regulating development on the hazard-prone slopes of mountain erosion
in Southern California may be in the works.

In Sacramento last week, the Legislature sent a bill to Gov. Arnold
Schwarzenegger seeking $208,000 in state money to secure $624,000 from FEMA to
fund the Alluvial Fan Task Force.

Backers of the task force have included former Assemblyman John Longville, his
wife and San Bernardino Councilwoman Susan Lien Longville [both D-San
Bernardino], Assemblywoman Barbara Matthews [D-Tracy], Assemblyman Bill Emmerson
[R-Redlands], Assemblyman Lloyd Levine [D-Van Nuys], state Sen. Jim Battin [R-La
Quinta], and state Sen. Carole Migden [D-San Francisco].

Feinstein and Rep. Jerry Lewis [R-Redlands] also played a role in the passage of
the bill by having their staff urge state lawmakers to approve the measure, Lien
Longville said.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2005 MediaNews Group, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 215 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                        San Bernardino Sun (California)

                          September 17, 2005 Saturday

< cm REMINDER: STORY HAS CP PHOTO, TWO MAP GRAPHICS AND AT LEAST ONE ON-LINE
LINK TO VIDEO OF GREENWOOD AVENUE BOULDER FLOOD. SUGGESTED CUTLINE FOR PHOTO:
This home on Greenwood Avenue stands outside a 500-year floodplain designated by
the county Flood Co

BYLINE: Guy McCarthy Staff Writer

LENGTH: 1529 words


The former dream home on Greenwood Avenue is still buried to its eaves in mud
and boulders that came down on Christmas 2003.

The San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors voted last week to have the
Devore home demolished because the owners have abandoned it.

But demolition won't change the fact that Greenwood is a k-rail lined flood
channel in a neighborhood that flood-planning maps state is outside a 500-year
floodplain.

The Federal Emergency Management Agency's flood-insurance rate maps intended to
guide emergency-assistance agencies, inform homebuyers about flood dangers and
help insurance carriers set rates are so out-of-date they are virtually useless,
floodplain scientists say.

Furthermore, flood-plain experts warned last week that the level of flood
protection used by Southern California communities to identify where acceptable
risk begins the 1 percent annual flood chance is inadequate for densely
populated urban areas.

Although scientists and flood-plain managers agree the concept of 100-year flood
protection is imprecise and inadequate, it may be months or years before
land-use decision-makers in San Bernardino County have to take this information
into account.

That means thousands more homes can legally be built in the way of foreseeable
flood hazards, where they may or may not be protected if worst-case storms
overwhelm existing flood-control facilities.

"In certain situations, in urban areas with flood-control structures and levees,
100-year protection is not enough,' said Ricardo Pineda, flood insurance
coordinator for the state Department of Water Resources. "In New Orleans, they
had 250-year protection. But over 50 years, that works out to an 18.2 percent
chance.'

Confirmed storm deaths from Hurricane Katrina topped 500 last week, various news
agencies reported. An unknown number of corpses have yet to be recovered.

Hurricanes in Southern California are all but unheard of, but the region is
vulnerable to its own brand of catastrophic flooding. Storms killed more than 40
Southern Californians earlier this year.

Pineda and more than 200 flood-plain experts from three states met last week in
Sacramento to focus on structural and nonstructural solutions to flood control.
The first topic of discussion was the inadequacy of FEMA's 100-year flood maps
and the adequacy of using the 1 percent flood chance as a demarcation for public
safety and development.

"In most cases, people do not know the consequences if their flood-control
system gets overwhelmed,' Pineda said Monday. "They need to know the
consequences. Do they have evacuation maps?'

San Bernardino County has inundation maps that show what could happen if Seven
Oaks Dam, San Antonio Dam or Prado Dam fail. But it does not have maps showing
what happens if individual flood-control basins are overwhelmed.

"In San Bernardino County, we hope and pray the dams Prado and Seven Oaks don't
fail,' Pineda said. "The next question is: What happens if the basins are
overwhelmed? Are you putting homes in those areas?'

It remains to be seen what effect state questions about 100-year flood
protection could have on the county's appraisal of 1,137 acres of spreading
grounds for a possible settlement with an Upland developer.

David Ford, a Sacramento-based consulting engineer, said San Bernardino County's
erosive flooding is particularly difficult to plan for.

"The problems down there are related to alluvial fans and sediment transport and
erosion,' Ford said. "It makes it especially hard to map the flood plains. Down
there the flood plains go where they want to go. The channels change location.'

Ford is optimistic that scientists have the tools and knowledge to deal with
alluvial fan flooding. It's up to local elected leaders and land-use
decision-makers to put it to use, Ford said.

"The technology exists, but the question is: Does the political will exist to
put the technology to use?' Ford said. "Whether politicians pick up on this and
decide it's the right thing to do is up to them.'

Since county officials do not know what a worst-case flood could look like on a
map, they don't know what it could do to individual houses or neighborhoods. The
only reliable visual evidence that shows how bad flooding can be locally are
photos from previous events.

FEMA and the county Flood Control District have mapped estimated 100-year flood
plains in all local communities. In late 2003 and early 2004, FEMA also tried to
map what a 100-year flood could look like in post-fire conditions.

Omissions of key information render both sets of maps useless, FEMA officials
and scientists said. In addition, weather and storm-flow data used for
estimating and mapping flood risks are almost 40 years old, state flood plain
managers said last week in Sacramento.

"Many of the maps are based on older data,' county Public Works Director Patrick
J. Mead said last week.

"Our general plan, development code and county ordinances require us to design
for a 1 percent chance of a 100-year flood,' Mead said. "FEMA maps are based on
a 100-year flood and are a resource we utilize.'

A 100-year flood has a 1 percent chance of occurring each year. They can occur
back-to-back or once in a thousand years. There is no way to predict such
events, but authorities and developers can plan for them.

Homeowners should know that a 100-year flood has a 26 percent chance of
occurring during a typical 30-year mortgage, state flood plain managers have
warned.

Weaknesses in the flood insurance rate maps and the post-fire maps include but
are not limited to the following:

Maps distributed to the public by the county Flood Control District and FEMA do
not include the principal element that makes Southern California flooding so
dangerous.

Alluvial debris flows water-borne avalanches of sediment, boulders and trees are
not factored into the maps or mentioned in their accompanying text. The maps
show clear water flood estimates only, said county Hydrologist Michael Fox.
Alluvial flooding has accounted for at least 17 local deaths since Dec. 25,
2003.

The maps are so out-of-date they don't show key public works projects that have
radically changed local flood plains. Features missing from the most current
maps include the 210 Freeway in Upland and Rancho Cucamonga and Seven Oaks Dam,
the nation's largest earthen flood-control structure.

Some maps are based on disputed rainfall data. One of the most heated disputes
involves the omission of catastrophic flooding measured in 1969 in Day Canyon
north of Rancho Cucamonga.

No maps take into account what a 100-year storm on a record snowpack in the
mountains could unleash in the valleys below.

Since the 100-year flood and post-fire flood maps are touted by FEMA and the
county Flood Control District as the most current available, the maps'
limitations should be factored into any discussion of the region below Day
Canyon and Deer Canyon, scientists say.

The two massive watersheds already loom above densely populated neighborhoods of
homes and schools.

Now the county is appraising a 1,137-acre strip of land below the canyons for a
potential settlement with Upland developer Colonies Partners LP. The land in
question overlaps one of the largest marked flood zones on the FEMA
flood-insurance rate maps.

The state's two U.S. senators, Democrats Barbara Boxer and Dianne Feinstein,
recently called for the Army Corps of Engineers to re-assess public safety
threats below Deer Canyon.

In a 2002 report titled "Alluvial Amnesia: How Officials Imperil Communities by
Downplaying Flood Risks,' the nonpartisan, nonprofit Center for Governmental
Studies noted that a key dispute in estimating the safety of the Deer Canyon
basin involves the Corps' omission of 1969 flood data recorded in Day Canyon.

The floods of January and February 1969 are among the most severe of the past
century in local records, eclipsed only by the floods of March 1938. The fact
that data from these floods was omitted in calculating a 100-year flood event in
Deer Canyon is ludicrous, some scientists said.

Similar data may have been omitted from calculations used in designing other
flood-control structures in San Bernardino County, including the Cucamonga
Canyon flood-control structures above the Colonies development in Upland.

New laws regulating development on the hazard-prone slopes of mountain erosion
in Southern California may be in the works.

In Sacramento last week, the Legislature sent an urgency bill to Gov. Arnold
Schwarzenegger seeking $208,000 in state money to secure $624,000 from FEMA to
fund the Alluvial Fan Task Force.

Backers of the task force have included former Assemblyman John Longville, D-San
Bernardino; his wife, San Bernardino Councilwoman Susan Lien Longville;
Assemblywoman Barbara Matthews, D-Tracy; Assemblyman Bill Emmerson, R-Redlands;
Assemblyman Lloyd Levine, D-Van Nuys; state Sen. Jim Battin, R-La Quinta, and
state Sen. Carole Migden [D-San Francisco].

Feinstein and Rep. Jerry Lewis, R-Redlands, also played roles in the passage of
the urgency bill by having their staff urge state lawmakers to approve the
measure, Lien Longville said.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2005 MediaNews Group, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 216 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                           January 12, 2011 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

Building more dams is no way to prevent flood catastrophe

BYLINE: WILLEM VERVOORT. Dr Willem Vervoort is associate professor in hydrology
and catchment management at the University of Sydney.

SECTION: NEWS; Opinion; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 842 words


Residents in flood-prone areas must be better prepared, or shifted. NOW is not
the time to panic as we scramble to find ways to help the people affected by the
floods. Calling for the building of new dams is, however, not a satisfactory
response to a very wet La Nina year. Rather, Australia must look at more
innovative ways to adapt to the naturally occurring floods and future increasing
climatic variability.

The current deluge has highlighted the risk of flooding in many parts of
Australia. Risk is the combination of occurrence (how often something occurs)
and damage (how bad it is). The traditional focus in flood management has been
to minimise the occurrence by building dams and river control structures. But
there are three main reasons why new dams are not an easy solution to manage
future flooding in Australia. First, the worst floods are the largest floods -
to reduce the occurrence of large floods we would have to overdesign our dams.
This would result in low efficiency and high costs as the dams would be mostly
empty, as in the past 10 years of drought. And we can't accurately estimate the
largest possible flood, particularly with predictions of increasing extreme
events due to climate change. A dam can never provide full flood protection.
Second, because of the inefficiency of having dams solely for flood prevention,
most dams have multiple purposes, such as for power generation or water storage
- and these counteract the effective flood-prevention role. A water manager
focusing on flood prevention would want a dam to be as empty as possible to
store the maximum flood, while one focusing on irrigation, water storage or
power generation would like the dam to be as full as possible. As a result, the
risk of early spilling is increased, resulting in floods downstream. Many of the
major dams are currently full and spilling. Water storage in dams is also
inefficient due to high evaporation losses, particularly in areas such as
central Queensland. Third, a large body of international research highlights the
detrimental effects of dams on the environment, and this is one of the key
drivers for the proposed Murray-Darling Basin plan. Dams reduce flows and smooth
out flow variations. In Australia - the land of droughts and flooding rains -
the climate is highly variable, and this creates its natural beauty and
diversity. Floods are a key element of this environment. Dams cause variations
in water quality and temperature that are different from the natural environment
and disrupt downstream flora and fauna. Finally, some interesting socio-economic
research. Dams tend to give a false sense of security to people living below
dams and on flood plains; they believe they are 100 per cent safe, which is
never the case. And there is the fact that increasing water supply (through
building additional water storages) always leads to increased water use and
water demand. Traditional catchment management has concentrated on preventing
floods by focusing on land management, increasing infiltration and slowing down
the water before it reaches the stream. Many countries, such as the US and in
Europe, are looking at alternatives by focusing on the second part of the risk
equation, reducing damage rather than occurrence. The widespread flooding of the
Mississippi in 1993 and in Europe in the Rhine and Elbe have further forced some
of this rethinking. A key element of this type of management involves limiting
development on flood plains to allow the river to run freely. Spreading out the
floods lowers the peak and thus limits the damage. For Australia, this involves
identifying different ways of living and working in flood-prone areas, while
still protecting high-value assets. Reassessing development regulations and
possibly moving homes or businesses might be part of the solution. People living
in flood-prone areas can be compensated or helped to be "flood ready", similar
to people living in bushfire-risk areas. Re-routing floodwaters to certain areas
of the flood plain could be another option. Australian agriculture also requires
flexible and responsive cropping systems that take full advantage of the wet
years and make do in the very dry years. For this to be effective, flood risk
forecasting, particularly at the long range, needs more focus. There is
significant forecasting at the short range, but full interpretation of
long-range climate patterns, their influence on Australia and their possible
changes due to climate change still needs more work. While we are able to
predict the La Nina pattern, we are not yet able to accurately predict the
impact or risk of such a pattern for different areas. Careful assessments of the
floods now affecting Queensland will assist with this for the future. Learning
to live with floods rather than preparing to fight floods will lead to a more
resilient and prosperous future and allow us to take full advantage of our
variable climate. Dr Willem Vervoort is associate professor in hydrology and
catchment management at the University of Sydney.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 217 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                           October 14, 1993 Thursday
                                  Late Edition

Flood planning, not prevention

SECTION: NEWS; Letters; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 337 words


from Keith Murley The letter from Ian Morgans (8/10) rightly referred to better
measures and concepts in river management. However, the reference to controlling
floods could be taken by readers to mean that those measures will prevent
flooding of properties in flood plains and along river channels.

Flooding of such properties cannot be prevented, only minimised; nature will
control. Certainly total flood management is needed, including improved flood
warning systems and evacuation plans to reduce loss of life, human and stock,
plus planning controls on development in flood plains.

Reservoirs can never be built large enough and held empty to completely absorb
any flood without releases, or levees built high enough to fully protect
properties.

The problem for reservoir control is to maintain the reservoir level within the
safe loading limits for the dam to ensure the dam will not fail, which would add
another devastating effect. Releases are normally kept to no greater than the
flood coming into the reservoir.

There are practical limitations in trying to predict when and where a flood will
occur and the extent from the limited historical records available. There will
always be a bigger flood. The atmospheric rain producing potential is many times
greater than the storms that have just occurred, even though these were, in
cases, the largest in recorded times, ie only the past, say, 100 years.

European records go back hundreds of years and can relate to devasting floods
700 or more years ago. Australia, although the driest continent, has one of the
most variable rain potentials in the world from long-term droughts to extreme
floods.

Land along rivers and in flood plains is desirable, but has a hazard; human
memory is short. Flooding causes much heartache from damage, disruption and
trauma, which is greatly increased because insurance does not normally cover
flood damage.

As Ian Morgans stated, improved planning and flood preparedness is required, not
calls for flood prevention.

Keith Murley, Blairgowrie.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 1993 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 218 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                           January 22, 2011 Saturday
                                 First Edition

Xenophon demands insurance shake-up;
FLOODS: THE AFTERMATH

BYLINE: Kirsty Needham

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 482 words


THE independent MP Nick Xenophon will push for a Senate inquiry into the flood
insurance market as the Coalition backed calls for insurers to broaden access to
policies and develop a standard flood definition. The Herald revealed yesterday
that insurers are likely to take a hard line on households and small businesses
destroyed in flood-ravaged Brisbane and Ipswich by river water, while
policy-holders in the Lockyer Valley would receive payouts for flash flooding
and storms. Thousands of small businesses in flood-prone towns unable to get
insurance face ruin, while many families have been caught out after
misunderstanding their flood cover.

The shadow Treasurer, Joe Hockey, said the push for a standard flood definition
in contracts was "laudable". "A flood's, a flood's, a flood," he said. Senator
Xenophon said he intended to move amendments to consumer laws requiring standard
contract definitions of flooding. He also wanted Parliament to examine how other
countries protect flood towns. "Flood insurance is not mandated here in
Australia. In the UK and in France, for instance, lenders cannot give a home
loan unless there is mandatory flood insurance," he said. "The risk is, if
suddenly people can't get insurance you will see a collapse in the price of real
estate in huge pockets and that will just destroy people's equity. You need to
cushion people from that so we need a national response." The assistant
Treasurer, Bill Shorten, and the Queensland Treasurer, Andrew Fraser, have met
the Insurance Council of Australia and flagged the federal government's
determination to overhaul consumer protections. Mr Fraser has warned of the
possibility of a national, government-backed flood insurance scheme if the
industry does not broaden coverage. The federal government favours a private
sector solution, but has told the industry the community will demand reform in
the wake of the flood devastation. The Greens lower house MP, Adam Bandt, said
his party supported a national insurance scheme, "but it needs to be coupled
with planning laws which limit reconstruction in flood-prone areas". Mr Hockey
said he opposed a government-funded scheme, such as that implemented to provide
terrorism insurance for commercial buildings in 2003 after the September 11
terrorist attacks. In the case of the terrorism pooled fund, no affordable
private coverage existed as an alternative. Mr Hockey said the insurance company
Suncorp had shown a private insurer could provide commercially viable flood
coverage by conducting its own flood data mapping and then tailoring policies to
a flood risk. "The answer here is to have better information out of local
government on areas that are prone to flooding," Mr Hockey said. "If business
will not provide insurance coverage or cannot provide insurance coverage to
people then that is an issue that we collectively have to face as governments."

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2011 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 219 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        The Augusta Chronicle (Georgia)

                              May 12, 2008 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

Coverage for floods might be necessary

SECTION: YOUR BUSINESS; David Colmans; Pg. 006

LENGTH: 427 words


Remember the old sci-fi show Lost In Space? The robot let the young boy on the
series know about upcoming trouble with the line, "Danger, Will Robinson!"

Danger is an ongoing character in real life and on TV.

Today's warning comes from the federal government, the state's Emergency
Management Agency, the county-level EMA and the insurance industry.

When asked about flood insurance, many people will say, "I don't need it,
because my home isn't in a flood plain."

This is where the robot puts up its arms, flashes its red lights and says,
"DANGER!"

The start of hurricane season is one month away, but that only seems to register
with coastal property owners.

This is where I hope you will pay attention to the reality of flood insurance.

* A property with a mortgage must have flood insurance if it's in a flood plain.
That's the demand by the mortgage-holder.

* If a property is NOT in a flood plain, flood insurance is not mandatory.

* Flooding definitely occurs in areas that are not in a designated flood plain.

* Homeowners' or renters' insurance typically does NOT cover flooding, aka
rising water.

* To obtain insurance coverage for flooding, flood insurance is required.

Flood insurance can be obtained from many insurance companies directly or
through their agents. It can also be obtained directly from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, because flood insurance is a federal program that
allows insurers to sell policies on behalf of FEMA.

Here is what you need to know:
www.floodsmart.gov/floodsmart/pages/your_flood_risk/oneStepFloodRiskAddresSear
ch.action is the Web site of FEMA where you can enter your address and the
database will give you a good idea of how high your risk is for flooding.

If your address has a moderate or high risk of flooding according to the Web
site, you should talk with your agent or insurer to find out more about flood
coverage.

Remember, flood insurance must be in place more than 30 days before it will pay
a claim.

Flooding occurs from very heavy rains that might or might not be associated with
hurricanes. This year has been a dangerous time for flooding in many regions of
the U.S.

Floods know no boundaries. Floods know where water will not drain well. This is
not an issue to put off.

To learn more about flooding and what you can do to protect yourself and your
family, click on the Georgia Insurance Information Service Web site,
www.giis.org/ho/flood.shtml and the FEMA site.

David Colmans is the executive director of the Georgia Insurance Information
Service. He can be reached at (770) 565-3806 or dcolmans@giis.org

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2008 Southeastern Newspapers Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 220 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           September 12, 2014 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Jupiter flood map results upbeat;
Many at FEMA meeting learn their homes are not in a flood zone.

BYLINE:  By Bill DiPaolo   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL & BUSINESS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 500 words

DATELINE: JUPITER


More than 2,000 parcels of Jupiter-area property are no longer in flood zones,
according to federal officials who met with about 200 residents Thursday to
answer questions about flood insurance.

Most of the properties no longer in flood zones in preliminary federal maps are
in Admiral's Cove, around Jones Creek and in and near the Bear's Club, said
David Rotar, Jupiter utility services manager. "The changes are happening
because the flood maps are 30 years old. The topography has changed. So has the
technology to measure the elevations," Rotar said.

The new maps show about 20 properties, most along Loxahatchee and Riverside
drives and Center Street, are in flood zones. The old maps showed they were out
of them, Rotar said.

Thursday's meeting at Jupiter's community center was the last of four by Federal
Emergency Management Agency officials to discuss recently proposed flood map
changes, risk ratings and insurance rules . Hundreds attended meetings in
Boynton Beach and West Palm Beach. About 60 attended Wednesday's meeting in
Belle Glade.

FEMA will now gather the information from the four public meetings. In about a
month, FEMA will announce the start of a 90-day period for any property owner to
appeal proposed map changes.

Fearing their flood insurance costs may skyrocket, Gardens resident Patricia
Hughey came looking for answers. "I'm not in a flood zone. I'm hoping that does
not change," said Hughey, who has lived in her home in the Palm Beach Square
neighborhood since 1960.

Flood map changes are based on a building's age, how high it is above the base
flood elevation, if the structure is on a slab or crawl space and other factors,
said Jody Cottrill, FEMA external affairs person. "Homeowners want to talk to
someone face to face. Even if they get bad news, they are relieved. At least
they know," Cottrill said.

National flood maps are being updated by ­FEMA in Palm Beach County. Changes
could put some homeowners in high-risk flood areas, which would raise their
insurance.

The 1968-created National Flood Insurance Program allows property owners to get
subsidized premium rates for flood insurance, often lower than normal rates.
Flooding from hurricanes such as Katrina and Sandy convinced Congress in 2012 to
change the maps and boost flood insurance rates to reflect the increased risk.

Property owners and politicians complained. Congress agreed to reduce some rate
hikes . But some property owners will still be required to pay higher insurance.
Some who were eligible for flood insurance could lose it. So could those who
have had repeated flood damage. Reinstating expired flood insurance could cost
more.

Homeowners who are no longer in flood zones should keep flood insurance, Rotar
said. "Homeowner's insurance does not cover flood damage."

But many, like Pat Hughey, left the meeting happy.

bdipaolo@pbpost.com Twitter: @Billdipaolo

more online

Find your flood zone: msc.fema.gov/portal or goo.gl/1dEs8g

Understanding your flood risk: msc.fema.gov/portal/howto#msc-readmap

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2014 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 221 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                           September 6, 2007 Thursday
                                  ALL EDITION

EVERYONE HAS A ROLE IN REDUCING FLOOD RISK

BYLINE: By LARRY LARSON

SECTION: OPINION; GUEST COLUMN; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 552 words


Once again, many people in Wisconsin are experiencing flood damage. And once
again, local and state officials, citizens and media are portraying everyone as
"victims" rather than educating everyone that flooding is predictable and flood
damages are preventable.

People who build or buy in flood risk areas can expect to get flooded, and the
communities which allow building in flood hazard area often do so with the
knowledge it is a flood hazard area, but who then ignore the community's primary
function to provide public safety for what they think is economic gain.

Those who make money from these decisions are long gone by the time property
owners suffer flood losses and taxpayers are left to pay the disaster costs.

The media cover these stories from the "victim" standpoint. The opportunity here
is to start asking "why does this flooding continue to happen - and usually to
the same properties?" and "what can be done to reduce flood risk?"

A couple months ago, these same media were claiming the people who were shown to
be in a flood-mapped area in Dane County would now be "forced" to buy flood
insurance, and wasn't that a terrible thing! How many of those flooded in the
past few weeks did not have flood insurance, but now wish they did?

Local and state decision makers must understand their decisions can lead to
people and property being at flood risk and suffering flood damages.

At the local level, permits are issued for development. If officials allow
building in flood hazard areas, the consequences are easily predictable.

If development anywhere in the watershed is allowed without considering the
adverse impact the increased runoff will have on existing properties now and in
the future, those community officials have just contributed to somebody's future
flood damage.

When a state legislator tries to weaken regulations intended to reduce flood
risk, there is an obvious risk communication problem. State and local officials,
elected and staff, must lead the way to reduce flood risk - public safety is
their primary role and responsibility.

Citizens and property owners have the obligation to find out whether they are
buying or building in a flood risk or other hazardous area.

While the most dangerous areas must be avoided, there are techniques to protect
property in lower-risk flood areas. Just because a property is outside that
"magic" 100-year flood line doesn't mean it is not a flood risk.

Fully one third of the flood insurance claims are from outside the 100-year
floodplain. Just because a property is behind a levee does not mean that levee
will not fail or overtop.

Did the nation learn nothing from Katrina? It's two years later, and there are
still communities and states insisting they should not have to buy flood
insurance if they are behind a levee.

People readily accept their need for fire insurance, but will fight tooth and
nail to get out of paying for flood insurance. Yet the probability of a home in
the 100-year floodplain being flooded is seven times greater than having a fire.

We all have a role in public safety through our efforts to reduce the human
suffering and damages from flooding. The first step is to admit we have a
problem, and then start acting on it Larson is executive director of the
Association of State Floodplain Managers, headquartered in Madison.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 222 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                              June 13, 2008 Friday
                                  ALL EDITION

TAKE STEPS TO PROTECT YOURSELF FROM FLOODS

BYLINE: By LARRY LARSON

SECTION: OPINION; GUEST COLUMN ; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 510 words


Once again, folks in Wisconsin are experiencing significant flooding.

It is not "unheard of" or "beyond belief" or "could not be predicted" flooding,
but flooding which can be expected from time to time, and has occurred a number
of times in the last 15 years.

Is flooding increasing?

Yes, for a number of reasons.

First, changes in rain patterns are occurring. It makes no difference if you
think it is caused by global warming or something else - the reality is that
while average yearly rainfall may remain fairly constant, rain occurs through
less frequent but more intense storms during the year.

Secondly, as development changes watersheds by converting farm land and forests
to rooftops and big box parking lots, less water soaks in and more rain runs off
into our streams and rivers. This increases the amount of water from each rain
event in our streams and thus increases the flood heights.

Another reason flooding is increasing is that we continue to manage development
to be elevated to yesterday's flood instead of tomorrow's flood.

Because of these changing factors, flood heights will increase.

When a new flood map is produced, it will likely show higher flood levels. It is
important communities use better data and that property owners know their true
risk and build accordingly.

Further, while many people seem to think it only can flood in that 100-year
floodplain shown on the map, there is flood risk beyond that.

Just ask the folks who lost their homes in Lake Delton. They may have been above
the 100-year flood level, but they were not safe from a larger storm.

Each property is subject to a variable risk of flooding, it just depends on how
big the flood must be to impact each of them.

Here's what can you do to protect your life and property: Buy flood insurance.
Anyone, anywhere, can buy flood insurance as long as his or her community has
joined and complies with the minimal requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP).

A primary responsibility of your community is public safety, and flood safety is
no different than fire or police safety. Insist your community leaders join and
comply with the NFIP.

If you live near water, know your flood risk. If your property may be flooded,
know how to evacuate yourself and your family. Homes and possessions can be
replaced, but life is precious and cannot.

Avoid building in floodplains, the high-risk flood areas.

Don't build in a way that pushes flood water on other people's property. That is
not a good neighbor policy and may create liability for you.

Do not drive through flood water. This causes the most deaths from floods. Six
to 12 inches of water can float any vehicle, and moving water will carry away
people and vehicles.

The most effective way to reduce losses from floods is to move from or avoid
flood risk areas. The federal government cannot prevent flooding or make us
whole after a flood. Only by accepting personal and community responsibility
will we reduce the adverse impacts of flooding.

Larson is executive director of the Association of State Floodplain Managers.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2008 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 223 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                                 Hobart Mercury

                             August 8, 1995 Tuesday

BYLINE: MILFORD MADELEINE

LENGTH: 619 words


Hobart Rivulet floodwaters and the Liverpool St cleanup in 1960.

State Emergency Service director Joe Paul at a Hobart Rivulet trash rack,
designed to prevent logs and debris moving down the waterway during a flood.

Disaster closer to home than most think, warn experts Fighting flood complacency
By MADELEINE MILFORD DISASTERS are always something that happen to someone else,
especially when you live in Tasmania and the disaster under discussion is
floods.

But Tasmanians, and Australians in general, have been too complacent about
flooding, which costs up to $400 million a year nationally, say the Tasmanian
State Emergency Service and Emergency Management Australia.

With claims to the dubious titles of highest flood death toll and the only state
to have a dam burst, Tasmanians should perhaps take the threat of floods a
little more seriously.

To combat our lackadaisical attitude a flood awareness campaign, based on the
theme "Floods aren't funny", has been launched.

State Emergency Service director Joe Paul said the campaign aimed to raise
awareness of measures that should be taken before, during and after a flood.

"The whole point of our new campaign is to remind people we can not afford to be
caught off guard when it comes to floods," he said.

Mr Paul said floods could be extremely severe in certain areas of Tasmania, with
New Norfolk, Hobart, Longford, Launceston and Latrobe the main risk areas.

While unusually dry weather has left the South flood free of late, the North and
South Esk rivers in Launceston flood, to some degree, almost every year.

And in 1993 there were severe floods on the East Coast and north of New Norfolk.

Tasmania's worst flood occurred in northern Tasmania in 1929, killing 22 people
and forcing the evacuation of 5000 from Launceston.

Fourteen of the deaths were caused when the Cascade Dam burst at Derby and eight
were caught in floodwaters near Ulverstone.

In 1960 the business centre of Hobart was flooded when the Hobart Rivulet
overflowed. New Norfolk also flooded that year.

While isolated instances such as these make the threat of a flood seem like a
once-in-a-lifetime occurrence, Mr Paul said all flood planning was done on the
basis of the "100-year flood".

This does not mean after a major flood people can comfortably sit back, safe for
another 100 years, because each year has a 1 per cent chance of experiencing the
100-year flood, or the highest flood on record.

Mr Paul said although many city people did not understand the threat of floods
it was well understood by farmers in the state's North East.

Over the years their flood damages' bill has run into many millions of dollars,
with severe stock and crop losses as well as damage to fences, irrigation
systems, dams, roads, bridges, and buildings.

Mr Paul said the personal cost of floods, with damage to houses and possessions,
could be absolutely devastating, even before the threat to human life was
considered.

Lives were most often lost by people entering fast-flowing water, either on foot
or in vehicles, and by ignoring warnings, he said.

"It is not a question of trying to make people worry.

"We simply want to make sure people have the right information at their
fingertips." Mr Paul said the flood history of an area and the existence of a
flood disaster plan should be checked with local councils.

"Obviously we suggest people do not build homes or businesses on a known flood
plain," he said.

It is also recommended people develop their own household flood plan - before a
flood happens.

"You cannot easily stop flooding but you can prepare for it and try to minimise
damage," Mr Paul said.

To get a free flood information pack call 30 2700.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: 1-2) Hobart Rivulet floodwaters and the Liverpool St cleanup in 1960.3)
State Emergency Service director Joe Paul at a Hobart Rivulet trashrack,
designed to prevent logs and debris moving down the waterwayduring a flood.1-2)
FLOODS 1960 3) PAUL1) D2899/65 2) D2899/60 3) AB448/3A

JOURNAL-CODE: MER

                   Copyright 1995 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                          FOCUS - 224 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Advertiser

                              May 18, 1990 Friday

Adelaide suburbs 'not ready for floods'

BYLINE: JENNY BRINKWORTH

LENGTH: 317 words


Most Adelaide suburbs and outlying areas are not prepared for a flood, warns the
State's flood planning officer, Mr Noel Hodges.

Mr Hodges said yesterday some areas would not be prepared "at all" and others
would have "some sort of hope".

Major problems in the State's flood warning system were a lack of historical
information and low public awareness.

"The problem is we don't get enough floods in South Australia," he said.

Mr Hodges was responding to claims of serious shortcomings in Australia's flood
warning system by two Australian National University resource and environment
research scientists.

Mr Dingle Smith and Dr John Handmer said the kind of extensive damage caused by
the recent Queensland and NSW floods could be alleviated by a more efficent
flood warning system and better public education on responding to flood
warnings.

Mr Hodges said Salisbury and Clare councils had been "very good" in installing
flood signalling equipment and developing flood response plans.

No one authority

But Hills councils needed to install signalling equipment to assist the
development of response plans.

No single authority was responsible for funding the flood warning system and it
was largely up to local councils to develop flood response plans.

Mr Hodges said it was difficult to convince councils upstream of flood
catchments to assist downstream councils with flood-prone areas.

He said the State's Flood Warning Advisory Committee was working towards a
better system involving public education, but there was "a long way to go".

Bureau of Meteorology engineer hydrologist Mr Chris Wright said awareness of
serious flooding problems was "extremely low" because floods occurred
infrequently and people forgot or moved away.

He has been promoting the use of ALERT, which speedily computer-records
automatically monitored rainfall and river height information.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: ADV

                   Copyright 1990 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                          FOCUS - 225 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                           August 22, 2007 Wednesday
                                  City Edition

FLOODED;
What water washes away, Uncle Sam insures today

BYLINE: Jim Stafford, Business Writer

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 604 words


As he scraped four inches of muck and goo out of his flooded downtown Kingfisher
hardware business Tuesday, Brian Walter contemplated the flood insurance policy
that will help him recoup some of the losses.

The policy, written by his local property and casualty insurance agent and
underwritten by the federal government, covers the loss of property and
inventory. But for the loss of revenue, Walter is on his own.

Still, he is grateful for the insurance coverage because this is the third time
the Walter Building Center has been flooded since he opened it in 1995.

"There is only one person in this United States that will write it and that is
the federal government itself," Walter said. "Nobody else wants any part of it
because it is such a predictable disaster."

Downtown Kingfisher sits in a flood plain hit hard by the confluence of the
Kingfisher and Uncle John creeks. Nine inches of rainfall overnight Sunday sent
four feet of water rushing through Walter's businesses.

Fortunately for him and other business and residential owners who owned flood
policies, Kingfisher participates in the National Flood Insurance Program, which
means that insurance is available to residents.

"It's an expensive thing; we probably spent several thousand a year on flood
insurance," Walter said.

In fact, according to the Web site www.smartflood.gov, a flood insurance policy
for a business that insures $500,000 to the building and $500,000 to the
contents would cost $9,948 annually. Walter said his policy was written by Pat
Cheap of the Throckmorton Insurance Agency.

Flood insurance is optional coverage for residential and business owners,
although lending agencies require a flood policy on mortgaged property located
in a flood plain.

Unfortunately, said Dan Ramsey, executive director of the Independent Insurance
Agents of Oklahoma, most people refuse to obtain flood insurance policies when
they have that option.

"All over the state we are seeing floods this year, but people still aren't
stepping up and buying flood insurance," Ramsey said. "I talked to an agent in
one of those communities, and he said they had 20 or 30 policies and that's all
they wrote.

"The thing about Oklahoma, a few years ago we did a study on it, and 80 percent
of the property in Oklahoma that is located in a flood plain doesn't have flood
insurance. And that's just a shame that people don't want to buy the flood
insurance."

At Oklahoma Farm Bureau, the flooding in areas such as Miami, Guthrie and
Kingfisher has heightened the interest in flood insurance this year, said Paul
Springer, commercial lines manager.

"We've had a lot more requests for flood insurance," Springer said. "It has
definitely been on people's minds. We have a clerk that one of her jobs is
taking care of flood insurance, and she got a lot more calls from our agents
this spring."

Meanwhile, back in Kingfisher, Brian Walter faces a challenge in preparing a
document for the claims adjuster listing everything that was lost, while
simultaneously cleaning the property and keeping the business up and running.

"We prepare that document and they are pretty quick to pay," Walter said. "I
remember the last time it was two weeks and they had the money to me."

Floods struck the business in 1995 and 2002, although damage was much less
severe in those instances, he said.

"It's gotten progressively worse," he said. "We've got a lot of help; the
community has been very supportive, bringing meals, and friends have been
stopping by. We're still open for business. We sold some things yesterday
(Monday), as well."

Jim Stafford:  475-3310,  jstafford@oklahoman.com

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphic: FLOODED (flood insurance illustration)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2007 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 226 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              The Ballarat Courier

                            January 23, 2012 Monday

Flood-risk homes slugged by huge premiums

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 324 words


NEARLY 100,000 Victorian households at moderate to extreme flood risk can expect
to see their insurance premiums increase up to tenfold this year in the wake of
last summer's devastating floods. While flood-risk homes will be the worst hit,
the Insurance Council of Australia has said every household nationwide can
expect a rise of up to 15 per cent, even if they are at "no risk'' of flood,
because of a leap in global insurance costs triggered by worldwide natural
disasters. Several major Victorian insurers, including AAMI, GIO and CGU, have
said insurance premiums will increase for all policyholders this year, with the
RACV having already written to members flagging the price rise.

Insurance industry sources estimate that up to 5 per cent of Victorian homes are
judged to be at medium-to-extreme risk of flood, driving up insurance bills.
Insurers say they are struggling with poor maps of flood-risk areas across the
state and, in most cases, do not know the depth of past floods. The rises come
one year after devastating floods in Victoria and Queensland left many insured
home and business owners alarmed to find they were either not covered for flood
at all or their insurer's definition of flood meant they were not covered. The
federal government plans to legislate this year so that all insured households
are offered flood cover and is drawing up a standard definition of a flood. The
rise in general insurance costs has been caused by a series of natural
disasters, including Japan's tsunami and New Zealand's earthquakes, that led to
a 50 per cent jump in the cost of reinsurance | the insurance that companies
take out to limit their risk from claims for catastrophic events. Last week, the
RACV wrote to all its members with home insurance to tell them their property
would be assessed for flood risk and then rated for risk. The RACV conceded some
would be surprised by the rise, which came into effect last week. Home insur

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: flooded: One of the unlucky homes hit in the Skipton floods last year.
Nearly 100,000 Victorian households can expect to see insurance premiums rise.
Skipton Flood

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2012 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 227 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              European Union News

                             March 16, 2018 Friday

Guildford flood alleviation scheme

LENGTH: 1441 words



London: UK Government has issued the following news release:  Background
The Environment Agency is working in partnership to develop a scheme to reduce
the risk of flooding directly from the river (fluvial) and indirectly from
overwhelmed surcharged local drainage systems in Guildford town centre. The
design of the scheme is at an early stage of option selection but investigations
have confirmed that a combination of permanent and temporary flood defence walls
will bring significant flood-relief benefits to parts of Guildford town centre.


The Guildford flood alleviation scheme project team is developing a series of
options that include building new flood walls and using temporary defences in
the flood plain of the River Wey. The project team has started to analyse the
options available in detail. This initial work will be presented in consultation
events being planned for later in 2018.
Following these consultations, the next stage will be to design the scheme and
to secure necessary funding and approvals to build the selected approach.
A temporary defence deployment plan for Mary Road and William Road has also been
prepared. This plan sets out how temporary flood defences can be put up in these
areas in the event of a flood warning being issued. The Environment Agency has
completed work in the area to enable this plan to be viable and to ensure an
effective barrier to reduce flood risk to properties in this area.  Why the
scheme is needed
Guildford has a history of flooding; most recently in December 2013 when 92
properties were recorded to have flooded. Guildford also experienced flooding in
2000, when 29 properties were flooded, and significantly in 1968 when
significant parts of the town were flooded. Major roads, railway lines and
businesses were also affected by flooding.
The Environment Agency carries out regular maintenance activities and operates
its assets to reduce the flood risk as much as possible.
Since the winter 2013 to 2014 floods, the project team has been working with
partners including Surrey County Council, Guildford Borough Council, Thames
Water, M3 Enterprise Local Enterprise Partnership, Thames Regional Flood and
Coastal Committee, the National Flood Forum and the Guildford Flood Action
Group, to develop a scheme in line with this study.
In 2014, the Environment Agency completed an initial assessment of flood risk
management options along the River Wey. This work described how flood risk can
be managed in the River Wey over the next 100 years.  How the scheme would work

During high flows following heavy rainfall in the River Wey, new flood walls and
temporary flood barriers will prevent flood water from spreading to the adjacent
properties. In doing this it is also important to provide additional capacity in
the flood plain next to the river to help manage the movement of water through
Guildford town centre. The design would look to reduce the risk of flood water
entering homes, businesses and disrupting transport links. Although flood walls
and barriers would reduce flood risk, it cannot remove it entirely. The flood
plain would still play an important role in managing flood risk in Guildford.
Guildford is also affected by surface water flooding with water from heavy and
persistent rainfall running off land and hard surfaces, and particularly the
steep slopes of the town leading down to the River Wey at the valley bottom. The
Environment Agency is working with its partners to ensure options on reducing
the risk of flooding from surface water flooding are included within the design
approach.
The Guildford flood alleviation scheme project team works to reduce flood risk,
not to transfer it from one place to another. It is therefore carrying out
modelling, and will design the scheme to ensure that flood risk to communities
both upstream and downstream does not increase.  Timescales
Over the summer, the Environment Agency will be developing designs for different
options for flood walls and barriers, including different routes and
construction approaches. To inform this, ground investigations have been carried
out, which involved digging boreholes and trial pits across the flood plain to
help better understand the geology, soil and groundwater levels.
Once the preferred design option has been selected, there are various approvals
that must be sought (including planning permission) before construction can
begin.
Provided the scheme is fully approved and funded, the earliest construction can
be expected to start is summer 2019. Construction is expected to be completed by
2020.           Timescales    Activity              Spring/summer 2018    Option
consultation          Spring 2019    Detailed design          Summer 2019
Consents and permissions          Summer 2019    Construction starts
2020    Flood defence complete       Funding
The current projected cost of the scheme is approximately 163;5.6 million.
The scheme will use a mixture of funding from central government, the M3
Enterprise Local Enterprise Partnership, Thames Regional Flood and Coastal
Committee and local councils. But it still needs further contributions to enable
construction. This is the standard way in which flood schemes are funded today.

Since 2010, there have been changes to the way the Environment Agency is able to
secure funding for flood alleviation capital projects. The new approach requires
partnership funding, meaning sufficient funds for the scheme have to be secured
before the scheme can start developing detailed designs and construction.
There is work ongoing to seek funding from a combination of partners involved
with the project including other risk management authorities, infrastructure
operators and existing businesses and groups as well as those development sites
potentially benefiting from the work.  Benefits of the scheme
The Guildford scheme will reduce the impact of flooding during a flood with a 1%
annual probability of flooding (also known as a 1-in-100-year standard of
protection) to:    58 residential properties  100 non-residential properties
(primarily commercial)
In addition to this the outline design also offers benefit to key parts of the
road network through Guildford town centre, including the A281 at Millbrook.
The scheme will also seek to include new habitat creation including improvements
to fish passage and flood storage provision through landscaping near to the
River Wey channel (where feasible).  What the scheme might involve
The project team is looking at design options for areas through the town centre:
A mixture of permanent and temporary flood defence walls Mary Road, William Road
and Leas Road.  A mixture of permanent and temporary flood defence walls around
Millbrook area to protect highway infrastructure.  A mixture of permanent and
temporary flood defence walls around the Walnut Tree Close area.  Short-term
temporary flood defence walls in the Bedford Wharf area with a longer term
aspiration for regeneration to deliver permanent flood risk management measures
integrated with development proposals.
In addition, there are areas of Guildford town centre that will seek flood
mitigation and environmental enhancement through development and regeneration.
These locations will form a linked approach to this project.  Adjacent
communities
This scheme will not increase the flood risk to adjacent communities along the
River Wey. The Environment Agency is working through a thorough design,
consultation and planning process to get the right scheme for Guildford that
will not negatively impact any other communities along the river.
In the same way, the Environment Agency is developing other flood alleviation
schemes along the River Wey that will also need to demonstrate no increase in
flood risk within Guildford.  Get involved
The project team will be holding public events across the Guildford and wider
River Wey area in spring and summer 2018.
A period of consultation was originally planned for autumn 2017 to present
design options for the scheme. There have been some delays to the outline
designs being available meaning consultation has also been deferred.
The format of this is likely to include consultation events, letter drops and
newsletters and articles in the local press and publications. The locations and
dates for these events will be advertised to local homeowners and businesses and
announced on this page as soon as they are confirmed.
The events will seek to gain useful local knowledge and understand the
priorities of the local communities. The project team will use this information
to help develop the scheme.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2018 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 228 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                                  Dearne Today

                                November 3, 2005

FLOOD MISERY: FIVE YEARS ON

LENGTH: 614 words


IT is almost exactly five years since the worst floods in a century hit the
country and caused havoc in the Dearne.

Few people will forget how the River Don became a raging torrent, as more than
an inch of rain a day fell for a week, transforming fields and footpaths at
Mexborough and Old Denaby into a Lake District landscape.

Although most Dearne residents were spared the worst in terms of flooded
dwellings, businesses were left counting the cost and authorities had to decide
what to if the same thing happened again.

Now they readily admit Improving flood defences can only achieve a limited
amount.

This week, a hard-hitting advertising campaign from the Environment Agency
reminds Dearne residents of the need to be prepared for the worst now autumn is
here.

Area flood risk manager David Wilkes said: "Whilst we can reduce the effects of
floods through awareness, education and investment in flood defences, we can
never prevent flooding altogether.

"That is why we are urging people to be aware, and to help themselves to try to
reduce the massive financial and emotional costs.

"There is a tendency for people to think it will never happen to them. The fact
is, it could, we just don't know when. People in Yorkshire cannot afford to
ignore the risks."

Environment Agency research revealed one third (34 per cent) of people in flood
risk areas had not checked whether their buildings and contents insurance
covered flood damage and only seven per cent had found out how to get flood
warnings.

A free automatic voice message service is available to homes in areas at risk
whenever a flood warning is issued.

Mr Wilkes said the agency was developing a Flood Risk Management Strategy for
alternative ways of reducing flood risk.

Its priorities include reducing flood risk by looking at changes in land use,
preventing inappropriate development in the flood plains and encouraging
residents to take effective action to protect themselves.

He added: "We advise any individual or planning authority to look on our website
to see if the area is at risk of flooding.

"We ask them refer to the strategic flood risk assessment of their site.

"If the risk of flooding is lower than one in 100 years then generally we should
say it is OK to develop that site. People can ring us on 0800 807060.

"If the site is at risk we will put you on our flood warning service and give
you an information pack."

Mr Wilkes also outlined the measures that had been taken to strengthen flood
defences in the Dearne area.

He said rumours that the area was deliberately allowed to flood to protect
Doncaster were untrue.

"In South Yorkshire, the highest profile area was Catcliffe where 85 houses were
flooded and there were allegations they were sacrificed to protect Doncaster,"
Mr Wilkes added.

"That was not the case. There was a big flood storage area at Catcliffe, because
of the rarity of the event it had never been tested to that level - and it
leaked in a few places.

"All these leaks have been attended to and the pumping station has been made
more robust. We do not expect Catcliffe to flood in the same circumstances.

"We are also pulling together a field study of the River Don and its
tributaries. Some of the bank was strengthened at the back of Morphy Richards
when it was flooded and we gave them as much advice and support as we could."

Further work in the pipeline includes work to strengthen the Bolton Ings area by
acquiring clay from the washland to create flood banking.

Major improvements to the area's flood defences were carried out as part of more
than £28m of improvements across Yorkshire.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2005

LANGUAGE: English

                      © Copyright 2005 Johnston Press Plc


                          FOCUS - 229 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                  The Leader-Times (Kittanning, Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 30, 2013 Friday

Totals tell tale of flood

BYLINE: Brad Pedersen, The Leader Times, Kittanning, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 539 words


Aug. 30--Communities throughout Armstrong County responded to several emergency
situations caused by the heavy rains and flooding on Wednesday.

According to Armstrong County's Department of Public Safety, the county faced a
total of 244 flood-related emergencies between 12:20 p.m. on Wednesday and 5:35
a.m. on Thursday, including:

--Ford City Borough had 53 reports of flood-related emergencies.

--Kiski Borough had 37 reports of flood-related emergencies.

--Manor Township had 32 flood-related emergencies.

--North Apollo Borough had 29 reports of flood-related emergencies.

--West Franklin Township had 18 reports of flood-related emergencies.

--Parks Township had 13 reports of flood-related emergencies.

--Apollo Borough and Bethel Township each had 11 reports of flood-related
emergencies.

--East Franklin Township and Gilpin Township each had 10 reports of
flood-related emergencies.

--South Buffalo Township had nine reports of flood-related emergencies.

--Cadogan Township and Worthington Borough each had seven reports of
flood-related emergencies.

--Bradys Bend Township had six reports of flood-related emergencies.

--Sugarcreek Township had five reports of flood-related emergencies.

--Leechburg had three reports of flood-related emergencies.

--Ford Cliff Borough, Freeport Borough, Kittanning Borough and Rayburn Township
each had two reports of flood-related emergencies.

--Mahoning Township, Burrell Township, Perry Township and South Bend Township
each had one report of flood-related emergencies.

--Armstrong County first responders assisted Butler County with one, and
Westmoreland County with two reports of flood-related emergencies.

According to PennDOT, several roadways were closed, and remained closed,
throughout Armstrong County because of the flooding, including:

--Glade Run Road, between Route 128 in Cadogan Township and Pony Farm Road in
North Buffalo Township.

--Stitts Run Road in Parks Township, between Dime Road and Garvers Ferry Road.

--Nicola Road in West Franklin Township, between Fenelton Road and Route 422.

--Edmon Road/Old State Road in Kiskiminetas Township, between School Road and
Ross Road.

Several roads, which closed on Wednesday due to flooding, reopened Thursday
according to PennDOT, including:

--Yellow Dog Road, at the intersection of Craigsville Road, in West Franklin
Township.

--Route 3007, between Freeport Road in North Buffalo Township and Booher
Road/Claypoole Road, in East Franklin Township.

--Route 128, between Bunker Hill Road in North Buffalo Township and Ford City
Road in South Buffalo Township.

--Iron Bridge Road, between South Scenic Road and Locust Drive, in Buffalo
Township.

--Route 3011, between Yellow Dog Road in West Franklin Township and Ruffaner
Road in North Buffalo Township.

--Worthington Slate Lick Road, between Lemmon Hollow Road in West Franklin
Township and Ridge Road in East Franklin Township.

--Lairds Crossing Road, between Route 3011 and Ridge Road, in West Franklin
Township.

Brad Pedersen is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at
724-543-1303, ext. 1337, or bpedersen@tribweb.com

___ (c)2013 The Leader Times (Kittanning, Pa.) Visit The Leader Times
(Kittanning, Pa.) at www.pittsburghlive.com/x/leadertimes Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130830-KT-Totals-tell-tale-of-flood-0830-20130830

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: KT


                        Copyright 2013 The Leader-Times


                          FOCUS - 230 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                     Williamson Daily News (West Virginia)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            August 6, 2016 Saturday

Mingo has new flood plain maps

BYLINE: Kyle Lovern, Williamson Daily News, W.Va.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 864 words


Aug. 06--WILLIAMSON -- There are now new flood plain maps for Mingo County and
there have been changes.

According to Amanda Starr, of the Mingo County Flood Plain Management office,
"There has been a lot of changes for the county."

"FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) has remapped Mingo County. The last
time the maps were done was back in 2012," Starr said. "The last time before
that was back in 1984."

"I would suggest that anyone who lives along the Tug River should come in and
talk to us," Starr added.

The flood plain maps include every part of the county, including small streams,
creeks and other bodies of water that could flood with heavy rainfall. "If you
are near a body of water you are probably in a flood plain," Starr emphasized.

Starr has the new computerized maps on her computer. She can zoom in to a
particular area, much like Google Maps.

Flood maps, known officially as Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), show areas of
high and moderate to low flood risk. Communities use the maps to set minimum
building requirements for coastal areas and floodplains. Lenders use them to
determine flood insurance requirements, and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) uses them to help determine what you should pay for flood
insurance, according to www.floodsmart.gov.

"We have all of the pertinent information available -- the coordinates, new
elevations and other info," Starr stated.

She said the old elevation levels are different from the new ones, especially
along the Tug Fork. "There were some discrepancies with Kentucky and West
Virginia," Starr said.

Starr, who was recently certified by the state, is the only person in Mingo
County to have completed the course and to have received the training.

"I had worked with the 911 mapping for Mingo County. I know this county like the
back of my hand," Starr added.

For people to put a structure or any development in a potential flood plain
area, they have to come in and fill out paperwork and get a permit. Starr said
the permits are free, but persons need to get this document before they build or
place a trailer along or near a stream.

"Many people don't know that they need to do this," Starr stressed.

"A lot of times people build before they get a permit. This could cause them
problems and increase their flood insurance," she said. "Some people are not
aware of it or just ignore it."

In high-risk areas, there is at least a 1-in-4 chance of flooding during a
30-year mortgage. All home and business owners in these areas with mortgages
from federally regulated or insured lenders are required to buy flood insurance.

Starr said many homeowners need flood insurance and may not have it.

She said some dwellings can be built in certain flood plains, but they may need
to be elevated on blocks and put up higher out of the projected flood plain.
"There are certain stipulations. Like they need to be 2-feet above the elevated
flood plain and in compliance."

"I can walk them through the process and even go out and check out the
situation," Starr said.

Her office also has the authority to issue violations.

Persons who place trailer homes along the possible flood path on any stream,
large or small, needs to have them anchored. "It could be washed off during a
flash flood. If this happens and the trailer damages another person's property,
then that owner would be libel for those damages," Starr said. "If there is any
changes in the flood plain, they need to get a permit." This could be bridges,
fill dirt or other developments.

"Mudslides are also a problem in this area," Starr stated. She gave as an
example of the huge slide at Big Splint Hollow near Nolan that damaged homes and
also blocked the road to several homes and filled up the creek.

"Floods are devastating," Starr said. She talked about the recent flooding in
central West Virginia that claimed lives and damaged many homes, churches,
schools and businesses. The Tug Valley area is all too familiar with these types
of scenarios, having experienced many floods in the past.

She said if her office doesn't have the answer, they can contact FEMA, the state
or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The Corps of Engineers was the agency that
built the floodwalls, bought out homeowners who lived in the flood prone area
back in the 1990s and also placed many homes up to higher elevations to get them
out of the 100-year flood plain.

"FEMA comes in every so often and points out potential violations," Starr said.
"The last time they went out in the county was back in 2013. Last winter (2015)
they went around to each of the municipalities in the county.

Starr said her office is ready to assist anyone and to help with permits. She
can be contacted at 304-235-0566. Her office is located in the basement area of
the Mingo County Courthouse.

(Kyle Lovern is the Managing Editor for the Civitas Media Mountain District
including the Williamson Daily News and Logan Banner. He can be contacted at
klovern@civitasmedia.com or at 304-235-4242, ext. 2277 or on Twitter
@KyleLovern.)

___ (c)2016 Williamson Daily News (Williamson, W.Va.) Visit Williamson Daily
News (Williamson, W.Va.) at www.williamsondailynews.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160806-UX-Mingo-has-new-flood-plain-maps-0806-20160806

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UX


                      Copyright 2016 Williamson Daily News


                          FOCUS - 231 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                         Erie Times-News (Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              June 8, 2014 Sunday

Girard neighborhood fights flood-zone designation

BYLINE: Valerie Myers, Erie Times-News, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 791 words


June 08--GIRARD -- A small stream that meanders through the Sunset subdivision
in Girard Borough occasionally floods its banks after heavy rains. About six
years ago, after several days of rain, it knocked down a small footbridge on
neighboring church property.

But because the stream's banks are only a few inches high in places and the
footbridge was just inches above that, nearby homeowners aren't worried about
flooding or flood damage.

Plus, the stream runs underground through most of the neighborhood and
apparently isn't significant enough to have a name. A new Federal Emergency
Management Agency flood-zone map refers to it as Unnamed Stream to Lake Erie No.
9.

But the little stream could cost some neighbors big money.

The new flood-zone map includes some properties in the subdivision in Flood Zone
A, at higher risk of flooding. Homeowners have been required to buy federally
approved flood insurance as a result.

"It doesn't make sense," said Franne Carnahan, who lives in the 100 block of
Lourdes Drive. "This stream, where it's above ground, most of the time is about
half the width of the sidewalk. And yet we went from Flood Zone X (at low risk
of flooding) to Flood Zone A (at higher risk) overnight."

Homeowners weren't notified of the changes before FEMA approved the new
flood-zone map this spring. They only learned of the new designation in notices
from their mortgage lenders, Carnahan said.

"Now we feel like we've been put up against the wall in trying to find out what
is going on, after all of the decisions have already been made."

Carnahan and her husband, Michael, paid $371 for the required annual flood
insurance for their home, based on the amount of their mortgage loan. An
elevation study that could prove that the flood-zone designation isn't warranted
would cost between $700 and $800, plus an additional $400 to prepare the
accompanying paperwork for FEMA, according to estimates that Carnahan received.

"And then you don't know what the results will be, or if FEMA would change the
flood zone," she said.

Other homeowners in the neighborhood also have been required to buy special
flood insurance. Homeowners whose mortgages are paid off are not required to buy
the insurance, even if their properties are in the flood zone.

"This house is in the zone and has to have flood insurance. That house isn't in
the zone and doesn't have to have it. That house is in the zone but doesn't need
flood insurance because the mortgage is paid off," Carnahan said, pointing out a
checkerboard pattern from her own to neighboring properties. "It makes no
sense."

Being "in the zone" in the quiet Girard neighborhood isn't a good thing,
Carnahan said. Even homeowners not required to have flood insurance are
concerned by the new flood-zone designation because it could discourage buyers
if they decide to sell their homes, she said.

Homeowners have asked staff at FEMA's district office in Philadelphia for
topographical information that could help them discover if their properties
truly belong in the higher-risk flood zone or not, Carnahan said. She and others
also plan to ask Girard Borough Council for help in fighting the Flood Zone A
designation.

But there may not be anything that Girard Borough can do to help, borough
Manager Rob Stubenbort said.

The state Department of Environmental Protection in recent years has permitted
treated water to be discharged into the stream from the sewage plant at Imperial
Point mobile home park, located upstream in neighboring Girard Township. And
that's increased stream volume, Stubenbort said.

"It used to dry up completely in August, but now, because of an increase in
rainfall in recent years and because of the sewage plant effluent going through
there, the stream runs year around," Stubenbort said. "There actually is a
pretty good amount of water coming through up there at times."

The borough once cleaned culverts along the stream to prevent water from backing
up and overflowing, but environmental and conservation agencies have prohibited
that in recent years, Stubenbort said. "If the stream was dry, then the borough
would be allowed to go in and clean out the culverts," he said. "When it's
running, we can't."

Neighborhood residents will continue to ask questions and do what they can do
fight the new flood-zone designation, Carnahan said. "Our goal is to get this
neighborhood remapped back to Zone X," she said.

Flood Zone A has a 1 percent annual chance of flooding. Zone X has very minimal
chance of flooding, according to FEMA.

VALERIE MYERS can be reached at 878-1913 or by e-mail. Follow her on Twitter at
twitter.com/ETNmyers.

___ (c)2014 the Erie Times-News (Erie, Pa.) Visit the Erie Times-News (Erie,
Pa.) at www.GoErie.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20140608-EI-Girard-neighborhood-fights-flood-zone-designation-0608-20140608

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EI


                         Copyright 2014 Erie Times-News


                          FOCUS - 232 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                    Appeal-Democrat (Marysville, California)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            March 30, 2013 Saturday

Flood insurance: 'No win' for homeowners

BYLINE: Appeal-Democrat, Marysville, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 866 words


March 30--The head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency warned that people
who buy federal flood insurance need to plan for big rate hikes. FEMA director
Craig Fugate said some people now paying hundreds of dollars a year could wind
up paying thousands because Congress says the program must at least pay for
itself.

He said the increases will be phased in over three to four years.

In Yuba-Sutter, several flood prone areas require residents to buy flood
insurance. If rates increase dramatically, one Yuba County supervisor called it
a "no-win" situation for struggling homeowners. We asked politicians, government
officials and mortgage lenders what the impact might be if rates skyrocket as
Fugate predicts.

Regional flood insurance rates

US Congressman John Garamendi, R-Walnut Grove, said flood insurance rates should
be set on a regional basis rather than on a nationwide scale.

"One of the things I am looking into is the regional payout for flood
insurance," said Garamendi.

He said California residents have contributed about 30 percent of the premiums
nationwide, but receive less benefit than other states.

"This would indicate that California is generally looking at being a major
contributor and a net negative receiver," he said. "That would mean that
premiums in California are too high.

"We have always argued the need to adjust the rates regionally," he said.

Garamendi acknowledged that it is written into the flood insurance program that
it must be self-sustaining, but that Yuba City and Marysville "are spending a
pile of money (on levee improvements) to reduce the risk."

As for FEMA director Craig Fugate's comment that rates could climb into the
thousands of dollars, Garamendi called it "irresponsible."

"It would force people out of their houses," he said.

Yuba, Marysville concerns

Yuba County Supervisor Roger Abe wondered whether everybody who has benefited
from having flood insurance actually paid into it such as the victims of
hurricanes Katrina and Sandy.

"If you are going to receive protection, everybody should be paying into the
program," Abe said.

He said that increases similar to that described by Fugate could send homeowners
into foreclosure.

"People have loans that require them to have flood insurance," Abe said. "If
people have to decide to make their house payment or pay flood insurance, it's a
no-win situation."

Marysville Mayor Ricky Samayoa noted that ongoing improvements to the Marysville
ring levee will make the city safer from floods and make the city more
attractive to private enterprise.

But he acknowledged it would be a hardship for some residents.

"I think it is just economics," Samayoa said. "If you don't have the money, I
think the decision is pretty easy to make."

Yuba City to curb flood risks

Flood insurance is crucial for Yuba City residents, who live surrounded by
levees, said Darin Gale, the city's economic development director.

He said the city, by levee improvements, seeks to reduce the risk floods pose.

"We're doing everything possible to try to minimize that," Gale said.

He added that "any increase in federal flood insurance reduces disposable income
of residents."

Real estate agent Lloyd Leighton said a boost in flood insurance rates will
likely have more impact on what houses people buy -- and not on whether they
buy.

An increase in flood insurance costs from $350 a year to $1,350 a year, for
example, would mean that people would buy smaller homes. The median home price
in Yuba City is $170,000, Leighton said.

"It's hard to measure," he said of the effect of rising flood insurance rates.
"It's hard to know how much."

Yuba-Sutter has flood history

For areas like Sutter County, which carries a reputation for flooding, high
flood insurance rates could have a significant impact on residents, said David
Tomm, associate civil engineer for the county.

People living in high risk flood areas are already paying upward of $1,400 to
$3,000 for flood insurance per year, he said. If the rate went up emphatically,
it could force some folks to sell their homes.

"It would be difficult for property owners to pay that," he said.

Flood insurance is mandatory in many places throughout the Sutter County flood
basin, Tomm said. However, the completion of the bi-county levee project --
slated to begin construction in July -- would largely eliminate those
requirements, or at least keep them from rising detrimentally.

Mortgage lenders predict harder sales

For mortgage lender Ed Bevacqua, branch manager of Evergreen Home Loans in Yuba
City, an increase in federal flood insurance rates "would be another government
increase that would hinder buyers."

He said with the increase in FHA loans and other related costs, the federal
government is making it tougher for home loan borrowers who live in areas where
the insurance is mandatory.

"Those areas in floodplans, they are not going to sell. Buyers will live
elsewhere. Buyers are going to look more at location," Bevacqua said. "It's
going to hurt all the homes in flood plains and make them tougher to sell.

-- Richard Olmsted

___ (c)2013 the Appeal-Democrat (Marysville, Calif.) Visit the Appeal-Democrat
(Marysville, Calif.) at www.appeal-democrat.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130330-MY-Flood-insurance-No-win-for-homeowners-0330-20130330

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MY


                         Copyright 2013 Appeal-Democrat


                          FOCUS - 233 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            The Keene Sentinel, N.H.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             April 27, 2014 Sunday

Flood mapping can be subject to change, not be-all end-all for homeowners

BYLINE: Meghan Foley, The Keene Sentinel, N.H.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1132 words


April 27--Finding out if the prospective home you've fallen in love with is a
flooding target, or if you'll need to buy pricey flood insurance, often involves
looking at a map to see if you're in the flood zone.

But what if that map isn't accurate?

There are few other resources to turn to, and if you're buying a new home, you
may be at the mercy of the seller to disclose if the property has a history of
flooding. A new state mapping program expected to come online later this year,
though, could help homeowners.

Flood insurance rate maps compiled by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
have been used for decades to measure how often an area could flood on a yearly
basis, how high and far potential flood waters could flow outside a waterway's
embankment, and to identify properties that could be affected.

Anyone who has a property identified on a FEMA map as being in a flood hazard
zone has to buy flood insurance.

FEMA maps are primarily used by lenders to calculate flood insurance premiums,
but can be used for other purposes, including municipal and emergency planning,
said Kerry A. Bogdan, senior engineer for FEMA Region 1, which covers New
England.

But the federal government doesn't regulate how often these maps should be
updated, and FEMA will only study or restudy a problematic area when it has the
money to do so.

And in recent years, the money to conduct studies of flood-prone areas has
dwindled, Bogdan said.

As a result, flood maps don't always match up with what's happening on
properties today, according to state and federal officials.

"We can only do projects we have the money for," Bogdan said.

In places such as the Route 12 corridor of East Westmoreland, which has flooded
three times since 2003, that can be a problem.

The area is bisected by two brooks, White Bridge and Mill, and neither one has a
documented flood plain, according to the most recent flood insurance rate maps
for Cheshire County, which were updated in 2006.

Two residential property owners in the area claim that when they purchased their
homes, they weren't aware the buildings were susceptible to flooding. Tracy L.
Atkins, and Robert and Kate Jobmann were among a small group of residents and
business owners in the Route 12 area whose properties were damaged by flood
waters on July 2, 2013, when heavy rain caused the White Bridge and Mill brooks
to overflow. Their homes abut the Mill Brook.

Nine months later, Atkins' home remains unlivable, and she has sued the real
estate agency who sold her the home, and the previous owner.

FEMA officials turn to individual states to determine the areas that should be
studied, Bogdan said. The states, through their National Flood Insurance Program
coordinators, keep a priority list of areas that should be mapped or remapped,
she said.

The areas that have priority status in New Hampshire tend to be the ones with
large populations and more development, said Jennifer R. Gilbert, state
coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program.

While Gilbert knows about the situation in East Westmoreland, she doesn't know
the exact reason why the area hasn't been mapped.

The flood insurance rate maps for Cheshire and Sullivan counties were updated in
2006, as part of a statewide effort to digitalize New Hampshire's maps.
Hillsborough County's flood risk map was updated in 2009.

However, each time a flood map is updated, it doesn't mean that all areas are
revisited, Gilbert said.

The initial flood plain maps for the counties were made in the 1970s and '80s,
she said. FEMA officials did return to some areas on those maps, and study new
ones, as part of the 2006 map updates, she said.

Today, FEMA officials are involved in a five-year, congressionally mandated
project to map and remap flood hazard areas along the coasts from Connecticut to
Maine. The project began in 2009, and preliminary maps for Rockingham and
Strafford counties were released earlier this month.

The mapping project has caused some controversy throughout New England as people
with property that once wasn't in a flood plain now find they have to buy
expensive flood insurance.

It's not so much changes in the topography and underlying geology of an area
that would prompt an update to flood risk maps, but rather more data becoming
available since the last maps were made, said Robert R. Holmes, a national flood
hazard specialist with the U.S. Geological Survey.

Today, officials can base the maps on data collected over a longer period of
time than when the original maps were made, he said. By having more data, a
better picture of the flood plain is painted, he said.

Ann Flanagan, an investigator with the N.H. Real Estate Commission, said when a
property is for sale, it's usually up to the seller to reveal if the property
has a history of flooding. This is done through a property disclosure form, she
said.

"Agents aren't required to investigate stuff," she said.

Typically, if a property is in a flood plain, it comes out during the lending
process, she said.

According to state law, the duties of a real estate agent representing a seller
include "disclosing to a prospective buyer or tenant any material physical,
regulatory, mechanical or on-site environmental condition affecting the subject
property of which the licensee has actual knowledge."

City Planning Director W. Rhett Lamb said people buying property will sometimes
visit his office to look at the city's flood insurance rate maps. If a property
isn't listed as being in a flood plain on the map, city officials who have
institutional knowledge of a property can try to help determine if a site has a
history of flooding; otherwise there aren't many other resources, he said.

"The FEMA maps -- whether recent or older -- they're the bottom line," he said.

However, flooding events statewide in recent years have prompted state
officials, with the help of federal grant money, to embark on their own flood
data collection program.

The data is being collected from a number of sources, and is expected to be
compiled by August, said Perry Plummer, state director of the Division of
Homeland Security and Emergency Management. From there, maps using the data will
be created, he said.

By having the data and maps, state officials hope to lessen the damage caused by
flooding, including by targeting money to address areas with a record of flood
issues, he said. The maps aren't official FEMA maps, and therefore wouldn't
require people to buy flood insurance.

However, the information could lend a hand to prospective homeowners with few
other options.

Meghan Foley can be reached at 352-1234, extension 1436, or
mfoley@keenesentinel.com Follow her on Twitter @MFoleyKS.

___ (c)2014 The Keene Sentinel (Keene, N.H.) Visit The Keene Sentinel (Keene,
N.H.) at www.sentinelsource.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20140427-KN-Flood-mapping-can-be-subject-to-change-not-be-all-end-all-for-homeow
ners-0427-20140427

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: KN


                                 Copyright 2014


                          FOCUS - 234 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Advertiser

                              May 18, 1990 Friday

Adelaide suburbs 'not ready for floods'

BYLINE: JENNY BRINKWORTH

LENGTH: 317 words


Most Adelaide suburbs and outlying areas are not prepared for a flood, warns the
State's flood planning officer, Mr Noel Hodges.

Mr Hodges said yesterday some areas would not be prepared "at all" and others
would have "some sort of hope".

Major problems in the State's flood warning system were a lack of historical
information and low public awareness.

"The problem is we don't get enough floods in South Australia," he said.

Mr Hodges was responding to claims of serious shortcomings in Australia's flood
warning system by two Australian National University resource and environment
research scientists.

Mr Dingle Smith and Dr John Handmer said the kind of extensive damage caused by
the recent Queensland and NSW floods could be alleviated by a more efficent
flood warning system and better public education on responding to flood
warnings.

Mr Hodges said Salisbury and Clare councils had been "very good" in installing
flood signalling equipment and developing flood response plans.

No one authority

But Hills councils needed to install signalling equipment to assist the
development of response plans.

No single authority was responsible for funding the flood warning system and it
was largely up to local councils to develop flood response plans.

Mr Hodges said it was difficult to convince councils upstream of flood
catchments to assist downstream councils with flood-prone areas.

He said the State's Flood Warning Advisory Committee was working towards a
better system involving public education, but there was "a long way to go".

Bureau of Meteorology engineer hydrologist Mr Chris Wright said awareness of
serious flooding problems was "extremely low" because floods occurred
infrequently and people forgot or moved away.

He has been promoting the use of ALERT, which speedily computer-records
automatically monitored rainfall and river height information.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: ADV

                   Copyright 1990 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                          FOCUS - 235 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              The Pioneer (India)

                            September 4, 2015 Friday

Prepare now for next flood

LENGTH: 970 words

DATELINE: India


India, Sept. 4 -- Early warning systems for storms have saved many lives. A
similar mechanism to predict floods is being developed

According to a World Bank report, about 4,400 flood events - coastal, flash and
riverine - were recorded between 1900 and 2015 across five continents in the
world. About 57 per cent of these floods constituted riverine floods. About
1,800 events occurred in Asia alone, highest among the five continents. These
floods have affected about 3.5 billion people and has led to the death of 6.8
million people which accounts for 98 per cent of the deaths among the five
continents. Hence, the seriousness to tackle flood-based disaster rests more
with the Asian countries.

In India, floods and droughts affect vast areas of the country, transcending the
boundaries of the States. As per the 12th Plan Working Group report, total flood
affected area in the country is about 50 million ha, out of which, 24 million ha
lies in the Ganga basin States ie nearly 50 per cent of the flood affected area
in the country lies in the Ganga basin States.

So, what can be the possible steps to mitigate a natural disaster caused by
riverine floods? What approach is required to be in tune with the technological
times we live in? Can we do something to live up to the old adage - prevention
is better than cure?

There are two root causes for floor related disaster that is preventable. First,
is the absence of an early warning system. Second, is the absence of a
responsible and effective disaster management system in the country.

In India, organisations like the Central Water Commission, the India
Meteorological Department deal with flood-related issues. They are requested to
furnish flood data (information on flood and flood damages during the monsoon
season). While the CWC takes into account the real-time water level rise in the
rivers, the run-off factor, the storage capacity in barrages and history to give
flood alerts three days in advance, this is far from real-time and still not
effective to save lives of the people.

The existing ways to tackle flood are archaic, which pose innumerable challenges
- ranging from information repositories stored in silos with various Central and
State agencies, extreme dependence on manual process for collection, complexity
in dealing with static reports stored in google drive (the reservoir basin
weekly bulletin from CWC). There is an inability to gain insights and also a
lack of ability to take action in real-time to mitigate risks during harsh flood
environments.

Although early warning systems have reduced death tolls, as reported by the
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, this
type of EWS is widely used to predict the movement and intensity of cyclones.
However, early warning flood detection and prediction is considered expensive
and computationally complex. Some case studies, research publications based on
embedded networked sensor systems do exist. However, to this writers
understanding, the ability to collect, monitor and provide real-time analysis of
the river basins and reservoirs, usage of robust adaptive distributed algorithms
for flood warning for covering a large geographic area such as a river basin is
still pursued as a research topic.

There ought to be a system that takes into account, unique characteristics of
the State and local departments responsible for flood management that operate in
India. What makes creating such an early warning flood monitoring and forecast
system challenging, is to leverage the sensor networks and the power of
real-time computational capability with the latest in-memory technology.

In a first such attempt, a system has been built recently with inputs from the
State irrigation department with unique abilities to tackle the typical needs of
a large river basin in India. With support from the State irrigation
authorities, field trials and implementation of the system will be taken up in
one of the major river basins in India. This system addresses the major elements
of the UN-defined EWS.

This real-time flood EWS uses world class technology and has the potential to
avoid loss of property and lives by accurate monitoring of flood situations and
provide clear and timely distribution of warnings to all those at risk and build
resilience and response capability both at the national and local level.

A national resolve to save lives during riverine floods; is a reality, saving
lives is a priority. Although more work is required to implement the river
monitoring sensor network system and invest in developing multiple linear
regression models that predicts river flooding with inputs from several types of
local data collected from space as well as ground surveys, the flood EWS is the
first step towards putting a system in place to monitor the most flood prone
river basins. Such a flood monitoring and forecasting solution would soon become
a reality to enable State irrigation departments to centrally monitor, analyse
and forecast flood situations and help save lives of many thousands who perish
during riverine floods.

The implementation, however, depends on the Budget allocation for disaster
management solutions and will typically involve coordination of multiple
institutions under the Central and State Governments like the Ministry of Water
Resources,the CWC, the IMD, the Ganga Flood Control Commission and the National
Disaster Management Authority. If we consider floods as a reality, then as a
responsive nation, saving human lives and livestock should be a priority.

(The writer is head of SAP Co-innovation Labs, South Asia, ANZ and Middle East)

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Pioneer. For any query with
respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor
at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 CMYK Printech Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 236 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                      Orange County Register (California)

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday

Laguna to hash out specifics of flood-control measures

BYLINE: By CLAUDIA KOERNER, THE ORANGE COUNTY REGISTER

SECTION: LAGUNABEACH; Pg. C

LENGTH: 725 words


Mandatory flood-proofing is on the horizon for businesses and commercial
properties in a flood-hazard zone, though city officials will spend this year's
rainy season working out the specifics.

The Planning Commission voted last week to continue an ordinance amendment
requiring flood-proofing contingency devices in downtown, Laguna Canyon and
other areas designated as special flood hazard zones by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The devices could come in the form of watertight doors,
sealants or flood gates - the wood or metal panels that slide into place in
front of entrances. According to city staff, if every business in downtown
Laguna Beach had used flood gates during 2010's deluge, the estimated $3 million
in damage would have been cut in half.

In other coastal cities prone to flooding, officials have looked to
infrastructure improvements and temporary measures - such as Seal Beach's winter
sand berm - to stave off water damage. In Huntington Beach, new projects must
elevate building pads above the flood plain or use a flood gate during storms.
Laguna Beach has a similar requirement for new projects or remodels in its
downtown, but the widespread damage of 2010's storm encouraged officials to go a
step farther to apply the standards to all properties. With the cost of flood
gates starting at $600, it's a relatively inexpensive improvement that can have
a big impact, Planning Commissioner Norm Grossman said.

"Comprehensive channel improvements in the downtown are years away, but we know
that the flood gates are effective," he said.

After hearing from local business and property owners, city staff will take a
closer look at exemptions for properties that might already meet the intent of
the ordinance amendment. A revised version will come back for a vote on Dec. 12,
then move to the City Council for final approval.

In downtown, new businesses or those that remodel must already include
flood-proofing measures. Some older businesses already voluntarily use flood
gates, though in 2010, the precaution was not widespread. Mark Christie, owner
of Hobie Surf Shop and other downtown properties, said the flood gates are
simple to slide into place before a storm, yet many of his neighbors weren't
prepared.

"When I have had the channels in place, I haven't had a drop, not single drop of
water go into my stores, and they've been hit," he said. "The front of Hobie, it
was like a river running around that thing."

In some cases, water came through buildings without flood gates to damage
neighboring properties, a risk Planning Commissioners agreed warranted blanket
requirements. In other flood-prone areas, however, commissioners and business
owners raised questions about a one-size-fits-all approach to flood-proofing.

"Downtown, you've got the risk of adjacent property owners being damaged which I
think is strong justification for requiring everybody to put it up," Planning
Commissioner Bob Whalen said. "That may not be the case with canyon property
because of the way they're configured out there."

Laguna Canyon property owner Richard Packard said his warehouses had never faced
water damage from flooding, though they were in a flood hazard zone. He
questioned whether flood gates made sense for roll-up doors, and added he
shouldn't be faced with a burden to prove his property's exempt status. Those
who have worked in flood zones in the city for years know what to do to prepare,
he added.

Kurt Bjorkman, general manager of Aliso Creek Inn & Golf Course, said flood
control measures on the 300-acre property diverted water away from guestrooms in
2010. He asked if flood gates would be required at the Inn.

We have 60 rooms with two entrance doors each, plus maintenance rooms and
things," he said. "Hundreds of doors."

Though the specifics of the ordinance amendment still need some work, the
Planning Commission showed support for some type of mandatory flood-proofing in
town.

"With the measure in place, we may be able to get lower flood insurance for the
city as a whole," Grossman said.

With downtown alone seeing millions of dollars in damage during the last flood,
Commissioner Linda Dietrich said the city would have to move forward soon.

"We've got a problem that we need to address," she said. "It affects our entire
downtown. We have to look at the whole community as well as an individual
business."

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE:  Story

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 Orange County Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 237 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                            West Sussex County Times

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JWIN


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 238 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              West Sussex Gazette

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPWG


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 239 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Mid Sussex Times

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPMT


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 240 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                         Midhurst and Petworth Observer

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPMO


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 241 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Inverurie Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAIH


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 242 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                             The Fraserburgh Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAFH


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 243 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                  Ellon Times

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAEL


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 244 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                            Donside Piper and Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SADO


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 245 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Arbroath Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAAH


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 246 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          The Albany Herald (Georgia)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            April 15, 2017 Saturday

Albany residents cannot repair homes because of flood regulations

BYLINE: Jon Gosa, The Albany Herald, Ga.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1509 words


April 15--ALBANY -- Albany resident Jerry Crawford is all too familiar with the
hardships that come from weathering a major tornado. But the Vietnam veteran
never thought getting a building permit to repair his home after such a storm
would be one of them.

Crawford, like many others in the Hollis Drive area of south Dougherty County,
has been denied a legally required building permit by the Dougherty County
Building Permit Office, which prevents him from beginning repairs to his heavily
storm-damaged home because his home is located within the flood plain.

According to Crawford, the building permit office said his home would have to be
raised 3 feet above the flood plain to meet federal regulations before a permit
would be granted.

"They told me that because my home was more than 60 percent of value damaged and
because we were in the flood plain, FEMA regulations required that we raise our
home 3 feet above the flood plain before we could get a building permit," said
Crawford. "Now I understand regulations, I was in the military for 27 years, but
this is ridiculous. It is going to cost more than $15,000, and that was just an
estimate, to raise this house 3 feet. Plus, my home is already severely
damaged."

Crawford and his family have been living at a local motel since Jan. 22, when
the EF3 strength storm ripped through his east Albany neighborhood, destroying
homes and killing five people.

The storm left a path of destruction that stretched from the southwest to the
northeast edges of Dougherty County and beyond.

Crawford's home and property, located not far from the Paradise Village mobile
home park (where four of the five storm fatalities occurred), like many others
in the area, were severely damaged during the January storm.

Broken and twisted trees, a damaged boat, a missing shed, a collapsed porch and
a tarped house on Crawford's property are testaments to the intensity of that
tornado.

"We have substantial roof damage and a destroyed patio, which is the attached
structure to the house," Crawford said. "We got a contractor; he went down and
filed for a permit so we could begin repairs. We have a lot of interior damage
as well, but the foundation is solid. But they denied the permit because we are
in a flood plain. My house is only like 4 inches off, but they are telling us
that we have to raise it more than 3 feet above the flood plain. It is a brick
home, but this part over here used to be a patio that we enclosed. So I will
have to somehow elevate that portion as well; it is on a slab."

A sign can be seen from the front window of Crawford's home, put there by
Dougherty County inspectors. The sign reads, "DANGER -- This building is unfit
for human occupancy."

"We are living in a motel room," Crawford said. "And after three months, that
room is getting smaller and smaller. All of our belongings are in these portable
storage containers in the front yard. I don't know what to do. I have been
paying on this house for 26 years. It is almost paid off. I don't want to walk
away from it. A house is the biggest investment that most people ever make in
their life.

"Now this house did flood in '94, before I bought it, but it did not flood in
'98. The only reason this area flooded in the first place is because of a
county-owned drainage ditch that is right on the other side of those trees."

Crawford's neighbor and friend, David Fuller, is equally concerned about what he
calls "bureaucratic nonsense."

"My home wasn't damaged as bad as Jerry's," Fuller, also a Vietnam vet, said.
"So I don't have to raise my home, even though my house sits at a lower
elevation. But this federal regulation still affects me, and it is going to hurt
a lot of people in this area. I don't want to lose my neighbor. I don't want
Jerry to have to walk away, but I am afraid that a lot of people are going to
have no choice but to abandon their homes because they can't afford what it
takes to meet that regulation. They are trapped. It's bureaucratic nonsense."

According to Dougherty County Director of Planning Paul Forgey, the flood plain
issue is a complex one that will require a significant amount of time to sort
out.

"This is a complex issue because there is a lot of flood plain in the city of
Albany and Dougherty County," Forgey said. "Ideally, people shouldn't be living
in the flood plain. It is an area that is potentially dangerous and subject to
flooding, but nonetheless, there are a lot of houses in various areas across the
county in flood plains. Some of it is because the developers didn't know it was
a flood plain when they built there. It may have been unknown or maybe whoever
built it didn't recognize it. We've only had flood regulations since, I think,
'78. Probably all of these houses were built before then."

Forgey explained that since there were homes built during the past in areas
prone to flooding, the city and county adopted flood plain regulations to
prevent future building in those areas unless certain flood prevention standards
were met.

"So houses got built where they probably shouldn't have," Forgey said. "They are
subject to flooding, and the city and county both adopted flood plain
regulations, which require, if you are building a new house, that your house be
built above the flood level. The county (regulation) is 3 feet above flood
level, and the city it is 1 foot above flood level. So raising a house 3 feet
would only be if you were currently at the flood level. Some of those houses are
below the flood level, so, realistically, they would have to be raised higher,
maybe 4, 5 or even 6 feet."

According to Forgey, if a home within the flood plain is damaged in any way,
regulations require the house be built back to current regulation standards.

"What happens is, when there is any kind of damage to a house, in this case it
was a storm but it could be anything, there is a thing called 'substantially
damaged,'" the Planning director said. "If the structure, if your house, is
damaged 50 percent or more, by any cause -- fire, storm, whatever -- if it is 50
percent or more of the value of the house, then our flood plain regulations
require that you build it back to current flood plain standards, which is 3 feet
above flood plain in the county. This is also true if it wasn't a damage
situation, but someone was increasing the value of their house by more than 50
percent, like adding on. They would also have to meet the current flood plain
regulation. It's not just for damage, but it's also for new improvements or
building from the ground up. So, in that way, it is going to negatively impact
some individuals."

According to Forgey, flood plain regulations exist not just to keep people safe
but to also allow the county and citizens of the county to purchase flood
insurance at an extremely reduced rate.

"The reason we have these flood regulations in place is because we participate
in the flood insurance program so people who live in flood areas can purchase
flood insurance through the national flood insurance program," explained Forgey.
"Flood insurance is not typically sold on the open market, because it is not a
product that most people could afford to buy. So it is subsidized by the federal
government to make it affordable, but your community has to participate in the
program, and they have to have a flood ordinance, which is what we have. So the
reason people can buy flood insurance and afford it is because we have these
regulations in place."

The director said there are talks of programs that could possibly help people
like Crawford, people who are literally trapped -- can't live in their home
because of the damage, can't get a building permit to fix it unless they raise
it, can't afford to raise it -- but those programs were at best a year or two
away, if at all.

"There may be some money or programs that could help in these situations,"
Forgey said. "The problem is it is going to take some time. There has been talk
of FEMA grants that could pay to raise homes above the flood plain, and there
has been talk of a buyout program like what happened after the '94 flood. Some
people impacted during the flood were able to literally walk away from their
homes but get paid for it, pre-flood value. None of these programs is set in
stone, and whatever happens, it will be at least a year or two away, at best."

Crawford, however, does not want to walk away, forced to start over somewhere
else.

"I am trying to salvage the house," he said. "I don't want to have to start all
over again."

Stay Informed

Success! An email has been sent with a link to confirm list signup.

Error! There was an error processing your request.

Breaking News Alerts

Get Breaking News alerts from the Albany Herald delivered to your email.

Local Newsletter

Get the Local News headlines from the Albany Herald delivered daily to your
email.

Sports Newsletter

Get the Sports headlines from the Albany Herald delivered daily to your email.

Manage your lists

___ (c)2017 The Albany Herald, Ga. Visit The Albany Herald, Ga. at
www.albanyherald.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20170415-1AH-Albany-residents-cannot-repair-homes-because-of-flood-regulations-0
415-20170415

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1AH


                        Copyright 2017 The Albany Herald


                          FOCUS - 247 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Austin American-Statesman (Texas)

                            October 3, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

San Marcos aims to raise flood guards

BYLINE: Molly Bloom AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

SECTION: METRO & STATE; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 607 words


SAN MARCOS - San Marcos' population has grown more than 60 percent since 1990,
but the federally approved maps that determine flood insurance rates and where
flood control channels are built have not kept pace with the boom's accompanying
development.

Now, the city is working to update its flood plain map and is considering
building water diversion channels and a reservoir.

Redrawing the map would affect about 17,000 residents near several rivers and
creeks, according to Espey Consultants, the company hired by the city to lead
the flood protection study.

The revisions, which could remove some homes and businesses from flood plains
and add others, could affect flood insurance rates and home prices. By taking a
more detailed look at flood plains within the city than the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has, San Marcos hopes to find ways to better protect residents
from flooding, city engineering director Laurie Anderson said.

Projects that could reduce the risk of flooding, including building and
repairing ditches and street crossings, are big-ticket efforts and could change
the look of some neighborhoods.

The city plans to hold a public meeting on the flood control measures in
November as part of a series of meetings to solicit feedback before presenting
the report to the City Council early next year.

FEMA maintains the flood plain maps that determine flood insurance rates and
last conducted hydrological studies of the city in 1990, spokesman David Passey
said.

Changing the federally approved flood plain map would require a City Council
request to FEMA.

"The FEMA maps don't always reflect the effects of new development," Anderson
said. "We want to take a proactive look at how do we avoid flooding more people
in the future."

On a draft map that models how recent changes and planned projects in San Marcos
could affect flood patterns, new flood-prone areas arc from Purgatory Creek in
western San Marcos and Cottonwood Creek in southeastern San Marcos. Homes added
to the flood plain could see insurance rates rise and home values drop.

San Marcos' location next to the Balcones Escarpment puts it within the area
that hydrological professionals - and residents familiar with washed-out roads -
call "Flash Flood Alley." Floods endanger more than a third of the city's 46,000
residents and put property worth $150 million at risk, according to FEMA.

In the fall of 1998, 30 inches of rain that fell in two days cost San Marcos
$3.4 million in public property loss and filled the San Marcos Community Center
with hundreds of ousted residents. In November 2001, the city evacuated a
neighborhood east of Interstate 35 near the San Marcos River in advance of
flooding. And in July 2002, a tropical storm that dumped 40 inches of rain in a
week closed more than 70 roads in Hays County and led to a brief ban on tubing
in the San Marcos River.

The city's consultants have suggested flood protection strategies such as
purchasing homes and businesses in flood-prone areas and requiring developers to
dedicate land to drainage.

Other possibilities include building channels, improving street crossings over
culverts and constructing a reservoir upstream of the city, J. Travis Wilson, a
project manager at Espey Consultants, said. Those projects would also require
council approval.

Before the city formalizes any maps or fires up the backhoes, it wants to hear
from residents about how floods affect them and what should be done.

"We have a good idea for what flows look like, but sometimes folks who have
lived in a certain area have a much better idea of what a flood looks like,"
Wilson said.

mbloom@statesman.com; (512) 392-8750

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2006 The Austin American-Statesman
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 248 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                   New Orleans CityBusiness (New Orleans, LA)

                                December 1, 2005

FEMA issues new flood plain guidelines

BYLINE: CityBusiness Staff Report

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 560  words


To help Louisiana coastal communities make prudent rebuilding decisions, the
Federal Emergency Management Agency today released Flood Recovery Guidance
documents for 11 parishes in southern Louisiana. The guidance documents cover
Calcasieu, Cameron, Iberia, Lafourche, St. Charles, St. John the Baptist, St.
Mary, St. Tammany, Tangipahoa, Terrebonne, and Vermilion parishes. It provides
information on expected flood heights to use to make better decisions on
rebuilding storm-ravaged communities. Frank Pagano, FEMA's director of the Flood
Insurance and Mitigation Division for Region VI, reported today to the Louisiana
Recovery Authority Board of Directors. The guidance documents for each parish
are available online at http://www.fema.gov/hazards/floods/recoverydata/

. "Our goal is to help states and local communities make the best decisions as
the reconstruction progress continues in these communities," said Pagano. "This
guidance provides communities the specific information they need to make
better-informed decisions on how high water might rise during floods and at what
height buildings should be constructed."Following hurricanes Katrina and Rita,
FEMA assessed its existing flood risk data and updated its information. In some
places along the Gulf Coast, information about flooding hazards was off by as
much as 9 feet. The new Flood Recovery Guidance takes into account storm data
from the past 35 years, including major hurricanes like Camille, Georges,
Katrina and Rita, as well as coastal land loss, degradation of coastal barriers
and sinking land. "Citizens in affected parishes are desperate for solid
information to use in rebuilding," said Louisiana Recovery Authority Executive
Director Andy Kopplin.The Flood Recovery Guidance documents show areas with a
1-percent annual flood risk and updates levels at which water could rise in the
event of a flood. The 1 percent-annual-chance flood elevation represents a flood
with a 1 percent chance of happening in any given year. The standard will be
used for setting premium rates and requirements for the National Flood Insurance
Program. Given the complexities of assessing flood risk behind and near levees,
additional work is under way to produce similar guidance for levee-protected
areas and coastal areas outside and near levee systems. FEMA is coordinating
with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to develop Flood Recovery Guidance
documents for those areas. The Flood Recovery Guidance was created to provide
communities with more accurate and up-to-date flood hazard data. The guidance
serves to assist state and local officials and those rebuilding in making
decisions on how to reconstruct to help minimize vulnerability to future flood
events. The release of this guidance is for advisory purposes and will not
increase flood insurance premiums or flood insurance requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program. "FEMA strongly recommends communities build
higher and stronger to reduce vulnerability from flooding during future
hurricanes," said David Maurstad, FEMA's acting director of Mitigation and
Acting Federal Flood Insurance Administrator. "FEMA provides this kind of
advisory information to local governments, but ultimately it is state and local
officials, working with their citizens, who make final decisions on land use and
other building code requirements."

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Government activity

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2005 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 249 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                   New Orleans CityBusiness (New Orleans, LA)

                                  May 1, 2008

FEMA, state urge N.O.-area residents to buy flood insurance

BYLINE: CityBusiness Staff Report

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 491  words


FEMA and Louisiana homeland security officials are pushing New Orleans-area
residents to prepare for the hurricane season now by purchasing flood insurance.

Whether renting or owning a home, New Orleans residents should take steps now to
protect their financial well-being before a hurricane strikes, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and the Governor's Office of Homeland Security and
Emergency Preparedness said.

Hurricane season officially begins June 1, a month away.

"Buying flood insurance is the best way to protect yourself financially from
flood damage," said Jim Stark, acting associate deputy administrator for FEMA's
Gulf Coast Recovery Office. "Call your agent now so that you are covered by the
start of hurricane season because when you purchase a flood insurance policy
there is a 30-day waiting period before it takes effect. "

Anyone - property owners, renters and business owners - can purchase flood
insurance if their community participates in the National Flood Insurance
Program.

FEMA administers the NFIP, which Congress established in 1968 with the goals of
reducing future flood damage through floodplain management and providing people
with flood insurance. After hurricanes Katrina and Rita, the NFIP paid $13.2
billion to Louisiana flood insurance policyholders. The average claim paid for
flood damage was $70,000.

"Even if you live away from the coast, you are still vulnerable to flooding,"
said Mark Cooper, director of GOHSEP. "Having flood insurance is a proven way
you can help yourself recover faster after a damaging flood, especially since
homeowners insurance does not cover flood damage. "

Homeowners can insure their homes for up to $250,000 and its contents for up to
$100,000. Renters can cover belongings for up to $100,000. Nonresidential
property owners can insure a building and its contents for up to $500,000 each.
The cost of a policy depends on various factors, the most important of which is
whether a resident lives in a low-, moderate- or high-risk flood area. Flood
Insurance Rate Maps, which show flood hazard areas, are used to determine the
flood insurance rate for properties.

Residents in high-risk areas or Special Flood Hazard Areas and have a mortgage
from a federally regulated lender are required to purchase flood insurance. They
must carry the insurance for the life of the mortgage.

If someone lives outside a Special Flood Hazard Area, they still are at risk for
flooding. Twenty percent to 25 percent of all flood claims are filed in low- to
moderate-flood-risk areas. FEMA advises these people contact their local
floodplain management officials to view current local flood maps or go to
www.msc.fema.gov to see the latest flood maps for their community.

Currently, 296 communities in Louisiana participate in the NFIP.

To buy a flood insurance policy, residents are asked to contact their insurance
agent or find an agent online at www.floodsmart.gov or by calling (800)
427-2419.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 250 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                   April 6, 1998 Monday MORNING FINAL EDITION

A FLOOD OF PROBLEMS FEDERAL INSURANCE PROGRAM NEEDS MAJOR CHANGES

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 6B

LENGTH: 760 words


FEDERAL flood insurance is a good idea.

But the current system of federal flood insurance needs major changes. And
action in Congress, while necessary, is not enough. Federal agencies, local
governments, mortgage lenders and residents must face up to reality, accept more
responsibility and in some cases absorb substantial costs if the flood insurance
program is ever to work the way it should.

Reporter Stephen Buel painted a vivid picture of what is wrong with the National
Flood Insurance Program in his recent stories on how flood aid has turned into a
major financial drain for the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the
country as a whole.

Only 30 percent of the 10 million Americans who own property in flood plains
purchase the insurance; flood plain maps fail to consider that dams and levees
can fail; premiums are artificially low for property owners in high-risk areas;
many communities fail to participate in programs to reduce building in
flood-prone areas; and basing requirements on the "100-year flood" model ignores
the fact that flooding of that magnitude or worse can -- and has -- occurred
repeatedly in some areas of California just in the past fewyears.

We don't have a problem with the government offering flood insurance. Private
firms don't include it in home insurance policies, so the government has had to
step in. Otherwise, all taxpayers end up bailing out victims of floods, which
just gets too expensive when we're already providing disaster aid to victims of
earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, forest fires, volcanic eruptions and
everything else Mother Nature can hurl at us.

And since flooding is at least somewhat predictable, it makes sense to saddle
flood plain residents with the cost. Since there are 10 million of them, the
risk can be spread across a very large pool. What doesn't make sense is letting
most flood plain residents get away without buying insurance, and then helping
them out anyway with grants and loans when their homes and businesses are under
water.

Nor does it make sense to continue replacing policy owners' possessions when
their homes get flooded year after year. And it certainly doesn't make sense to
exclude new developments in the Central Valley from insurance requirements
because they are "protected" by levees, in light of the spectacular levee
failures that inundated much of that area in 1997.

The flood insurance program is fixable, if Congress can come up with the
political will to make it work. Instead of drawing maps to show the 100-year
flood plain, FEMA should include all areas that could be inundated in, say, a
500-year flood. After all, more than a third of flood claims in California have
been paid to people outside the "flood plain," so clearly the boundaries need to
be expanded. Next, everyone who lives in the flood plain should be required to
have flood insurance, rather than letting it be pretty much voluntary as it is
today. That means lenders must include flood insurance in escrow requirements,
and current property owners in flood plains must be signed up for the program
(rather than waiting until the property is sold).

Beyond that, the flood insurance program should be allowed to raise rates to
owners of high-risk properties. Currently, people who buy homes along the
Russian River, for example, pay a fraction of what they should pay to reflect
their actual risk of flood damage. As a result, the program is $810 million in
debt to the Treasury, despite a $1.2 billion bailout by Congress in 1986. And
Congress should get tough on communities that want to participate in the
insurance program but don't want to reduce risks by enforcing stricter building
codes and limiting development in flood plains.

Flooding is this nation's costliest type of disaster. When the news features
photos of flood victims, Americans rush to help them with both private and
public money. But Congress realized back in 1969 that while outbursts of
checkbook compassion are admirable, they are a poor way of dealing with
catastrophes, especially if they occur predictably year after year. That's even
more true today, as California experiences back-to-back years of severe storms
and as property values continue to rise.

The federal flood insurance program can serve more people and actually become
self-supporting with intelligent changes. Congress should act now to spread the
cost of disaster relief over everyone whose property is at risk of flooding, and
put into the program whatever teeth are necessary to make that happen.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: EDITORIAL

                     Copyright 1998 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 251 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

False Claims

BYLINE: By J. Robert Hunter.

J. Robert Hunter, the director of insurance for the Consumer Federation of
America, is the former federal insurance administrator and Texas insurance
commissioner.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: Washington


IN mid-April, the Federal Emergency Management Agency released its long-awaited
guidelines for rebuilding homes and businesses in New Orleans. Americans
throughout the country should pay attention, because although these requirements
were devised with the best of intentions to spur the reconstruction of a
devastated city, they will have negative repercussions far beyond Louisiana.

The new guidelines will cripple FEMA's National Flood Insurance Program, which
is the only assistance available to most Americans trying to protect themselves
from flooding caused by natural disasters. They will also cause taxpayers to
subsidize dangerous and improper rebuilding in New Orleans, putting many
residents in harm's way.

The National Flood Insurance Program, which I administered from 1974 to 1978,
was introduced in 1968 as a way to assist families devastated by flooding and to
encourage safe construction in flood plains. Communities on flood plains receive
taxpayer-financed insurance subsidies on existing buildings, in exchange for
which they must use their land and construct new buildings in ways that reduce
the risk of flood damage.

The program discouraged such communities from building in areas vulnerable to
hurricane storm surges, for example, or where water rushes at high velocity when
rivers overflow. New buildings in safer parts of flood plains were to be
elevated to at least the level of a flood that had a 1 percent chance of
happening in a year -- the so-called 100-year flood. The program also requires
that homes and businesses be raised to the 100-year flood level after suffering
damage of 50 percent or more of their structural value.

Taxpayers will subsidize more than $20 billion in flood insurance claims for the
victims of Hurricane Katrina. This is as it should be; residents purchased
policies for exactly this purpose. But now it seems that the National Flood
Insurance Program is not living up to its promise to reduce flood damage.
Significantly, FEMA's flood risk maps are old -- in some cases two decades old
-- and grossly underestimate the hazards. My research on Hancock County in
Mississippi shows that the 100-year flood levels predicted on the old maps are
about 10 feet below what new maps forecast.

By allowing the maps to get so out of date, FEMA has misled people into building
houses at levels that appear to be safe but are not. In some cases, the low
projected flood levels also mislead people into thinking that they live outside
the flood zones. As a result, they fail to purchase the flood insurance they
need.

FEMA's new guidance for the area bounded by the New Orleans levees will allow
rebuilding even though, as the agency has stated, ''the flood control system
will not meet the standards necessary for providing protection'' against a
100-year flood. People whose houses sustained less than 50 percent damage can
rebuild where they were. Those with more than 50 percent damage have lined up at
City Hall to talk inspectors into altering damage assessments and thus avoid
elevating their homes.

Those whose certificates still state that their homes were more than 50 percent
damaged -- many had water over their roofs -- will be allowed to rebuild at
elevations dictated by the old maps or lifted a mere three feet higher than they
were before the flooding, whichever is greater. New maps for New Orleans won't
be released for six more months. Some parish officials have indicated that they
may not enforce even this inadequate interim standard.

The desire to help the displaced residents of New Orleans return is
understandable, but to do so at the expense of the National Flood Insurance
Program's principles of safe construction is shortsighted, dangerous and costly.
In order to protect the lives and livelihoods of the city's residents and not
saddle taxpayers with avoidable insurance claims, houses in New Orleans must be
built above the new 100-year level.

There is a way to maintain National Flood Insurance Program standards and help
New Orleans rebuild quickly. First, Congress should require FEMA to enforce all
of the standards. Second, Congress should provide the generous financial
assistance necessary to help the people of New Orleans raise their homes or move
to higher, safer ground. We do nobody in New Orleans a favor if residents are
allowed to rebuild in a way that puts their property -- or lives -- at risk.

If FEMA does not enforce the standards, Congress should end the National Flood
Insurance Program. No flood insurance is better than continuing to have
taxpayers subsidize unsafe construction in the nation's flood plains.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Paul Hoppe)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 252 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 27, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mississippi Flooding Is Reviving a Debate On Government Role

BYLINE:  By DOUGLAS JEHL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1479 words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS, April 26


With near-record floodwaters rolling down the Mississippi River once again, a
debate has been reignited in the Midwest about how or even whether governments
should try to protect the areas that might lie in rivers' paths.

Since the devastating floods of 1993, the federal and state governments have
spent hundreds of millions of dollars to buy and demolish nearly 13,000 homes
and businesses along the Mississippi and its tributaries, essentially conceding
that battling the waters was a losing fight. But more recently, communities near
St. Louis have begun a surge of development across thousands of acres of the
flood plain and are seeking federal assistance to raise levees ever higher.

Critics say the plan reflects a dangerous hubris about the power to tame mighty
rivers, and they say federal money would be better spent keeping structures away
from the riverbanks. But signals from the Bush administration, which has scolded
the sodden city of Davenport, Iowa, for not building a permanent flood wall,
appear to suggest a preference for development over demolition.  Page A16.

In one move, the administration has said it intends to reduce to 50 percent from
75 percent the federal share of the Congressionally mandated program that
acquires property in flood-prone areas and converts it to open space. It has
also chosen not to renew a $160-million-a-year program to restore farmland to
wetlands, which have a sponging capacity experts regard as important in reducing
the severity of floods.

At the same time, the Army Corps of Engineers is going forward with a $58
million program to help raise one levee just west of St. Louis, a project
intended to protect strip malls and other development under way in the flood
plain of the lower Missouri River. The Corps is also moving ahead on a
controversial $60 million levee project in the southern part of the state that
will close off one of the last remaining natural flood ways on the lower
Mississippi.

In this year's flooding, predictions so far say the high water will begin to
dissipate as the crest moves southward, so that the flood will not come close to
1993 levels by the time it reaches the St. Louis area early next week. But
televised scenes of damage in Minnesota, Iowa and Illinois have nevertheless
been disturbing to people who live down river, including state officials and
environmentalists in Missouri who say the construction of the new and bigger
levees will only increase the potential for severe flooding elsewhere in the
future.

These critics also say that the development under way in the Missouri River
flood plain, in cities like Chesterfield, Hazelwood and Maryland Heights, Mo.,
suggests that local planners are ignoring the lessons learned from the 1993
flood, including the wisdom of moving structures out of harm's way.

"Basically what we're seeing is continued use of the flood plain for
inappropriate reasons," said Wayne Freeman, executive director of the Great
Rivers Land Trust, a conservation organization based in St. Louis.

Bob Shea, a senior official of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, conceded
that the reduced federal contribution recommended in the budget proposal the
White House has sent to Congress could have a "fairly major impact" on efforts
to remove structures from flood-prone areas.

But Mr. Shea said the administration believed that state and local governments
should bear a greater share of the burden for the program, which turns the
property over to local authorities. Mr. Shea said that the agency's new
director, Joe Allbaugh, supported the structure-removal effort and was sensitive
to the problems associated with building in the flood plain.

But to other flood experts, Mr. Allbaugh's repeated criticism of the Mississippi
River city of Davenport this week for its failure to build a flood wall that
might have offered greater protection from high waters has seemed to suggest a
misplaced inclination to emphasize structural approaches to flood protection.

"Davenport is not perfect, but it is close to a model for how to address
flooding," said Tim Searchinger, a lawyer with Environmental Defense, a New York
research and advocacy group. "Yes, they don't have a flood wall, but for the
most part, it has not built in the flood plain."

In the aftermath of the 1993 floods, which caused some $10 billion in damage, a
committee of government experts urged the Clinton administration to abandon the
Army Corps of Engineers's longstanding preference for dams and levees to control
floods. The report noted that flood damages in the United States had soared
despite the billions of dollars spent on such structures, and it called for
greater efforts to promote the evacuation of risky flood plains, the relocation
of businesses and farms to higher ground and the restoration of natural flood
cycles.

The most significant outgrowth of those recommendations has been the program to
buy flood-threatened property, which is now the biggest component of the federal
disaster agency's stepped-up efforts at flood mitigation. Under laws passed by
Congress since the 1993 floods, the federal emergency agency must devote at
least 15 percent of its flood disaster relief spending to clearing land and to
other projects aimed at preventing damage.

In Missouri alone, said Buck Katt, the deputy director of the state's emergency
management agency, the program has made possible the takeover of some 5,000
structures or parcels of land, at a cost of about $100 million, but with savings
from future flood damage expected to be greater. Under the program, some
Midwestern towns, like Valmeyer, Ill., have been transplanted house by house to
higher ground; of the structures flooded in 1993, one in seven has either been
moved from danger or no longer exists, Scott Faber, a lawyer with Environmental
Defense, said.

A condition of the program is that any land that is acquired must be deeded to
prohibit construction. But still, most land along the Mississippi and its
tributaries is not covered by such prohibitions, and the Army Corps of
Engineers, which regulates construction on wetlands, has proven willing to issue
the permits and assist in the levee building that have made the new flood-plain
development possible.

Among the biggest development projects is the one in Chesterfield, Mo., 20 miles
west of St. Louis, where a levee built to withstand a 100-year flood was
breached by the Missouri in 1993, causing $400 million worth of damage. There
local authorities are about halfway finished with an upgrade that will raise its
walls by as much as seven feet, to the level of a flood calculated as likely to
occur only once in 500 years.

Already, a business park and some light industry are in place in the part of the
Missouri River flood plain that is to be protected by the higher walls, and more
construction is under way or planned on thousands of acres of what was farmland.
Congress last year authorized $58 million for the part of the levee project that
is to be performed by the Corps of Engineers, but the money has not yet been
appropriated.

Further down river, 500-year levees are being built or planned to make
development possible in Maryland Heights and Hazelwood, but these projects would
be financed locally.

David Human, the executive director of the Chesterfield levee district, said a
study by the Corps had concluded that the benefits of the project would exceed
the costs by a two to one ratio. Charles Camillo, a Corps spokesman, suggested
that critics of such projects had exaggerated the link between development and
the risk of flood.

"Floods aren't caused by levees, the loss of wetlands, navigation structures in
rivers or flood-plain development, when taken alone," Mr. Camillo said. "What
causes floods is a lot of rainfall over a wide area over extended periods of
time. Everything has to be evaluated as a whole, not as separate features."

But critics of the projects say that the Corps's studies have failed to consider
as a whole the effects of development under way in the St. Louis area, as well
as the potential effect of the New Madrid levee project in southern Missouri,
which has been advocated by the Corps to help protect farmland near the small
town of East Prairie, Mo.

A supplemental environmental impact study on the project, which is meant to
address concerns raised by the state of Missouri, the Environmental Protection
Agency and the Fish and Wildlife Service, is expected to be completed this fall.

The biggest danger of levee construction, critics say, is that they constrict
rivers between man-made boundaries, thus denying them space for flooding, and
setting in motion an unhealthy race between communities to protect themselves
with ever-higher barriers.

"When you build a levee, you're going to pay the price somewhere else, and
there's no ifs, ands or buts about it," said Mr. Katt of the Missouri emergency
agency.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "A CLOSER LOOK -- Flood Control: Two Approaches" Let the River
Have Its WaySince the flood of 1993, federal and state governments have spent
millions to acquire and demolish properties in flood-prone areas and convert
them to open space, conceding that battling the waters is a losing fight. Try to
Control ItOver the years, many miles of levees have been built along the banks
of the Mississippi and its tributaries. Recently, communities near St. Louis
have sought federal assistance to raise levees to protect new development in the
flood plain. FEDERAL SHARE (75 percent of total)Illinois: $66.7 MillionIowa:
41.6Missouri: 38.2North Dakota: 34.2Minnesota: 33.8Kansas: 25.9Wisconsin:
16.7Nebraska: 11.9South Dakota: 2.3 Maps of Missouri highlighting flood
prevention levees in St. Louis region. (Sources: F.E.M.A.; Army Corps of
Engineers)(pg. A16)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 253 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

YOUR HOME;
Insuring A Home for Flooding

BYLINE:  By JAY ROMANO

SECTION: Section 11; Column 1; Real Estate Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1062 words


ACCORDING to statistics compiled by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
people who live in federally designated flood plains -- which include many homes
near beaches, bays, rivers and wetlands -- have a 26 percent chance of
experiencing a flood at some point in the course of 30 years, the typical term
of most home mortgages.

In fact, according to FEMA, a building in such an area is six times more likely
to be damaged by flood than by fire. However, a quarter of all flood claims are
from areas that are not in flood plains.

"And what many people do not know is that their homeowner's insurance policy
does not provide protection against flooding," said Amy Danise, editor of
insure.com, a West Hartford, Conn., online consumer guide to insurance.

Indeed, Ms. Danise said, while most homeowners' policies provide coverage for
water damage resulting from things like broken pipes, overflowing washing
machines and wind-driven rain, they generally do not cover damage from floods.
As a result, she said, homeowners who believe they have any exposure to risk of
flooding should consider buying flood insurance under the federal government's
National Flood Insurance Program.

Mark Stevens, a public affairs officer for the program, agreed. "'No one ever
questions the need to have fire insurance," Mr. Stevens said. "Yet a lot of
people don't realize that their risk of having a flood could be considerably
higher than the chance of experiencing a fire."

He explained that the National Flood Insurance Program, which is administered by
FEMA, was created in 1968 to provide affordable flood insurance on a nationwide
basis.

"And flood insurance is available not only to homeowners, but to small
businesses and renters as well," Mr. Stevens said.

For an owner or renter to buy flood insurance, he said, the property to be
insured must be in a community that participates in the program. "At present,
about 19,700 communities participate," Mr. Stevens said, or about 80 percent of
the 24,000 or so individual communities in the nation. (Towns participating in
the program are listed in agency's Community Status Book. The listing is
available on the agency's Internet site at www.fema.gov/fema/csb.htm. It is also
possible to determine if a particular town is participating by calling the local
planning or building department.)

In most cases, Mr. Stevens said, a homeowner's first encounter with flood
insurance comes when a mortgage lender requires the homeowner to buy it to get a
mortgage. Federal law requires lenders who are federally regulated, or who are
making federally backed loans, to make their borrowers take out a enough flood
insurance to cover at least the mortgage if a home is in what is known as a
Special Flood Hazard Area.

Mr. Stevens said that such zones -- depicted on maps known as Flood Insurance
Rate Maps -- describe the relative risk of flooding to which a particular area
is subject. In most cases, he said, an area is considered to be a Special Flood
Hazard Area if it is in what is referred to as a "100-year flood plain."

"But the term '100-year flood plain' is misleading," Mr. Stevens said,
explaining that the term does not refer to an area where a flood is expected to
occur once every 100 years. Instead, he said, the term refers to a location that
has a chance of 1 percent or more of flooding in any given year.

Mr. Stevens added that since 25 percent of flood-damage claims are for
properties outside the "100-year flood plain," even homes in low to moderate
risk areas could benefit from coverage.

Patricia A. Burns, president of Central Property Search, a company in
Norristown, Pa., that sells flood insurance and provides flood zone information
to lenders, said the maximum amount of flood insurance coverage that a homeowner
can obtain from National Flood Insurance Program was $250,000 for the structure
itself and $100,000 in contents coverage. (Once the first policy has been
obtained through the program, added coverage may be obtained through a "surplus
lines" company like Lloyd's of London.)

"It's important to note that flood insurance does not cover damage to personal
items or improvements in the basement," Ms. Burns said, explaining that while
the insurance would cover heating units, water heaters and damage to the
structure itself, it would not provide coverage for personal articles stored
there or for improvements like paneling and carpeting. "So if you put in a pool
table and some furniture, you're not going to be covered for that," she said.

Generally speaking, Ms. Burns said, flood insurance premiums depend upon a
number of factors. Among them are the amount of coverage bought, the deductible
desired (which can range from $500 to $5,000) and the specific flood zone of the
property.

"There are lots of different types of zones," she said, explaining that
different zones -- which are identified by letter and letter-and-number
combinations -- have different elements and degrees of risk associated with
them. For example, a property in an area designated as a Zone AO, which
corresponds to areas in 100-year flood plains where one to three feet of
flooding occurs, will have a lower degree of risk than an area designated as a
Zone VE, which is an area within a 100-year coastal flood plain that has
additional hazards associated with storm waves. Zones B, C, X and A99, she said,
are generally less prone to flooding.

"I would say that the average policy I write is for $100,000 for the structure
and $25,000 for contents, with a $500 deductible and an annual premium of $500
or less," Ms. Burns said. She added that premiums on residential properties
range from $100 -- for properties that are not in a flood zone -- to $1,500 or
more for properties in areas subject to severe or repetitive flooding.
(Additional information about flood insurance is on Ms. Burns's company's
Internet site at www.cps.cncoffice.com.)

Mr. Stevens of the National Flood Insurance Program said that homeowners who
wanted to determine what flood zone their property was in should contact an
insurance company that participates in the program. Those companies' names can
be found on the program's Internet site, www.fema.gov/nfip/infocon.htm, or by
calling 800-427-4661.

"And since the rate for a particular property is going to be the same no matter
who you go to," he said, "there's little to be gained by shopping around."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Tom Bloom)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 254 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            August 14, 2010 Saturday
                                 Met 2 Edition

New boundaries, higher premiums;
As Fairfax updates flood plain map, residents learn they must buy new insurance

BYLINE: Fredrick Kunkle

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1062 words


One day your house is outside a hazardous flood plain -- and the next day it's
in, potentially costing you hundreds of dollars a year in higher insurance
premiums. Or vice versa. And it's all the doing of the feds and a funky new map.

Fairfax County is updating and digitizing its map showing the boundaries of
flood-prone areas, as part of the National Flood Insurance Program run by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. Landscape changes, new hydrological data
and better mapping technology often alter the boundaries of flood-prone areas as
marked on paper maps that are sometimes decades out of date.

The effects can be jarring and sometimes costly, forcing some residents,
business owners and renters to buy flood insurance. Through FEMA, federally
subsidized policies cost an average of $600 a year but can run as much as
$1,385. Private insurers can charge more.

"It was a surprise when they told me my house was in it," said Jeff Relyea, 39,
a public accountant whose Mantua Drive house backs up on Accotink Creek. Under
the previous map, Relyea's house was outside the flood plain; the new map moves
the house into it. "When my mortgage company told me it was going to cost
$3,000, that was a huge surprise," he said.

Relyea, whose house has never been flooded, challenged the proposed designation,
as permitted by FEMA regulations. He hired surveyors, at a cost of $1,500, to
help prove that his house is unlikely to flood and to obtain certification to
that effect, known as a letter of map amendment, or LOMA.

For Thomas Black, the new map did the opposite. His home now appears to be
outside the Special Flood Hazard Area, a switch that could save him money. It
did not look that way at first, however. In May, his private lender notified him
that because his home was in a flood plain on the previous map, he would be
required to buy flood insurance. And the premium came to a whopping $2,244 a
year.

"That caused me to say, 'What's going on here?' " said Black, 67, who works for
the county in its transportation division and has lived on Mantua Drive near
Accotink Creek since 1980. After calling Fairfax County officials, Black learned
that the revised map will actually shift his house outside the flood plain,
making flood insurance unnecessary.

The nationwide revision of flood plain maps comes as the 42-year-old National
Flood Insurance Program is awash in debt, caused largely by a series of
devastating tropical storms, including Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Like a credit
card, the program has almost maxed out its congressionally authorized debt
limit, leaving officials $2.075 billion left to borrow and hoping for a mild
hurricane season.

The flood insurance program was started in 1968, partially because the federal
government was trying to reduce its cost of disaster assistance after natural
catastrophes. The aim was to offer affordable flood insurance policies to
Americans at a time when private insurers were leaving the market and to
minimize the risk to communities by adopting regulations to manage development
near flood-prone areas.

FEMA Administrator W. Craig Fugate told Congress in April that the flood
insurance program would probably have to seek debt forgiveness of about $18.7
billion, even as some representatives were pushing to expand the program to
offer subsidized coverage against wind damage. Fugate told a House panel that
such an expansion would be unwise, probably driving private insurers out of the
market and incurring more debt to taxpayers.

In the meantime, the agency is working to update its flood plain maps and enroll
more residents in the program. Since FEMA began updating its flood insurance
rate maps in 2003, the agency has issued revised, preliminary maps for more than
85 percent of the nation's population in about 17,000 communities. About 63
percent of the nation's population has finalized maps in more than 10,500
communities, FEMA spokesman Bradley Carroll said. Locally, the District's flood
plain map update is scheduled to be finished next month.

The undertaking in Fairfax, which began two years ago, has created an inundation
of another kind, as calls from residents pour in with worried inquiries about
whether they will have to buy flood insurance before the new map goes into
effect Sept. 17. County officials say the number of callers has averaged about
20 a day.

County officials say many callers simply need help negotiating the interactive
digital map on the county's Web site that shows the new boundaries of the
county's flood-prone areas. Others wonder whether they should buy flood
insurance through the national program or, for those who are required by lenders
to purchase the policies, how they will afford it. People who live in or own
businesses in high-risk areas are required to buy flood insurance if they have
federally insured or federally regulated mortgages.

Last month, Fairfax sent letters to homeowners potentially affected by the
update, advising them of the status of applications to remove them from the
flood plain. Other letters have advised residents that they can be grandfathered
in to lower flood insurance premiums by buying flood insurance before the
effective date of the map next month.

"People don't realize flood plains change, physically or naturally," said County
Board of Supervisors member Michael R. Frey (R-Sully).

On Mantua Drive in the Providence District, for example, the map shifts four
properties into the flood plain near Long Branch, a tributary of Accotink Creek.
Yet, along Millwood Pond Court and Willow Falls Drive in the Sugarland Run area
of the Dranesville District, about 10 properties that had been inside the flood
plain are now considered to be high and dry.

Relyea, the Mantua Drive homeowner whose house is now considered to be inside
the flood plain, said he understands the importance of the program, even if it
might mean paying a higher insurance premium for a fairly small risk.

"I would feel terrible for someone who didn't have flood insurance and they got
damaged," he said.

Black, the homeowner whose property is now deemed to be outside the flood plain,
said it is not clear why his home was included in the flood plain on the
previous map. He said his property is elevated and protected by a berm, so that
neither his house nor his back yard has ever been underwater in the years he has
lived there.

"It's bone dry," Black said.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; Dayna Smith For The Washington Post; Tracey Relyea helps son
Noah, 4, cross the stream that backs up to their family's Mantua Drive house,
which has never been flooded.
IMAGE; Dayna Smith For The Washington Post; Water from a stream behind her yard
sloshes from the boots of Casey Relyea, 5, after this week's rain.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 255 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             August 15, 2010 Sunday
                                Bulldog Edition

Flood plain changes lead to new premiums;
As Fairfax updates map, residents learn they must buy insurance

BYLINE: Fredrick Kunkle

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 850 words


One day your house is outside a hazardous flood plain -- and the next day it's
in, potentially costing you hundreds of dollars a year in higher insurance
premiums. Or vice versa. And it's all the doing of the feds and a funky new map.

Fairfax County is updating and digitizing its map showing the boundaries of
flood-prone areas, as part of the National Flood Insurance Program run by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. Landscape changes, new hydrological data
and better mapping technology often alter the boundaries of flood-prone areas as
marked on paper maps that are sometimes decades out of date.

The effects can be jarring and sometimes costly, forcing some residents,
business owners and renters to buy flood insurance. Through FEMA, federally
subsidized policies cost an average of $600 a year but can run as much as
$1,385. Private insurers can charge more.

"It was a surprise when they told me my house was in it," said Jeff Relyea, 39,
a public accountant whose Mantua Drive house backs up on Accotink Creek. Under
the previous map, Relyea's house was outside the flood plain; the new map moves
the house into it. "When my mortgage company told me it was going to cost
$3,000, that was a huge surprise," he said.

Relyea, whose house has never been flooded, challenged the proposed designation.
He hired surveyors, at a cost of $1,500, to help prove that his house is
unlikely to flood and to obtain certification to that effect, known as a letter
of map amendment, or LOMA.

For Thomas Black, the new map did the opposite. His home now appears to be
outside the Special Flood Hazard Area, a switch that could save him money. It
did not look that way at first, however. In May, his private lender notified him
that because his home was in a flood plain on the previous map, he would be
required to buy flood insurance. And the premium came to a whopping $2,244 a
year.

"That caused me to say, 'What's going on here?' " said Black, 67, who works for
the county in its transportation division and has lived on Mantua Drive near
Accotink Creek since 1980. After calling Fairfax County officials, Black learned
that the revised map will actually shift his house outside the flood plain,
making flood insurance unnecessary.

The nationwide revision of flood plain maps comes as the 42-year-old National
Flood Insurance Program is awash in debt, caused largely by a series of
devastating tropical storms, including Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Like a credit
card, the program has almost maxed out its congressionally authorized debt
limit, leaving officials $2.075 billion left to borrow and hoping for a mild
hurricane season.

The flood insurance program was started in 1968, partially because the federal
government was trying to reduce its cost of disaster assistance after natural
catastrophes. The aim was to offer affordable flood insurance policies to
Americans at a time when private insurers were leaving the market and to
minimize the risk to communities by adopting regulations to manage development
near flood-prone areas.

FEMA Administrator W. Craig Fugate told Congress in April that the flood
insurance program would probably have to seek debt forgiveness of about $18.7
billion, even as some representatives were pushing to expand the program to
offer subsidized coverage against wind damage. Fugate told a House panel that
such an expansion would be unwise, probably driving private insurers out of the
market and incurring more debt to taxpayers.

In the meantime, the agency is working to update its flood plain maps and enroll
more residents in the program. Since FEMA began updating its flood insurance
rate maps in 2003, the agency has issued revised, preliminary maps for more than
85 percent of the nation's population in about 17,000 communities. About 63
percent of the nation's population has finalized maps in more than 10,500
communities, FEMA spokesman Bradley Carroll said. Locally, the District's flood
plain map update is scheduled to be finished next month.

The undertaking in Fairfax, which began two years ago, has created an inundation
of another kind, as calls from residents pour in with worried inquiries about
whether they will have to buy flood insurance before the new map goes into
effect Sept. 17.

County officials say many callers simply need help negotiating the interactive
digital map on the county's Web site that shows the new boundaries of the
county's flood-prone areas. Others wonder whether they should buy flood
insurance through the national program or, for those who are required by lenders
to purchase the policies, how they will afford it. People who live in or own
businesses in high-risk areas are required to buy flood insurance if they have
federally insured or federally regulated mortgages.

Black, the homeowner whose property is now deemed to be outside the flood plain,
said it is not clear why his home was included in the flood plain on the
previous map. He said his property is elevated and protected by a berm, so that
neither his house nor his back yard has ever been underwater in the years he has
lived there.

"It's bone dry," Black said.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 256 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Silver City Sun-News (New Mexico)

                             June 9, 2007 Saturday

Do you need flood insurance in New Mexico?

BYLINE: By Annette West For the Sun-News

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 918 words


The flooding issues surrounding Hurricanes Katrina and Rita spurred the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to revisit the health of the nationwide levee
system. Even though we are not at risk from hurricanes, we know from last summer
that flooding can and does occur in southern New Mexico.

Revisiting the health of the nationwide levee systems means that FEMA, as
administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, is trying to more
accurately identify and assess flood hazards and risks for communities
nationwide by creating new flood maps called Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps.

The City of Las Cruces, the Doña Ana County Flood Commission and FEMA have
performed flood insurance studies to create proposed special flood hazard areas
noted in the DFIRMs. Special flood hazard areas are areas that would be
inundated by a 100-year flood. The maps also show base flood elevations.

Due to the decertification of portions of the Rio Grande levee system, some
areas along the Rio Grande River are now in the newly designated FEMA Special
Flood Hazard Areas.

As a result, the local levee owner, the International Boundary and Water
Commission must document that their levee system meets FEMA's current criteria
for design, construction, maintenance and operation. FEMA will then accredit the
levees and designate the area landward of the levy within the appropriate flood
zone accordingly. If the levee is not accredited, the area landward of the levee
is considered high risk.

"These DFIRMs are still in the preliminary stages and there is still the
possibility for more changes," said Orlando V. Fierro with the Doña Ana County
Flood Commission. "The County Flood Commission is in the process of drafting a
white paper to raise some questions about the proposed floodplains that have
been brought to our attention."

The bad news: Being in a high risk area can cost you money if you have a
federally backed home mortgage   most home mortgages are federally backed
because flood insurance is required for federally backed home mortgages in high
risk areas. Homeowner's insurance does not cover floods. Only the national flood
insurance program reimburses for flood damage and is available from your
insurance company or agent.

The good news: If you buy insurance when you are in a low risk area, and later
FEMA re-maps your location to high risk, you can save thousands of dollars in
your annual premium. How? Existing policy holders may be able to use the rate
charged for a lower risk zone based on a process called "grandfathering." The
simplest way to grandfather is to buy and maintain a flood insurance policy
before the new map takes effect. FEMA urges everyone living behind levees to
purchase and maintain flood insurance coverage, since levees can fall, decay,
etc. over time.

If you do take action right now, in one example, you can save up to $5,000.
Information from Carla A. Jaramillo, personal lines account representative with
Burke Insurance Group in Las Cruces, shows a substantial savings due to
grandfathering.

Let's assume you currently live in Zone X, a low risk area outside the 100-year
flood plain. Your premium to insure a building for $250,000 and contents for
$100,000 would be $317 per year.

Now let's further assume that FEMA re-maps the area to Zone A, the highest risk
rating. Your premium would triple to $1,190 per year.

But if you do not own flood insurance when the re-mapping to a high risk area
occurs, your premium for a new policy covering $250,000 building and $100,000
contents is a whopping $6,093 per year.

"The insurance premiums may cause some residents undue hardship," FIerro said.
"That is why the county flood commission is preparing a white paper to contest
areas we feel are not high risk."

Even though the grandfathered premium of $1,190 sounds expensive, it is fraction
of the cost of new flood insurance. Better yet, the grandfathering can be
transferred to the new owner should you sell your home.

Please note that the premiums quoted here may not match the premiums you are
quoted.

"There are a lot of factors that impact the cost of premiums, such as the exact
location of the home, the flood zone in which the property is located, the
amount of insurance including or excluding contents, and the deductible," said
Steve Howard with Farmers Insurance in Las Cruces. "I ran two quotes today, one
on my house in flood zone X, and another on a house in flood zone A, each with
$150,000 coverage for the dwelling, a $500 deductible and no contents coverage.
The flood zone X quote was $553 per year and the flood zone A quote was $2,902
per year.

"Besides the flood zone, there are other things that can reduce rates," Howard
said. "One is an elevation certificate done by a surveyor. When we had to write
flood on new apartments in flood zone AE, the premiums were about $2,000 per
building. Once we had the elevation certificates in hand which show the ground
height of the properties above the flood plain, the premiums were reduced to
about $300 per building."

It sounds like buying flood insurance is a smart move, even if you are located
in a 500-year flood area at low risk of flooding. The grandfathering process
could save you money and make your home more marketable should you ever decide
to sell.

For more information on flood insurance, visit www.floodsmart.gov, or contact
the Doña Ana County Flood Commission at 647-7256 or 525-5558.

Annette West, CCIM, MBA, CPA, is a Las Cruces Realtor® and can be reached at
AWest@NMApartment.com or at 505-644-1634

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 Silver City Sun-News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 257 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        Las Cruces Sun-News (New Mexico)

                             June 9, 2007 Saturday

Do you need flood insurance in New Mexico?

BYLINE: By Annette West For the Sun-News

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 918 words


The flooding issues surrounding Hurricanes Katrina and Rita spurred the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to revisit the health of the nationwide levee
system. Even though we are not at risk from hurricanes, we know from last summer
that flooding can and does occur in southern New Mexico.

Revisiting the health of the nationwide levee systems means that FEMA, as
administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, is trying to more
accurately identify and assess flood hazards and risks for communities
nationwide by creating new flood maps called Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps.

The City of Las Cruces, the Doña Ana County Flood Commission and FEMA have
performed flood insurance studies to create proposed special flood hazard areas
noted in the DFIRMs. Special flood hazard areas are areas that would be
inundated by a 100-year flood. The maps also show base flood elevations.

Due to the decertification of portions of the Rio Grande levee system, some
areas along the Rio Grande River are now in the newly designated FEMA Special
Flood Hazard Areas.

As a result, the local levee owner, the International Boundary and Water
Commission must document that their levee system meets FEMA's current criteria
for design, construction, maintenance and operation. FEMA will then accredit the
levees and designate the area landward of the levy within the appropriate flood
zone accordingly. If the levee is not accredited, the area landward of the levee
is considered high risk.

"These DFIRMs are still in the preliminary stages and there is still the
possibility for more changes," said Orlando V. Fierro with the Doña Ana County
Flood Commission. "The County Flood Commission is in the process of drafting a
white paper to raise some questions about the proposed floodplains that have
been brought to our attention."

The bad news: Being in a high risk area can cost you money if you have a
federally backed home mortgage   most home mortgages are federally backed
because flood insurance is required for federally backed home mortgages in high
risk areas. Homeowner's insurance does not cover floods. Only the national flood
insurance program reimburses for flood damage and is available from your
insurance company or agent.

The good news: If you buy insurance when you are in a low risk area, and later
FEMA re-maps your location to high risk, you can save thousands of dollars in
your annual premium. How? Existing policy holders may be able to use the rate
charged for a lower risk zone based on a process called "grandfathering." The
simplest way to grandfather is to buy and maintain a flood insurance policy
before the new map takes effect. FEMA urges everyone living behind levees to
purchase and maintain flood insurance coverage, since levees can fall, decay,
etc. over time.

If you do take action right now, in one example, you can save up to $5,000.
Information from Carla A. Jaramillo, personal lines account representative with
Burke Insurance Group in Las Cruces, shows a substantial savings due to
grandfathering.

Let's assume you currently live in Zone X, a low risk area outside the 100-year
flood plain. Your premium to insure a building for $250,000 and contents for
$100,000 would be $317 per year.

Now let's further assume that FEMA re-maps the area to Zone A, the highest risk
rating. Your premium would triple to $1,190 per year.

But if you do not own flood insurance when the re-mapping to a high risk area
occurs, your premium for a new policy covering $250,000 building and $100,000
contents is a whopping $6,093 per year.

"The insurance premiums may cause some residents undue hardship," FIerro said.
"That is why the county flood commission is preparing a white paper to contest
areas we feel are not high risk."

Even though the grandfathered premium of $1,190 sounds expensive, it is fraction
of the cost of new flood insurance. Better yet, the grandfathering can be
transferred to the new owner should you sell your home.

Please note that the premiums quoted here may not match the premiums you are
quoted.

"There are a lot of factors that impact the cost of premiums, such as the exact
location of the home, the flood zone in which the property is located, the
amount of insurance including or excluding contents, and the deductible," said
Steve Howard with Farmers Insurance in Las Cruces. "I ran two quotes today, one
on my house in flood zone X, and another on a house in flood zone A, each with
$150,000 coverage for the dwelling, a $500 deductible and no contents coverage.
The flood zone X quote was $553 per year and the flood zone A quote was $2,902
per year.

"Besides the flood zone, there are other things that can reduce rates," Howard
said. "One is an elevation certificate done by a surveyor. When we had to write
flood on new apartments in flood zone AE, the premiums were about $2,000 per
building. Once we had the elevation certificates in hand which show the ground
height of the properties above the flood plain, the premiums were reduced to
about $300 per building."

It sounds like buying flood insurance is a smart move, even if you are located
in a 500-year flood area at low risk of flooding. The grandfathering process
could save you money and make your home more marketable should you ever decide
to sell.

For more information on flood insurance, visit www.floodsmart.gov, or contact
the Doña Ana County Flood Commission at 647-7256 or 525-5558.

Annette West, CCIM, MBA, CPA, is a Las Cruces Realtor® and can be reached at
AWest@NMApartment.com or at 505-644-1634

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


        Copyright 2007 Las Cruces Sun-News, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 258 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          Reading Eagle (Pennsylvania)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                          September 14, 2017 Thursday

Flood insurance: What you should know

BYLINE: Written Brad Rhen, Reading Eagle, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 909 words


Sept. 14--Berks County, PA

As residents of Texas and Florida deal with the aftermath of flooding from
hurricanes Harvey and Irma, flood insurance is a concern for homeowners.

Although Berks County has been lucky this year, parts of Berks have flooded
before, such as the June 2006 flooding of the Schuylkill River; the 1987 Hay
Creek flooding, when parts of Birdsboro were underwater; and, of course,
Tropical Storm Agnes in 1972, which caused extensive damage in and around
Reading.

Often, it isn't until flooding occurs that many homeowners think about flood
insurance.

The Reading Eagle spoke to local insurance agents about this often misunderstood
type of insurance.

Does everyone need flood insurance?

Joseph Gallen, vice president of personal lines at Gallen Insurance,
Shillington: "No. Legally speaking, nobody has to have flood insurance. Mortgage
carriers are requiring it now if you're in a flood plain. It's expensive, and
you have to weigh where you are. We have flood maps out there that say where
we've flooded in the last 100, 200 years, and that's what you have to go by."

Jim Ruoff, owner of Berks County Insurance Group Inc., Exeter Township, said: "I
guess if you want to be 100 percent safe, you should get it, but it all depends
on the flood zone that you're in."

Flood zones in Berks County

Zoom into the map below to see flood zones in Berks County as determined by
FEMA. Green: 1 percent annual chance of flooding. Red: 0.2 percent chance of
flooding

What does flood insurance cover?

Gallen: "Flood is considered groundwater. It doesn't cover anything in a
substructure, so anything in your basement, as far as contents, is not covered.
It does cover the building, which would be your heating system or your electric
or that type of thing, but it doesn't cover any contents on substructures. So if
you think we're going to get a flood, get all your furniture upstairs or stick
it in your garage or something. A sump pump would be covered because that's part
of your dwelling, but if you have a sump pump and it fails and you have property
down that gets damaged, it's not covered. No contents are covered in the
substructure."

Ruoff: "It covers the damage from surface water. If there's a hurricane or
something like that, and the roof is damaged by wind, that type of thing is
going to be covered under your homeowners policy. Or if it leaks through and
damages the interior of your property, that type of damage is covered under your
homeowners policy, as well, but the flood is not covered under the homeowners
policy. You need a specific policy for it."

How much does it cost and is it expensive?

Gallen: "It depends on where you are in the flood plain, and a lot of different
variables go into it: the construction of your property and if you have a
substructure. It could (cost) thousands of dollars a year."

Ruoff: "It can range anywhere from a few hundred dollars for the preferred
program up to thousands and thousands of dollars. If you're not in a high-risk
flood zone, then it's much less expensive. Then you qualify for one of the
preferred programs, and you can get them for a couple hundred dollars a year.
But if you're in a high-risk flood zone, then it's significantly more expensive,
depending on the specific zone."

Where can you purchase flood insurance?

Gallen: "The government is the only one that sells flood insurance. You can buy
it from a whole bunch of different insurance companies, but the underwriter, the
one backing this whole thing, is the federal government. They're the only ones
that have an actual flood policy, the National Flood Insurance Plan. They'd come
to me, and I have three or four different companies out there that I can go to,
and they'll sell it on their paper, but the pricing is going to be identical to
any other carrier that says they're selling. They're putting it on their paper,
but it's actually through the federal government."

Ruoff: "Most of it comes from the government-subsidized program. However, there
are some other markets out there that deviate, and the rates can be slightly
different."

What are some common misconceptions?

Gallen: "You think if you have flood insurance and you get flooded, you're
covered, and you're not. It has to be deemed a flood by FEMA, or so many people
who have flood policies within a certain radius of each other must all make a
flood claim for it to be considered a flood. Just because you have it and get
water in your house doesn't mean you have coverage."

Ruoff: "Maybe some people think that type of thing is covered under their
homeowners policy."

Is it common for people to overlook flood insurance?

Gallen: "Absolutely, and part of it is the cost. It's expensive. They're hoping
that they don't need it."

Ruoff: "Yes. Most people either overlook it because they don't know or they
simply don't want it because they don't think their home is ever going to get
flooded. It seems to me that the only flood insurance that we write is when the
mortgage company requires the homeowner to get it because they're in a flood
zone. We rarely ever write the preferred policy for people who just decide they
want it."

Contact Brad Rhen: 610-371-5047 or brhen@readingeagle.com

Brad Rhen -- Money reporter

Brad Rhen is a money reporter/beer columnist for the Reading Eagle.

Phone: 610-371-5047

Email: brhen@readingeagle.com

___ (c)2017 the Reading Eagle (Reading, Pa.) Visit the Reading Eagle (Reading,
Pa.) at readingeagle.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20170914-RE-Flood-insurance-What-you-should-know-0914-20170914

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RE


                          Copyright 2017 Reading Eagle


                          FOCUS - 259 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          Reading Eagle (Pennsylvania)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                          September 14, 2017 Thursday

Flood insurance: What you should know

BYLINE: Written Brad Rhen, Reading Eagle, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 897 words


Sept. 14--Berks County, PA

As residents of Texas and Florida deal with the aftermath of flooding from
hurricanes Harvey and Irma, flood insurance is a concern for homeowners.

Although Berks County has been lucky this year, parts of Berks have flooded
before, such as the June 2006 flooding of the Schuylkill River; the 1987 Hay
Creek flooding, when parts of Birdsboro were underwater; and, of course,
Tropical Storm Agnes in 1972, which caused extensive damage in and around
Reading.

Often, it isn't until flooding occurs that many homeowners think about flood
insurance.

The Reading Eagle spoke to local insurance agents about this often misunderstood
type of insurance.

Does everyone need flood insurance?

Joseph Gallen, vice president of personal lines at Gallen Insurance,
Shillington: "No. Legally speaking, nobody has to have flood insurance. Mortgage
carriers are requiring it now if you're in a flood plain. It's expensive, and
you have to weigh where you are. We have flood maps out there that say where
we've flooded in the last 100, 200 years, and that's what you have to go by."

Jim Ruoff, owner of Berks County Insurance Group Inc., Exeter Township, said: "I
guess if you want to be 100 percent safe, you should get it, but it all depends
on the flood zone that you're in."

Flood zones in Berks County

Zoom into the map below to see flood zones in Berks County as determined by
FEMA.

Legend:

What does flood insurance cover?

Gallen: "Flood is considered groundwater. It doesn't cover anything in a
substructure, so anything in your basement, as far as contents, is not covered.
It does cover the building, which would be your heating system or your electric
or that type of thing, but it doesn't cover any contents on substructures. So if
you think we're going to get a flood, get all your furniture upstairs or stick
it in your garage or something. A sump pump would be covered because that's part
of your dwelling, but if you have a sump pump and it fails and you have property
down that gets damaged, it's not covered. No contents are covered in the
substructure."

Ruoff: "It covers the damage from surface water. If there's a hurricane or
something like that, and the roof is damaged by wind, that type of thing is
going to be covered under your homeowners policy. Or if it leaks through and
damages the interior of your property, that type of damage is covered under your
homeowners policy, as well, but the flood is not covered under the homeowners
policy. You need a specific policy for it."

How much does it cost and is it expensive?

Gallen: "It depends on where you are in the flood plain, and a lot of different
variables go into it: the construction of your property and if you have a
substructure. It could (cost) thousands of dollars a year."

Ruoff: "It can range anywhere from a few hundred dollars for the preferred
program up to thousands and thousands of dollars. If you're not in a high-risk
flood zone, then it's much less expensive. Then you qualify for one of the
preferred programs, and you can get them for a couple hundred dollars a year.
But if you're in a high-risk flood zone, then it's significantly more expensive,
depending on the specific zone."

Where can you purchase flood insurance?

Gallen: "The government is the only one that sells flood insurance. You can buy
it from a whole bunch of different insurance companies, but the underwriter, the
one backing this whole thing, is the federal government. They're the only ones
that have an actual flood policy, the National Flood Insurance Plan. They'd come
to me, and I have three or four different companies out there that I can go to,
and they'll sell it on their paper, but the pricing is going to be identical to
any other carrier that says they're selling. They're putting it on their paper,
but it's actually through the federal government."

Ruoff: "Most of it comes from the government-subsidized program. However, there
are some other markets out there that deviate, and the rates can be slightly
different."

What are some common misconceptions?

Gallen: "You think if you have flood insurance and you get flooded, you're
covered, and you're not. It has to be deemed a flood by FEMA, or so many people
who have flood policies within a certain radius of each other must all make a
flood claim for it to be considered a flood. Just because you have it and get
water in your house doesn't mean you have coverage."

Ruoff: "Maybe some people think that type of thing is covered under their
homeowners policy."

Is it common for people to overlook flood insurance?

Gallen: "Absolutely, and part of it is the cost. It's expensive. They're hoping
that they don't need it."

Ruoff: "Yes. Most people either overlook it because they don't know or they
simply don't want it because they don't think their home is ever going to get
flooded. It seems to me that the only flood insurance that we write is when the
mortgage company requires the homeowner to get it because they're in a flood
zone. We rarely ever write the preferred policy for people who just decide they
want it."

Contact Brad Rhen: 610-371-5047 or brhen@readingeagle.com

Brad Rhen -- Money reporter

Brad Rhen is a money reporter/beer columnist for the Reading Eagle.

Phone: 610-371-5047

Email: brhen@readingeagle.com

___ (c)2017 the Reading Eagle (Reading, Pa.) Visit the Reading Eagle (Reading,
Pa.) at readingeagle.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20170914-RE-Flood-insurance-What-you-should-know-0914-20170914

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RE


                          Copyright 2017 Reading Eagle


                          FOCUS - 260 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Worthing Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPWD


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 261 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                 Sussex Express

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPSE


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 262 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                               Stornoway Gazette

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SLSG


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 263 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                            Rye and Battle Observer

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPRY


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 264 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Motherwell Times

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SFMT


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 265 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Montrose Review

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAMR


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 266 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                          Milngavie & Bearsden Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SFMB


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 267 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                 Mearns Leader

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAML


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 268 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              Kirkintilloch Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SFKH


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 269 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                            Kincardineshire Observer

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAKO


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 270 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                        Hastings & St. Leonards Observer

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPHO


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 271 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                 Falkirk Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SFFH


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 272 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                               Eastbourne Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPEH


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 273 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                            Deeside Piper and Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SADE


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 274 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Crawley Observer

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPCO


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 275 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                  The Buteman

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SATB


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 276 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                               Brechin Advertiser

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SABR


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 277 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Bexhill Observer

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPBO


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 278 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                             Daily News (Sri Lanka)

                             June 14, 2016 Tuesday

How to gamble with flood

LENGTH: 827 words

DATELINE: Sri Lanka


Sri Lanka, June 14 -- In ancient cultures flooding was perceived as blessing in
disguise because it was the main transportation method of fertilizers free of
charge for agriculture activities in temporary submergence areas called flood
plains. After moving people into flood plains because of shortage of space for
settlement, flood phenomena transforms to a curse for human. Deciding to settle
down in flood prone area is a gamble. However there are modern technologies
available to win in this gamble.

For example, it is now possible to simulate different flood conditions arise due
to heavy rains on a computer screen before it actually occurs using satellite
and survey data. This is called "flood modeling" in engineering. It is same as
modeling in cloth industry where the user becomes aware of how he or she looks
without actually wearing it. Similarly any area subject to floods can be modeled
and divide in to zones so that land user will know how his lands get submerged
or perform for different levels of flood situations. This type of performance
based methods evaluates how an existing or newly introduced flood mitigation
effort performs under different flood conditions.

Flooding during heavy rains and water pollution during normal time in natural
streams is a common problem all over the world when human settlements are
located near flood prone areas. For example about 7-10% land area of the US
under human settlements are subjected to flooding.

Hidden reasons for frequent flooding

* Increased upland development by clearing tree cover resulting in impervious
areas (Roofs, metaled roads etc.) that increase the runoff rate causing flash
floods (Attanagalu Oya Basin)

* Obstruction in natural stream and flow ways due to poor maintenance (very
common along Kelani River basin)

* Encroachment into flood zones (filling of wetlands for development. Ex;
Gampaha, Jaela, Wattala)

* Deposition of sediments in flood outlets due to erosion of stream banks
because of encroaching stream reservations either for agriculture in rural areas
or for settlement in urban areas

* Inadequate flow capacity in streams due to invasive type weed growth
associated with polluted water. (Wattala, Kalmunai)

How community to get ready to face above challenges

People who are already settled and people who are planning to settle in flood
prone areas subjected to above issues could be kept aware of the different risk
levels inherent to the place where they are currently settled or intend to
settle. For that there is a need to do an exercise called Flood Hazard Zoning.
This approach is very common in developed world. This exercise will also enhance
the community participation for government intervention such as canal cleaning
and discouraging further encroachment into flood plains by land fillings.

Available technologies

With flood zoning, flood insurance becomes an option that adds a financial
component in designing buildings to address those future risks. For example
people can build their houses at elevated levels on columns to suit predicted
flood levels. Also the sewerage systems can be introduced to suit the wetland
environments.

Opposite of flood

Wetlands of flood plain are the interface between aquatic and terrestrial areas.
Plants in those wetlands play very vital role in cleaning water biologically
before it falls into the main streams. Wetlands are in fact the kidneys of our
nature. With the time, because of so-called development, the environmental
features of flood plains have been changed vastly causing not only floods during
heavy rains but also malfunctioning natural water cleaning process especially
during droughts. Riparian trees along stream banks also have been disturbed.

In developed countries those stream banks are improved as walking/cycle tracks
after establishing tree cover along the bank and as a side benefit use as
Environmental Sustainable Transport (EST) in urban areas.

Note that those new technologies address not only flood situation but also
suggests methods to face drought situations too by identifying areas suitable
for temporary water storages within flood plains. For example during previous
drought situation before this flood, there was a water shortage under Attanagalu
Oya Basin though annually it dumps water into sea equivalent to a volume of
Parakrama Samudraya. Severe drought situations, is a big issue worse than a
flood especially in view of the current pollution levels of our natural streams.
Modern technologies also could be used to identify naturally available water
cleaning wetlands to be preserved.

King Parakramabahu's famous quote on water conservation and utilization "Do not
release even a drop of rain water to the sea without using" applies not only to
Dry Zone but for the Wet Zone too.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Daily News Sri Lanka. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2016 The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 279 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                           Star-News (Wilmington, NC)

                             May 27, 2017 Saturday
                             NC Wilmington Edition

flood;
Hurricane Matthew highlighted impacts of flooding

BYLINE: NC DelaCourt Hannah; StarNews Staff

SECTION: 1,A; GateHouse Media GM9; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 670 words

ABSTRACT

Most of the damage from Hurricane Matthew was from flooding. How do we know if
we need flood insurance? How do we get it, how much does it cost and what does
it cover? 25 inches

FULL TEXT

SOUTHEASTERN N.C.   Most of the damage and danger from Hurricane Matthew was due
to flooding and not necessarily to strong winds.

Although the storm pounded the coast of North Carolina on Oct. 8, the effects
continued to impact parts of the state, including many inland areas, for days as
rivers filled and crested.

The state of North Carolina requested $929 million in federal aid for damages
caused by Hurricane Matthew. Gov. Roy Cooper announced in early May that state
officials had learned they would receive less than 1 percent of that request.

Property owners can obtain insurance to help protect against losses due to
flooding.

According to an earlier release from the governor, Robeson, Cumberland,
Edgecombe and Wayne

See FLOOD,  A5

counties suffered some of the worst flooding in the state s history.

Parts of Pender County suffered flooding days following the storm as the Black
River swelled and overflowed, shutting down roads and flooding homes and
neighborhoods near Currie.

Flood zones

When it comes to knowing whether a homeowner or business owner needs or should
have flood insurance, Don Bullard, who has worked in the insurance industry for
nearly 45 years, said for some it is mandatory and for others it comes down to
comfort level.

First off, if you have a mortgage on your house, the mortgage company is going
to require you to carry flood insurance if you are in a flood zone,  he said.
That is in a 100-year floodplain where it is estimated that it will flood within
100 years. If you don t have a mortgage, it s up to you whether you have flood
insurance or not.

Bullard said even if a home or business is not in the 100 year floodplain that
does not mean they are out of the water, so to speak.

He said when Hurricane Fran hit in 1996, it affected areas that were in a
500-year floodplain, meaning they were only estimated to flood every 500 years.

Bullard suggested home buyers new to an area ask around to those who have lived
there for 40 or 50 years. Those residents, he said, will have the best knowledge
of the likelihood of flooding.

But if a home is anywhere near a river or stream, he said, it may still be
prudent to have flood insurance to be on the safe side.

He said the average price for flood insurance for a non-flood zone area is $400
a year.

That s less than $35 a month to be safe,  he said.  For anyone near a stream or
tributary to have that just for peace of mind.

Pricing and coverage

The price of flood insurance for those within a flood zone can be significantly
different, Bullard said.

He said the price can range from $450 to between $7,000 and $10,000. The more
likely an area is to flood, the higher the cost of insurance.

Homeowners in the lowest flood zones can raise their homes to lower their
premiums, he said.

The best place to get flood insurance is through the same company a person gets
their home insurance through, Bullard said, so a homeowner is not dealing with
multiple agencies.

Flood insurance covers the price of the home when impacted by external rising
water, so the insurance would not cover flooding from say a busted pipe, Bullard
said.

When it comes down to making a decision on flood insurance, Bullard said it adds
up to a person s risk tolerance.

Some people are very tolerant and some people aren t,  he said.  It s just a
matter of individual decision and how comfortable you are. If it were me, I
probably would get it because I sleep better having it and only spending $450 a
year.

Reporter Hannah DelaCourt can be reached at 910-343-2075 or
Hannah.DelaCourt@StarNewsOnline.com

Continued from A1



Floodwaters creep into the yards of homes in Currie on Oct. 12, 2016. [StarNews
file photo]



Debris lies at the corner of N.C. 210 and Point Caswell Road in October 2016 as
clean-up from flooding caused by Hurricane Matthew in Currie continues.
[StarNews file photo]

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 Star-News, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 280 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                             July 4, 2015 Saturday

1,000 villages feared to be hit by floods this year

SECTION: Vol. XXIX No. 125

LENGTH: 570  words


As the authorities feared that 1,000 villages in Gujranwala Division would be
affected by the expected flash floods during this year, the divisional
administration has started preparation for fighting recurring floods and
disasters by making effective measures to save the maximum areas and people from
the menace.

According to official sources, Gujranwala Division's Sialkot, Narowal, Gujrat,
Mandi Bahauddin, Hafizabad and Gujranwala districts have been divided in 79
sectors under the flood combating plan. The flood control officers have also
been deputed at the Flood Control Rooms established in these sectors.

The government was formulating district-level flood disaster management
committees in these districts and appointing focal persons at the tehsil level
to keep a 24-hour vigilant eye on the flood situation in the coming days.

On the other hand, following the Punjab government's flood preventing
instructions, the district administrations of Sialkot, Narowal and Gujranwala
have started de-silting of seasonal nullahs Aik and Dek on emergency grounds to
avert the recurring flood disasters.

The Rescue 1122 and civil defence departments have started their special
flood-fighting exercises. The joint important flood planning meetings of Pak
Army, district administration, police, Rescue 1122, livestock, agriculture,
health departments and TMAs are also being conducted on regular basis to monitor
the flood situation.

The banks of rivers Chenab, Tavi and Jammu and their dykes have also been paved
and repaired, besides, identifying the spots for helipads to meet any emergency
during the rains and floods under the special aviation plan.

The officials said that 837 villages in 2013 and 1,096 villages in 2014 were
badly affected during the flash floods in Gujranwala Division. They feared that
as many as 1,000 villages here would be affected by coming floods during 2015
flood season.

Eighty-one villages in Wazirabad tehsil, 65 villages in Kamonki tehsil, 175
villages in Gujrat tehsil, 55 villages in Kharian tehsil, 42 villages in Sarai
Alamgir tehsil, 75 villages in Sialkot tehsil,8 villages in Daska tehsil, 33
villages in Sambrial tehsil, 30 villages in Pasrur tehsil, 115 villages in
Narowal tehsil, 90 villages in Shakargarh tehsil, 25 villages in Zafarwal
tehsil, 70 villages in Hafizabad tehsil, 125 villages in Pindi Bhattian tehsil,
37 villages in Mandi Bahauddin tehsil, 48 villages in Phalia tehsil and 22
villages in Malakwal tehsil are feared to be affected in coming 2015 flood
season, the senior officials added.

The government has established 9 flood sectors in Gujranwala district, 16
sectors in Gujrat district, 19 flood sectors in Sialkot district, 17 sectors in
Narowal district, and 9 flood sectors have been established each in Hafizabad
and Mandi Bahauddin districts.

As many as 96 flood relief camps are also being established for the expected
flood affectees in these districts, out of which 13 flood relief camps are being
established in Gujranwala district, 25 in Gujrat district, 16 in Sialkot
district, 17 in Narowal district, 9 in Hafizabad district and 10 flood relief
camps would be established in Mandi Bahauddin district by the Punjab government.

Meanwhile, the divisional administration has 739 tents, 147 official jeeps, 84
ambulances, 46 water tanks, 121 tractors, 102 trolleys, 31 boats, 27 boat
engines, 145 dewatering sets, 7 bulldozers and 4 cranes to combat flood.

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 281 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                              July 12, 2015 Sunday

Flood plays havoc in Sialkot, Narowal villages

SECTION: Vol. XXIX No. 133

LENGTH: 741  words


Victims held protest demonstrations here on Saturday as 15 villages of Pasrur,
17 of Zafarwal and dozens others in Narowal, flooded due to overflowing Nullah
Dek on Friday, remained inundated for the second day.

Water flow of 33,000 cusecs passed through Nullah Dek near Pasrur and Zafarwal
and floodwater splashed over its bank, inundating the villages, besides
inundating hundreds of acres of the agriculture land.

In Pasrur, six villages including Chahoor, Jabbokey, Nawaadhey and Seehowal have
been cut off from Sialkot district as the local roads were badly damaged during
Friday's flash flood in Nullah Dek. The rescuers saved three local shepherds
from drowning in faster flow of flood water in Nullah Baeen.

Meanwhile, the River Chenab was in medium flood at Head Marala near Sialkot. The
maximum flow of floodwater was recorded 118,063 cusecs in Chenab at Head Marala
Barrage. In Shakargarh, the local administration remained unable to repair the
30-feet breach in the bank of Nullah Baeen, which occurred there near village
Sangraan-Shakargarh during Friday's flash flood in this Nullah.

As many as four persons were reportedly drowned in the faster flow of flood
water in Nullah Baeen near Noor Kot and Shakargarh. Abdullah, eighth, an class
student, drowned in this Nullah Baeen near village Madan Bagga-Noor Kot.
Rickshaw drive Javaid also slipped there and drowned in the Nullah near Noor Kot
Bridge. In village Kala Cheechi a youth Khalil Ahmed drowned in the floodwater
while Iqbal drowned near village Bachta Kot. MNA Zahid Hamid visited the
flood-hit villages in Pasrur tehsil. He reviewed the flood-fighting and relief
arrangements. Provincial Secretary Irrigation Punjab Saif Anjum, DCO Dr. Asif
Tufail and Sialkot DOC Malik Abid Awan were also present.

Assistant Commissioner Pasrur Tauqeer Ilyas Cheema said that the flood situation
was under-control and the water level was receding in Nullah Dek and in the
inundated villages. He said that the district administration was monitoring the
flood situation there.

According to Sialkot Flood Control Focal Person Malik Abid Awan, the flood
situation was totally under control in all the Rivers Chenab, Tavi and Jammu and
seasonal Nullahs Aik, Dek, Palkhu, Baeen and Bhed in Sialkot district. He said
that administration was round the clock monitoring the flood situation here.

He said that the flood water level was receded in the flooded Rive Tavi and in
the seven inundated Chaprar villages including Saalehpur, Patwal, Suhailpura,
Resmaan, Bara Dari, Beli and Jhumiyaan Dalaalaan. He visited the flooded
villages in Chaprar, Bajwat and along the banks of the Nullah Dek in Pasrur
tehsil. He reviewed the ongoing flood relief measures. He said that flow of
flood water was 5,820 cusecs in River Jammu Tavi and 1,547 cusecs in River
Munaawar Tavi near Chaprar-Sialkot.

Likewise, flood in Nullah Dek submerged dozens of villages of district Narowal
causing damage to crops on hundreds of acres. The recent rains in Kashmir and
Pakistan caused high-level flood in the Nullah. It has a capacity of 33,000
cusecs of water and the current flood is also of 33,000 cusecs. The water has
spread in more than a dozen villages including Jaboke, Nawade, Sehwal, Budha
Tarag, Kamlay, Jastiwala Uncha, Jandiala, Nidala, Balay, Hassan Bhattian, Phular
Lohan and Sair Bajwa.

The flood has damaged crops on hundreds of acres land in the area besides the
village houses and graveyards. The water level in the nullah was increasing
which may damage the protective dykes of the nullah. District Emergency Officer
Dr. Munawar Ali said that Rescue 1122 has started rescue operation to bring
people out of the flooded area and to provide them medical aid.

DCO Narowal, Syed Najaf Iqbal said the flood level will soon come down. He said
teams of district government were ready to meet the flood emergency and were
observing the situation vigilantly. People of the area under flood strongly
protested over the unreasonable arrangements by the government to protect them
from flood.

They said flood ruins every year their crops but no one in the government bother
to take the matter seriously. They appealed to the Punjab Chief Minster to take
notice of the situation and order necessary steps for their relief.

Meanwhile, a horse was electrocuted after receiving a severe electrical shock
from an electrical poll in Pasrur city. Local people have protested against the
alleged negligence of local Gepco officials.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 282 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                              July 12, 2015 Sunday

Flood wreaks havoc in Sialkot, Narowal villages

SECTION: Vol. XXIX No. 133

LENGTH: 741  words


Victims held protest demonstrations here on Saturday as 15 villages of Pasrur,
17 of Zafarwal and dozens others in Narowal, flooded due to overflowing Nullah
Dek on Friday, remained inundated for the second day.

Water flow of 33,000 cusecs passed through Nullah Dek near Pasrur and Zafarwal
and floodwater splashed over its bank, inundating the villages, besides
inundating hundreds of acres of the agriculture land.

In Pasrur, six villages including Chahoor, Jabbokey, Nawaadhey and Seehowal have
been cut off from Sialkot district as the local roads were badly damaged during
Friday's flash flood in Nullah Dek. The rescuers saved three local shepherds
from drowning in faster flow of flood water in Nullah Baeen.

Meanwhile, the River Chenab was in medium flood at Head Marala near Sialkot. The
maximum flow of floodwater was recorded 118,063 cusecs in Chenab at Head Marala
Barrage. In Shakargarh, the local administration remained unable to repair the
30-feet breach in the bank of Nullah Baeen, which occurred there near village
Sangraan-Shakargarh during Friday's flash flood in this Nullah.

As many as four persons were reportedly drowned in the faster flow of flood
water in Nullah Baeen near Noor Kot and Shakargarh. Abdullah, eighth, an class
student, drowned in this Nullah Baeen near village Madan Bagga-Noor Kot.
Rickshaw drive Javaid also slipped there and drowned in the Nullah near Noor Kot
Bridge. In village Kala Cheechi a youth Khalil Ahmed drowned in the floodwater
while Iqbal drowned near village Bachta Kot. MNA Zahid Hamid visited the
flood-hit villages in Pasrur tehsil. He reviewed the flood-fighting and relief
arrangements. Provincial Secretary Irrigation Punjab Saif Anjum, DCO Dr. Asif
Tufail and Sialkot DOC Malik Abid Awan were also present.

Assistant Commissioner Pasrur Tauqeer Ilyas Cheema said that the flood situation
was under-control and the water level was receding in Nullah Dek and in the
inundated villages. He said that the district administration was monitoring the
flood situation there.

According to Sialkot Flood Control Focal Person Malik Abid Awan, the flood
situation was totally under control in all the Rivers Chenab, Tavi and Jammu and
seasonal Nullahs Aik, Dek, Palkhu, Baeen and Bhed in Sialkot district. He said
that administration was round the clock monitoring the flood situation here.

He said that the flood water level was receded in the flooded Rive Tavi and in
the seven inundated Chaprar villages including Saalehpur, Patwal, Suhailpura,
Resmaan, Bara Dari, Beli and Jhumiyaan Dalaalaan. He visited the flooded
villages in Chaprar, Bajwat and along the banks of the Nullah Dek in Pasrur
tehsil. He reviewed the ongoing flood relief measures. He said that flow of
flood water was 5,820 cusecs in River Jammu Tavi and 1,547 cusecs in River
Munaawar Tavi near Chaprar-Sialkot. Likewise, flood in Nullah Dek submerged
dozens of villages of district Narowal causing damage to crops on hundreds of
acres. The recent rains in Kashmir and Pakistan caused high-level flood in the
Nullah. It has a capacity of 33,000 cusecs of water and the current flood is
also of 33,000 cusecs. The water has spread in more than a dozen villages
including Jaboke, Nawade, Sehwal, Budha Tarag, Kamlay, Jastiwala Uncha,
Jandiala, Nidala, Balay, Hassan Bhattian, Phular Lohan and Sair Bajwa.

The flood has damaged crops on hundreds of acres land in the area besides the
village houses and graveyards.

The water level in the nullah was increasing which may damage the protective
dykes of the nullah.

District Emergency Officer Dr. Munawar Ali said that Rescue 1122 has started
rescue operation to bring people out of the flooded area and to provide them
medical aid.

DCO Narowal, Syed Najaf Iqbal said the flood level will soon come down. He said
teams of district government were ready to meet the flood emergency and were
observing the situation vigilantly. People of the area under flood strongly
protested over the unreasonable arrangements by the government to protect them
from flood.

They said flood ruins every year their crops but no one in the government bother
to take the matter seriously. They appealed to the Punjab Chief Minster to take
notice of the situation and order necessary steps for their relief.

Meanwhile, a horse was electrocuted after receiving a severe electrical shock
from an electrical poll in Pasrur city. Local people have protested against the
alleged negligence of local Gepco officials.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 283 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                          September 24, 2015 Thursday

NDMA asks people to leave riverine areas

SECTION: Vol. XXIX No. 205

LENGTH: 466  words


The National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) issued flood warning for the
people living along the banks of River Chenab, Rive Tavi, River Jammu and Dek,
Aik, Palkhu, Bhed Baeen and Bassanter Nullahs.

The NDMA advised the people to shift to safer places due to feared spate in
these rivers and Nullahs. According to the NDMA officials, there could be a
feared increase and spate in these flooded rivers and Nullahs due to the fresh
spell of rains in Sialkot region and in all the catchment areas in neighbouring
Occupied Jammu and Kashmir.

After this flood warning issued by the NDMA, the people in Bajwat, Head Marala,
Chaprar, Pasrur, Zafarwal, Shakargarh and Narowal tehsils have started shifting
towards the safer places as the water was continuously souring up there.

In Sialkot, there was a medium flood in River Chenab at Head Marala-Sialkot as
the floodwater level soured up to 148,160 cusecs. According to the concerned
officials of the Sialkot Irrigation Department, there was a high level flood in
River Tavi as the flow of flood was 11,225 cusecs at Head Marala near Sialkot.

There was high flood in Nullah Dek near Pasrur, as the flow of flood water was
recorded 15,506 cusecs there. The water level was souring up there. The flow of
flood water was 2,257 cusecs in Nullah Aik in Sialkot.

Meanwhile, district administration officers reviewed the prevailing flood
situation in rivers and th Nullahs at a meeting. The meeting was told the water
level was souring up in the rivers and Nullahs.

Later, the Sialkot DCO told newsmen that all the departments concerned had been
put on red alert after the fresh flood warning issued by the Flood Forecasting
Division and they were continuously monitoring the flood situation.

According to the Flood Forecasting Division, River Chenab might be in high flood
at Head Marala near Sialkot during the next couple of days. The district has
already been divided into 22 sectors to avert the recurring flood threats under
a foolproof flood protection plan with the establishment of of 33 flood relief
centres in Sialkot, Daska, Sambrial and Pasrur tehsils.

He said that the special vigilance teams were monitoring the flood situation in
River Chenab round the clock. He said that the whole of the flood situation was
totally under control in Sialkot.

ROOF FALLS: A youth was killed and three others were injured seriously as the
roof of their room suddenly caved in in village Chhichharwali, Pasrur tehsil.

Five persons Zeeshan Ali, Aamir Mughal, Chaand, Waqas and Aamir Hussain were
having meal in the room when the muddy roof of the room caved in killing Aamir
Mansha on the spot. Local people and Rescue 1122 officials pulled out the
injured Chaand, Waqas and Zeeshan from the debris and shifted them to Pasrur THQ
Civil Hospital in critical condition.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 284 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Weekend Australian

                             March 7, 2009 Saturday
                             5 - Preprints Edition

Flood claims force firms' policy rules

BYLINE: Claire Galea

SECTION: REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 647 words


INSURANCE

Insurance companies are making flood cover a standard policy item, reports
Claire Galea

VICTIMS of the recent Queensland flood disaster will verify the importance of
having flood insurance. More than 3000 homes and many more lives and businesses
were devastated.

Sadly, the majority of the 450,000 homeowners at risk from inland flood are
unlikely to have adequate insurance.

Almost one in four Australians has no form of home and contents insurance at
all. Of those who do, few are likely to have taken out flood insurance as an
optional extra, put off by premiums that can be as high as $3300 to $4000 for
those living in high-risk areas.

Yet climate change means the odds of flood occurring are narrowing rapidly, in
some cases, from one flood in every 100 years to one in just 17 years.

Insurers say the problem with offering flood insurance is that it is not a
question of if a flood is going to occur, but of when.

Which is why your standard home insurance policy will not cover you for river
flood, as the risk is simply too high, and losses caused by flood damage top an
average of $400 million a year.

A standard policy will only cover you for flood damage occurring within the
house, such as a leaking pipe or faulty washing machine, while some cover
stormwater run-off and flash flood, but not from a river.

Suncorp/GIO and Zurich Financial Services Australia have been the first to brave
the market with flood cover as standard, preferring to risk putting customers
off with high premiums than having them thinking that they're covered when
they're not.

``It is the best thing we have ever done,'' GIO Home Insurance portfolio manager
Dennis O'Brien says.

``I would much rather argue about the cost of insurance premiums than to walk
away from a claim for $40,000, and have to explain to a customer why they are
not covered.''

However, thousands more coastal homes can take cold comfort from the new
developments, as storm surge from the ocean remains uncovered under a home
insurance policy.

Confusingly though, damage caused by a cyclone, including storm surge, is
covered.

Zurich Financial Services Australia (Zurich) is also concerned about the level
of commercial underinsurance in the market and offers five tips to help
businesses survive a flood:

* How the increasing risk of flood can affect businesses.

* How businesses can minimise risk: by storing expensive equipment off-site;
installing racks to raise stock off the ground; and putting computer hard drives
on desks rather than on the floor.

* The need for a disaster mitigation plan: allocating staff responsibilities,
sourcing back-up premises, additional suppliers and transport, for example.

* The need for flood insurance.

* The need for business interruption insurance, which will help meet the cost of
wages, stock, additional premises etc in the event of a flood. It will also
cover you for business interruption even if you are not affected by a flood
directly, but one of your clients or suppliers is.

Research undertaken by Zurich shows that less than a third (31 per cent) of
small and medium enterprises have any form of business interruption cover.

``The lack of flood insurance has always caused a lot of controversy for the
industry because of the expectation that people are covered when they're not,''
Zurich's corporate responsibility manager Alice Cahill says.

``The frequency of floods is going to increase because of global warming.
Therefore there is a greater need for insurance. Automatically offering flood
cover we hope will be a catalyst for the rest of the industry.''

The Insurance Council of Australia (ICA) completed its National Flood
Information Database in December 2008. It details flood zones across about 30
per cent of Australia.

This is the first time such comprehensive information has been available and the
ICA hopes it will encourage more insurers to launch standard flood cover.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 285 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                  Oxford Mail

                           January 16, 2014 Thursday

New deal to cap premiums for those at most flood risk

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 567 words


NO ONE in Oxford or the surrounding area needs reminding that flooding can be a
traumatic and distressing experience.

As we have seen recently, floods leave a trail of misery - destruction of the
daily routine, ruined family possessions, and homes that can take months to
fully dry out.

Having grown up near Abingdon, I know the risks of the Thames, the Ock and the
Cherwell.

In 2007 a number of my friends' homes flooded, and as I write this article six
years on, my family's home, although above the waterline, has been inaccessible
by car for over a week.

The stark reality is that these unpleasant experiences are happening more often
and more severely than ever before.

Sustained government investment in flood defences, a focus on keeping those
defences well maintained, and avoiding building homes in flood-prone areas are
essential if we are to keep flood risk under control.

Having flood insurance means that if the worst happens then there is help
available to get you back on your feet.

Matt Cullen

Insurers are committed to ensuring that flood insurance remains widely available
and affordable, but many Oxford homeowners are understandably concerned about
being able to afford flood insurance - especially if they have been flooded
recently.

Previously, under an agreement between the insurance industry and the
Government, insurers offered flood insurance to all their existing household
customers, at prices that reflect the risk of flooding.

But it had become clear that a new approach was needed to avoid the growing
danger of flood-vulnerable home owners being unable to afford flood insurance.

This is why the ABI spent most of 2012 and last year locked in discussions with
the Government to thrash out a new deal.

In June 2013, we were able to announce a shared vision of flood insurance for
the future, based on a scheme developed by the insurance industry.

Under this scheme - Flood Re (reinsurance) - flood insurance premiums will be
capped at an agreed level.

The cap level will be based on your council tax band, ranging between £210 for
council tax band A to £540 for council tax band G for combined buildings and
contents insurance.

It should also keep flood excesses at a sensible level - around £250.

Until the Flood Re scheme is ready - we expect it to commence in summer 2015 -
insurers will voluntarily continue to offer flood cover to their existing
customers, albeit at prices reflecting their assessment of the flood risk.

Flood Re is an elegant solution to a difficult problem, but will only work for
the long term if it is accompanied by good flood risk management.

We need to think very carefully about where new homes are built in the county.

The demand for new homes needs to be met, but not at the expense of building in
dangerous locations, which will only serve to make properties uninsurable,
unsellable and uninhabitable.

Developers, and those responsible for planning decisions, need to remember this,
and the guidance the ABI published for local planning authorities on development
in flood risk areas in 2012 should still be part of the toolkit today.

We cannot control the great British weather or make properties totally
flood-proof.

But we can and must continue to focus on managing flood risk as effectively as
possible.

Doing so will ensure that the flood insurance protection relied upon by
communities throughout Oxfordshire remains widely available and competitively
priced.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2014 NewsQuest Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 286 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Pakistan Observer

                           January 21, 2010 Thursday

Flood management in Punjab, but what next?

BYLINE:  Qudrat Ullah - Email: qudraulla@gmail.com

SECTION: Vol. XXI No. 78

LENGTH: 1133  words


Punjab the land of mighty rivers and flowing canals has witnessed many big
deluges which have caused losses to the tune of billions of rupees, besides
damaging lives and property of the public. Although the flood management is the
responsibility of the provinces, yet a number of federal departments are
entrusted with the Federal Flood Commission, which is acting as a coordinating
body with the provincial departments and technical agencies to help control the
floods.

Actually, up to the end of 1976, the provincial governments were responsible for
planning and execution of flood protection works. The disastrous floods of
1973and 1976 resulted in heavy losses, indicating that the protection facilities
and planning at that time were inadequate to cope with the great deluges.

In January 1977, the Federal Flood Commission was established. This is the
principal institution for flood planning and control in Pakistan. Its mandate
includes the preparation of the National Flood Protection Plan, approval of
flood control schemes, review of flood damages, plans for reconstruction works,
improvements in flood forecasting and warning system, monitoring and evaluation
etc.

In the province of Punjab, Irrigation and Power department, Punjab Irrigation
and Drainage Authority (PIDA), Crises and Relief Department and Civil Defence
Organizations are mainly responsible to take necessary measures in mitigating
the floods. Meanwhile, Pakistan Army also provides skilled manpower and the
technical support in times of need. In addition, Health, Agriculture, Livestock,
Food and Communication & Works Departments also play their role in flood
management in consultation with the districts administration.

According to the flood data of the last 62 years, the country has suffered
cumulative financial losses of more than Rs. 385 billion (6 billion dollars) on
account of 15 major floods. Besides that, more than 7,800 precious lives have
been lost in addition to dislocation of millions of people during the floods.

There are multiple reasons which cause the floods to occur, like floods in
rivers are caused by heavy concentrated monsoon rains, flash floods result due
to cloud bursts and hill torrents in Southern Punjab.

In Punjab, most flood  prone districts include Mianwali, Bhakkar,  Muzaffargarh,
Rahim Yar Khan, D.G. Khan, Rajanpur, Jhelum, Khushab, Jhang, Sargodha, Kasur,
Bahawalnagar, Pakpattan, Bahawalpur, Sheikhupura,  Faisalabad, T.T. Singh,
Khanewal and Lahore.

Flood disaster management policy of the Punjab government is aimed to achieve
the objectives of Public safety, protection of life and property of people and
security of vital infrastructures like canals, rail lines and offices etc. The
provincial Government is committed to bring improvement in watershed and river
management practices.

Espousal of community participation approach for effective flood preparedness,
fighting and rehabilitation is equally important. Improved flood forecasting
system has been developed and reliable interaction between all related flood
control and relief agencies is ensured. The Punjab Relief Department, set up in
the year 1975 as an independent organization, deals with measures to mitigate
natural calamities such as floods, famine, war, fire and earth quake etc.

The governing Act is the Punjab National Calamities (Prevention and Relief) Act,
1958. This department organizes rescue operations with the help of army; provide
adequate resource support to district governments through co-ordination with
provincial government departments/agencies, ensure provision of necessary
budgetary allocations to the district governments for relief work, oversee the
working of district governments in the implementation of relief measures, obtain
field reports of losses and apprise the provincial government/federal government
and assess and evaluate losses and suggest to the provincial government for
provision of relief to the affected persons.

Before the commencement of rainy/flood season, all the District Coordination
Officers are asked to prepare Evacuation Plans for the places declared
vulnerable and the evacuation to take place between the time gap of early
warning and influx of actual disaster without exposing the population to any
hazard.

Actually, flood management in the Indus Basin is a multi-dimensional process
that demands intensive resources and require efficient coordination between
various government agencies. However, even advanced flood management systems are
no guarantee against flood disasters as has often been proved in the more
developed countries like the case of hurricane Katrina in USA.

Tsunami is another particular case to study and Punjab being an agricultural
economy, can ill afford to risk its agricultural infrastructure consisting of
dams, barrages and irrigation canals, which can be under severe stress in major
flood events.

Currently, the flood management policy of Punjab is more reactive than proactive
in dealing with the flood issues. However, with the preparation of National
Water Policy, the flood situation is likely to change with far reaching effects
on the flood management process. Policy provides necessary legal and
institutional framework to improve the flood management process in Punjab.

Although the Water Policy provides the necessary guidelines for flood
management, yet there is a need for a separate policy for flood management to
deal specifically with the flood issues. Such a policy may outline the details
of policy framework for flood management. It is worth noting here that a new
paradigm in flood management that considers flood as a resource rather than a
natural threat can be highly helpful in achieving the environmental objectives
of the government, which are set under various international conventions to
which Pakistan is a signatory.

It is envisaged that the flood forecasting capabilities would be improved
considerably under the second Flood Protection Sector Project being undertaken
by the Federal Flood Commission. The task of quantification of flood risk
through detailed studies and subsequent measures required in minimizing the risk
should be taken on priority basis.

And in the end, we must not forget that Pakistan, being the downstream user of
the rivers and also embroiled in political conflicts with the upper riparian
state of India, has to be particularly cautious about its flood management
system as India has successfully developed several structures like Bhakra Nagal
Dam on Sutlej,   Pong Dam on Beas and Thein Dam on Ravi that have further
augmented its potential to relocate flood surges to Pakistan. This has happened
many times in the past and India's present water policy is aimed at converting
Pakistan into a waterless country with no agriculture to feed the 170 million
people.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2010 Hurmat Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 287 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 12, 2017 Thursday

Flood Warning

LENGTH: 414  words

DATELINE: New York



 Jackson: National Weather Service, The State of Mississippi has issued the
following newas arelease:



   The Flood Warning continues for the following rivers in California... Russian
River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville .The river level on the lower Russian
River peaked early Wednesday evening.

The stage at Guerneville peaked at 37.8 feet at 5:30 pm PST Wednesday, nearly 6
feet above flood stage. The river has begun to recede. The lower Russian River
is forecast to gradually recede through today and drop below flood stage this
afternoon. ...Flood Warning extended until late tonight...The Flood Warning
continues for The Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville * Until late
tonight * At 02AM Thursday the stage was 37.1 feet * Moderate flooding is
occurring and Moderate flooding is forecast * Flood stage is 32.0 feet * The
river will continue to fall to below flood stage by this afternoon. * At 38.0
feet...In Duncan Mills Freezeout Road at Moscow Road floods. In Guerneville Park
Cazadero Road at HWY 116 floods. * At 37.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Road at
River Road floods. In Guerneville River Road east of Guerneville floods. Mill
Street and 5th Street flood. In Monte Rio River Blvd east of Monte Rio floods. *
At 36.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Park Resort and Mirabel trailer park
flood. In Guerneville Fern Road at HWY 116 floods. * At 35.0 feet...Moderate
flooding is forecast along the lower Russian River. Numerous businesses and
residences in the lowest sections of towns within the reach are expected to
flood. In Guerneville Brookside Resort begins to flood. More extensive flooding
occurs at Parkers Resort. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive floods. * At 34.0
feet...In Guerneville flooding begins at Johnsons Resort, Parkers Resort,
Creekside Resort and Riverside Park. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive begins to
flood. * At 33.0 feet...In Guerneville the intersection of HWY 116 and Drake Rd
is closed. In Monte Rio Willow and Alder Streets flood. In Forestville Mirabel
trailer park begins to flood. * At 32.5 feet...In Guerneville the intersecton of
HWY 116 and Neeley Rd is closed. Mays Canyon Rd by the old rodeo grounds is
closed. * At 32.0 feet...Flood stage. Minor flooding. Lower Mill Street in
Guerneville and Old Bohemian Highway in Monte Rio are expected to flood. * At
29.0 feet...Monitor stage.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com





LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 288 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 12, 2017 Thursday

Flood Warning

LENGTH: 414  words

DATELINE: New York



 Jackson: National Weather Service, The State of Mississippi has issued the
following newas arelease:



   The Flood Warning continues for the following rivers in California... Russian
River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville .The river level on the lower Russian
River peaked early Wednesday evening.

The stage at Guerneville peaked at 37.8 feet at 5:30 pm PST Wednesday, nearly 6
feet above flood stage. The river has begun to recede. The lower Russian River
is forecast to gradually recede through today and drop below flood stage this
afternoon. ...Flood Warning extended until late tonight...The Flood Warning
continues for The Russian River at Johnsons Beach near Guerneville * Until late
tonight * At 02AM Thursday the stage was 37.1 feet * Moderate flooding is
occurring and Moderate flooding is forecast * Flood stage is 32.0 feet * The
river will continue to fall to below flood stage by this afternoon. * At 38.0
feet...In Duncan Mills Freezeout Road at Moscow Road floods. In Guerneville Park
Cazadero Road at HWY 116 floods. * At 37.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Road at
River Road floods. In Guerneville River Road east of Guerneville floods. Mill
Street and 5th Street flood. In Monte Rio River Blvd east of Monte Rio floods. *
At 36.0 feet...In Forestville Mirabel Park Resort and Mirabel trailer park
flood. In Guerneville Fern Road at HWY 116 floods. * At 35.0 feet...Moderate
flooding is forecast along the lower Russian River. Numerous businesses and
residences in the lowest sections of towns within the reach are expected to
flood. In Guerneville Brookside Resort begins to flood. More extensive flooding
occurs at Parkers Resort. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive floods. * At 34.0
feet...In Guerneville flooding begins at Johnsons Resort, Parkers Resort,
Creekside Resort and Riverside Park. In Northwood lower Redwood Drive begins to
flood. * At 33.0 feet...In Guerneville the intersection of HWY 116 and Drake Rd
is closed. In Monte Rio Willow and Alder Streets flood. In Forestville Mirabel
trailer park begins to flood. * At 32.5 feet...In Guerneville the intersecton of
HWY 116 and Neeley Rd is closed. Mays Canyon Rd by the old rodeo grounds is
closed. * At 32.0 feet...Flood stage. Minor flooding. Lower Mill Street in
Guerneville and Old Bohemian Highway in Monte Rio are expected to flood. * At
29.0 feet...Monitor stage.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com





LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 289 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        The Daily Telegraph (Australia)

                            January 18, 2011 Tuesday
                        4 - City Edition 11:30pm Edition

Councils in rush to flood-proof NSW --- THE GREAT FLOOD

BYLINE: Vikki Campion

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 776  words


Exclusive

COUNCILS across NSW are fast-tracking flood crisis prevention measures as
Queensland urban planners are being slammed for building in the path of natural
water courses.

NSW councils are buying up flood-risk properties, proposing levees and banning
major developments in flood plains in the wake of the Queensland crisis. Others
are hiring drainage experts and warning communities to prepare.

The moves come as new mapping technology uncovers flood risks on low-lying areas
across Sydney.

Hornsby Mayor Nick Berman, whose council was slammed for devaluing homes with a
new flood study, said it could not ignore the risks.

``Queensland was far worse than anyone could imagine. We have to make sure we
make the correct decisions now -- we won't be going down the path in Queensland
where the tough decisions were ducked,'' he said.

``There has been hostility from landowners who feel their properties will be
devalued. It can affect the development potential of a property. It is something
we have to do.

``What has happened in Queensland is a painful reminder of how important this
is. Local Government cannot shy away from responsibility.''

A number of councils, including Wyong on the Central Coast, have flood studies
on exhibition proposing dams, basins, channel works, flood proofing of buildings
and voluntary purchasing.

``There are many areas of Wyong Shire which are flood-prone and the likelihood
of flooding following an extended period of rain like they have experienced in
Queensland is very real,'' Wyong Mayor Doug Eaton said.

Hills Shire Council warned it was in the path of two river basins, the Upper
Parramatta River and the Hawkesbury River, that flooded in 1986 and 1988,
damaging homes.

``This could happen again and the devastation in Queensland serves as a reminder
of how quickly floods can hit,'' Hills Council waterways expert Allan Gear said.

``A 100-year flood has a one per cent chance of occurring in any year,'' Mr Gear
said.

``The reality is that we can experience a major flood sometime in the future.''

Hills Council said it would build better flood mitigation works to save houses
but urged residents to plan ahead.

Camden Council, in Sydney's southwest, has hired drainage engineers to examine
flood risks.

The State Government has spent more than $130 million on flood management over
the past decade on planning to limit deaths and damage, evacuation plans and
flood warning systems.

A Department of Environment spokesman said at least $8 million a year was
invested in prevention.

Planning Institute of Australia NSW president Tony McNamara said many councils
areas were in bad flood positions because the state's early settlers planned
towns around rivers.

He said it left councils in a difficult position and they should assess flood
risks.

``If you build on the riverfront and revise those flood heights you affect the
values of properties, it is an ongoing conflict,'' Mr McNamara said.

``At times you need to build sea walls or levees but the best practice is to map
the flood affected areas and build away from them.''

Parramatta

Completing its floodplain risk management plan, which includes all areas
possibly affected by rises in the Parramatta River. Anything identified as "at
risk" receives funding through the council's flood mitigation budget

Hills District

Working on floodplain mapping to find where the risk is most likely to occur and
has plans to build better flood mitigation works

Hornsby

A draft study on exhibition proposes expanded flood zones.

Development in flood-prone areas would be dependent on whether the development
would be affected by the overland flow

Warringah Proposal to remove building bans in low flood risk areas surrounding
Narrabeen, Dee Why, Curl Curl and Manly lagoons and parts of Cromer and Belrose

Outlying and regional areas

Camden

Hired engineering experts to look at the flood risk management policies and
other flood and drainage-related processes to identify and improve activities in
flood- affected areas

Wyong

A draft study on exhibition proposes dams, basins, channel works, flood proofing
of buildings and voluntary purchase of flood risk property

Cabonne A new flood plain study review for the Orange region went on exhibition
yesterday proposing stream clearing, stormwater drainage improvements and levee
bank work on creeks

Kyogle

Teams to fix landslips, roads and bridges, leaving communities stranded, as part
of emergency works in the hinterland of the Far North Coast

Australia

Unites

DONATIONS

Phone: 1800 219 028 (toll free, using credit card)

Online: www.dailytelegraph.com.au/floodrelief

In Person: Commonwealth Bank, NAB, Westpac, ANZ, St George, Bank Of

Queensland, Suncorp or Coles

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTM


                   Copyright 2011 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 290 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        The Daily Telegraph (Australia)

                            January 18, 2011 Tuesday
                               1 - State Edition

Councils in rush to flood-proof NSW --- THE GREAT FLOOD

BYLINE: Vikki Campion

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 744  words


COUNCILS across NSW are fast-tracking flood crisis prevention measures as
Queensland urban planners are being slammed for building in the path of natural
water courses.

NSW councils are buying up flood-risk properties, proposing levees and banning
major developments in flood plains in the wake of the Queensland crisis. Others
are hiring drainage experts and warning communities to prepare.

The moves come as new mapping technology uncovers flood risks on low-lying areas
across Sydney.

Hornsby Mayor Nick Berman, whose council was slammed for devaluing homes with a
new flood study, said it could not ignore the risks.

``Queensland was far worse than anyone could imagine. We have to make sure we
make the correct decisions now -- we won't be going down the path in Queensland
where the tough decisions were ducked,'' he said.

``There has been hostility from landowners who feel their properties will be
devalued. It can affect the development potential of a property. It is something
we have to do.

``What has happened in Queensland is a painful reminder of how important this
is. Local Government cannot shy away from responsibility.''

A number of councils, including Wyong on the Central Coast, have flood studies
on exhibition proposing dams, basins, channel works, flood proofing of buildings
and voluntary purchasing.

``There are many areas of Wyong Shire which are flood-prone and the likelihood
of flooding following an extended period of rain like they have experienced in
Queensland is very real,'' Wyong Mayor Doug Eaton said.

Hills Shire Council warned it was in the path of two river basins, the Upper
Parramatta River and the Hawkesbury River, that flooded in 1986 and 1988,
damaging homes.

``This could happen again and the devastation in Queensland serves as a reminder
of how quickly floods can hit,'' Hills Council waterways expert Allan Gear said.

``A 100-year flood has a one per cent chance of occurring in any year,'' Mr Gear
said.

``The reality is that we can experience a major flood sometime in the future.''

Hills Council said it would build better flood mitigation works to save houses
but urged residents to plan ahead.

Camden Council, in Sydney's southwest, has hired drainage engineers to examine
flood risks.

The State Government has spent more than $130 million on flood management over
the past decade on planning to limit deaths and damage, evacuation plans and
flood warning systems.

A Department of Environment spokesman said at least $8 million a year was
invested in prevention.

Planning Institute of Australia NSW president Tony McNamara said many councils
areas were in bad flood positions because the state's early settlers planned
towns around rivers.

He said it left councils in a difficult position and they should assess flood
risks.

``If you build on the riverfront and revise those flood heights you affect the
values of properties, it is an ongoing conflict,'' Mr McNamara said.

``At times you need to build sea walls or levees but the best practice is to map
the flood affected areas and build away from them.''

Parramatta

Completing its floodplain risk management plan, which includes all areas
possibly affected by rises in the Parramatta River. Anything identified as "at
risk" receives funding through the council's flood mitigation budget

Hills District

Working on floodplain mapping to find where the risk is most likely to occur and
has plans to build better flood mitigation works

Hornsby

A draft study on exhibition proposes expanded flood zones.

Development in flood-prone areas would be dependent on whether the development
would be affected by the overland flow

Warringah

A draft study on exhibition proposes expanded flood zones.

Development in flood-prone areas would be dependent on whether the development
would be affected by the overland flow

Outlying and regional areas

Camden Hornsby

Hired engineering experts to look at the flood risk management policies and
other flood and drainage-related processes to identify and improve activities in
flood-affected areas

Wyong

A draft study on exhibition proposes dams, basins, channel works, flood proofing
of buildings and voluntary purchase of flood risk property

Cabonne

A new flood plain study review for the Orange region went on exhibition
yesterday proposing stream clearing, stormwater drainage improvements and levee
bank work on creeks

Kyogle

Teams to fix landslips, roads and bridges, leaving communities stranded, as part
of emergency works in the hinterland of the Far North Coast

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTM


                   Copyright 2011 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 291 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Gainesville Daily Register (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 23, 2009 Monday

Emergency Management office warns of flood danger

BYLINE: Gainesville Daily Register, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 531 words


Mar. 23--There hasn't been significant rain in North Texas for months now but
the severe flooding of June 2007 proved how quickly things can change.

Cooke County Emergency Management Coordinator Ray Fletcher said floods are
consistently one of the most common, costly and deadly natural disaster
Americans face each year

According to a news release, 90 percent of all natural disasters in the nation
involve flooding and Texas residents cannot afford to ignore this threat.

"Flood Safety Awareness Week (March 16-20), is a perfect time to consider local
flood risks and learn important information about steps you can take to protect
yourself and your family," Fletcher said via e-mail.

Most homeowners and dwelling property insurance policies do not cover damage
caused by rising waters. You can buy a separate flood policy from the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). Call NFIP at 1-800-427-4661, visit its website,
www.floodsmart.gov, or contact an insurance agent to assist you.

If you live in an area designated as a high-risk flood zone, your mortgage
company may require you to have flood insurance. Flood insurance can be a good
idea even if you don't live in a high-risk area. About 25 percent of all flood
damage occurs in areas considered to have only a minimal flood risk.

Flood policies normally have a 30-day waiting period before they become
effective, so don't wait until a flood is imminent to apply for coverage.

NFIP, in partnership with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
has developed a webpage featuring an interactive map depicting historical
information about how floods have impacted millions of Americans in recent
years. The site also provides tools and resources for understanding your risk
and knowing what to do: before a flood, during a flood, and after a flood. To
learn more about Flood Safety Awareness Week and to utilize these resources,
visit www.FloodSmart.gov/noaafloodweek.

If you have flood insurance and experience a flood, you should:

--Contact your agent or insurance company to file a claim;

--Separate the damaged property from your undamaged property and take
photographs or videos of the damage, including possessions, structural damage,
and flood water levels.

--Use your home inventory list to itemize damaged property (a checklist is
available on the TDI website at: http://www.tdi.state.tx.us/pubs/tdipubs1.html);

--Complete the proof-of-loss form that the insurance adjuster provides;

--Visit this NFIP website for tips when filing your flood insurance claim:
http://www.floodsmart.gov/floodsmart/pages/preparation_recovery/file_your_claim.
jsp

For more information or insurance assistance, call TDI's Consumer Help Line at
1-800-252-3439 or visit TDI's webpage at www.tdi.state.tx.us.

To see more of the Gainesville Daily Register or to subscribe to the newspaper,
go to http://www.gainesvilleregister.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, Gainesville Daily
Register, Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090323-XG-Emergency-Management-office-warns-of-flood-danger-0323

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: XG


                                 Copyright 2009


                          FOCUS - 292 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                      The Reporter (Vacaville, California)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            January 13, 2009 Tuesday

Flood map change could be costly

BYLINE: Melissa Murphy, The Reporter, Vacaville, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 779 words


Jan. 13--A change in flood maps could force some 800 residents in Vacaville to
buy flood insurance -- protection that one local insurer estimates could cost
four times the price residents pay under current maps.

Effective May 4, the Federal Emergency Management Agency or FEMA, will adopt an
ordinance approving new Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the city.

As a result, some 800 properties in Vacaville that are currently designated as
outside of a 100-year-flood zone will be re-designated as within the zone.

About 1,000 letters were sent Thursday to residents and property owners who
could be affected by the change.

According to Tim Burke, senior civil engineer in Vacaville's Public Works
Department, the biggest areas affected by the maps include homes in the Tulare
Drive and Peabody Road areas.

That same area was drenched the night of Dec. 31, 2005, when the skies dumped at
least 5 inches of rain in just a few short hours, causing flood damage that
reached into the millions of dollars.

Property owners with a mortgage from a federally regulated lender whose building
is on a parcel within a Special Flood Hazard Area must, by federal law, carry
flood insurance when these flood maps become effective.

Ronald Stewart lives in the 700 block of Tulare Drive and said he isn't sure why
he would be required to buy flood insurance.

"Sure it flooded," Stewart said. "But I've never had a problem with it."

He explained that although his car was damaged three

years ago in the flood, he admitted it was his fault for not moving it. Other
than reaching up to his garage, Stewart hasn't seen flood damage in his home as
other residents have.

"Our house sits a little bit higher," he said. "I haven't seen a map, so I'm not
sure my house is even in the zone. Why would they require me to buy insurance? I
haven't had a problem."

When deciding on whether to purchase insurance, Burke said, don't wait.

Flood insurance costs vary, but purchasing flood insurance before May 4 could
drastically cut down on costs, he said.

Barbara Noll, a representative of Gateway Professional Insurance Services in
Vacaville -- an insurance agency listed on the Web site for the National Flood
Insurance Program -- said depending on certain variables, a single-family
residence could pay $348 a year for flood insurance before the FEMA flood maps
are approved.

If someone waits to purchase until after the maps are approved, they could spend
approximately $1,200 a year, she said.

Burke said FEMA updates the maps about every five to 10 years, but some
residents said their homes should have been included in the flood zones a lot
earlier.

"It should have been reflected like this 20 years ago," said Steve Bryant. He is
the original owner of the one-story home that sits on the corner of Persimmon
Circle and Tulare Drive. During the flood three years ago, he saw the water
inside his home rise at least 2 feet -- and the house sits at least 3 feet off
the street. "I had been going to the city for years saying that we did not have
proper flood protection," he said Monday.

Bryant said that since the 2005 flood, he and many of his neighbors have
purchased flood insurance. He said he's also quick to remind anyone looking to
buy in the area that they'll need it, too.

The city of Vacaville will hold two public meetings to provide information to
residents.

A representative of FEMA will be at both meetings to provide information and
answer questions.

The first public meeting will be 7 p.m. Jan. 29; the second will be 7 p.m. Feb.
12. Both meetings will be at the Ulatis Community Center, 1000 Ulatis Drive.

Residents and property owners who cannot attend one of the meetings, or those
who need assistance reviewing the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, can go to the
Community Development Department, 650 Merchant St., for information.

Additionally, FEMA has information on its Web site, www.fema.gov.

Information can also be found on the city of Vacaville's Web site,
www.cityofvacaville.com.

And residents can access the Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Solano County online
at http://www.map9-m.com/pro-jects/Solano to determine where property is located
in relation to the new floodplain.

For more information on flood insurance, visit the National Flood Insurance
Program's Web site, www.floodsmart.gov.

To see more of The Reporter, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.thereporter.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Reporter, Vacaville, Calif.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090113-VA-Flood-map-change-could-be-costly-0113

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VA


                                 Copyright 2009


                          FOCUS - 293 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                             creditunionjournal.com

                               September 4, 2017

How NFIP changes could affect lenders;
NFIP reauthorization expires on September 30. What changes could be in store for
flood insurance?

SECTION: Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 1113  words


The Importance of the National Flood Insurance Program to the U.S. Congressional
Reauthorization on the Horizon

Background

According to FEMA, floods have been the most common and costly natural disaster
in the United States. While flooding events are concentrated, they occur in all
50 states and US territories. Historically, flooding was controlled with public
or private efforts including levees, dams, and seawalls. Federal disaster relief
was occasionally made available to flood victims, but many were left devastated.
Insurance companies were mostly unwilling to underwrite the risk of flood due to
the catastrophic nature and concentration of claims; still today, a standard
homeowner's insurance policy typically does not cover flood damage.

With mounting flood losses and escalating disaster relief cost, Congress created
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) with passage of the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968. The NFIP is a Federal program, managed by the Federal
Emergency Management Administration (FEMA), and has three components, to (1)
provide flood insurance, (2) promote flood hazard mitigation, and (3) develop
maps of flood hazard zones.

The mandatory purchase requirement provisions of The National Flood Insurance
Reform Act of 1994, require federally backed lenders to determine whether the
building securing a loan is or will be located in a Special Flood Hazard Area
(SFHA) and if it is, require adequate flood insurance is obtained and retained.
Additionally, the NFIP allows all property owners in participating communities
to buy federally backed insurance to protect against flood losses. This
insurance is intended to provide an insurance mechanism instead of disaster
assistance; thereby protecting taxpayers as well as property owners. NFIP
participating communities are required to establish flood management regulations
in order to mitigate future flood loss.

Since the inception of the NFIP, additional legislation has been enacted to
reform the program, ensure its fiscal soundness, and bolster its mapping,
mitigation, and insurance functions. However, the costs associated with flooding
have risen significantly (including the impactful events of Hurricane Katrina
and Superstorm Sandy), putting the program more than 24 billion dollars in debt,
according to Government Accounting Office. Recent reform efforts to address the
burgeoning debt by eliminating subsidies and moving premiums to actuarial rates
have resulted in skyrocketing cost for policyholders.

Congress now faces the challenge of balancing financial solvency of the program
and reducing taxpayer exposure while also addressing affordability concerns.
Additionally, FEMA flood insurance rate maps, many of which are significantly
outdated and ever-changing, must be kept current with efficient and accurate
mapping technology. Finally, investment in cost-effective floodplain management
and mitigation efforts to reduce flood risk are vital to the programs intent.

NFIP Reauthorization Expiration Approaching

The current NFIP reauthorization expires on September 30, 2017 and Congress will
be considering potential changes to the program as part of the reauthorization
process. Seemingly unusual for Congress these days, there is significant
bipartisan interest in reforming and reauthorizing the NFIP. This article
summarizes the various areas where Republicans and Democrats mostly concur,
thereby making a reasonable prediction for September's legislation.

Long-Term Certainty: A long-term (5 to 10 year) reauthorization is sought to
provide communities, homeowners, businesses, and NFIP insurance providers'
uninterrupted access to and program funding for existing and new policies.
Legislators stress the need to avoid uncertainty in both the insurance and
housing markets.

Expand Private Flood Insurance Market:In recent years, more sophisticated risk
modeling has been developed, generating new interest among private insurers to
provide flood coverage. There is strong support for clarifying Congressional
intent that lenders should be able to accept private flood insurance as an
alternative to the NFIP; however, significant obstacles for the development of a
private market continue to exist. Reforms are sought to remove barriers for
private insurers to enter the domestic flood insurance market as a complement to
the NFIP to help provide consumers with more choices.

Address Affordability:To address constituent concerns, especially for low and
mid-income homeowners under mandatory purchase requirement, Representatives look
to address flood insurance premium increases. Vouchers, mitigation credits,
annual percentage caps to premium increases, and cost controls are all under
consideration and have significant support.

Invest in Mitigation:Congress looks to authorize funding for community-wide
mitigation projects and mitigation assistance programs. Floodplain management
and mitigation programs that show a positive return on investment have been
shown to be effective ways to reduce flood risk.

Modernize Mapping:FEMA's role in creating and maintaining accurate flood risk
maps is the foundation of the program's mandatory purchase requirement and
insurance premium calculations. Some maps are more than 30 years old. Mapping
techniques have significantly evolved including Light Detection and Ranging
(LiDAR) and other Geographic Information Science technologies. Investing in
newer systems and methods for more accurate mapping of flood risk across the
country will generate better data resulting in a more effective and efficient
program.

Whether you have indifference to it, love it, or hate it, the NFIP exists and
will continue to exist for at least the near-term. We can all hope bipartisan,
commonsense reforms to the program, as part of the 2017 reauthorization, will
make the program more fiscally sound while addressing affordability concerns for
policy holders, protecting property owners from devastating loss due to flooding
and taxpayers from excessive disaster relief payments or runaway program
expense.

Written By:Steve MurchisonDirector, FZDS

FZDS provides Flood Zone Determinations nationwide for lender compliance with
National Flood Insurance Program regulatory requirements. Federal regulations
require lenders to determine and document whether collateral used to secure a
mortgage is located in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). Life-of-Loan
tracking, census tract data, borrower's notices, and aerial map copy makes FZDS
your single-source for flood zone determinations. FZDS is sharply focused on
providing customers with superior accuracy and delivering solutions that saves
lenders time and money. Learn more athttps://www.fzds.com/

URL:
http://www.cujournal.com/partnerinsights/fzds/article/how-nfip-changes-could-aff
ect-lenders

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter


                        Copyright 2017 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 294 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                 Irish Examiner

                            January 7, 2016 Thursday

Experts back tighter restrictions for building on flood-prone plains

SECTION: IRELAND

LENGTH: 487 words


After a major study of city floods around the world, academics at University
College Cork, the London School of Economics, and Oxford University found no
evidence that cities, their economic hubs, or large population centres relocate
after large floods.

Full economic activity has usually resumed in the flood-prone zones, usually
within a year, they said.

The study also warned that modern cities with high population concentrations in
low-lying areas face greater flood risk as sea levels rise and extreme rainfall
episodes become more frequent.

At a minimum, tighter planning restrictions are required to prevent new building
on existing flood plains,  said co-author Tom McDermott, of UCC s school of
economics and the Environmental Research Institute   one of Ireland s leading
climate change research centres.

Extreme rainfall during December resulted in widespread flooding across parts of
Ireland and the UK, with some estimates putting the cost of the devastation to
the British economy alone at close to £3bn ( 4.07bn). In Ireland, the repair
bill could top  100m.

Over the past 30 years, floods worldwide have killed more than 500,000 people
and displaced over 650m people.

In the new study, Mr McDermott and his colleagues looked at the effects o f more
than 50 large floods, which displaced at least 100,000 people each in more than
1,800 cities in 40 countries from 2003 to 2008.

They found that the low-lying urban areas hit more often by large floods are
also the areas with the higher density of economic activity.

However, while these areas sustain more flood damage and recover quickly, the
economic activity does not move to safer locations.

Mr McDermott said part of the problem is that many cities were built in
flood-prone locations at a time when access to a river or the coast was
economically important.

However, the cities have remained in flood-risk locations even when modern land
transport reduced the importance of access to waterways.

The study also said that because governments bear much of the costs of building
and maintaining flood defences and compensating flood victims, private
developers can build on cheap, flood-prone land without bearing the full cost of
their actions.

This has resulted in too many people ending up living in these flood-risk areas.

As a society we appear to be overly exposed to flood risk   there are various
reasons why developers and house builders do not take full account of flood risk
when deciding where to build,  said Mr McDermott.

Rising sea levels and more extreme rainfall episodes as a result of climate
change will lead to greater flood risk   more frequent flooding of existing
flood-prone areas or an expansion of areas at risk.

We, as a society, must look at ways of mitigating that risk, and not building on
flood plains would be a good place to start.

Last month, the Oireachtas environment committee also called for a ban on new
buildings on flood plains.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Landmark Digital Media Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 295 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                  Burton Mail

                            January 9, 2016 Saturday

Flooding woes continue as levels increase

BYLINE: By Helen Kreft; helen.kreft@burtonmail.co.uk; @helen_kreft; 01283 245032

SECTION: NEWS:OTHER; Pg. 6-7

LENGTH: 394  words


PARTS of East Staffordshire and South Derbyshire are spending another day
submerged under water as flooding continues to cause problems.

The Washlands, in Burton, is still heavily affected by a weekend of torrential
rain, and Rolleston Cricket Club was also impossible to use following the heavy
downpour.

Fields off the A38, near Clay Mills, were also reported as unusable.

It comes as a driver was rescued on Thursday from a stranded car in Leathersley
Lane, Scropton, where water levels were continuing  to rise.

Following the drama, Derbyshire Fire and  Rescue Service reminded motorists of
the dangers and risks associated with driving through flood water.

Motorists are being reminded that 'road closed' signs were in place for a
reason, and they should not be ignored and  insurance companies may reject
claims for damage to cars where drivers have ignored 'road closed' signs.

Station manager Adam Hind said: "We have been to a couple of incidents where we
have had to rescue drivers from their cars which have been stranded in flood
water, such as Scropton, in South Derbyshire.

"Motorists should take responsibility for their own actions and not take the
risk of driving through flood water."

Further information regarding safe driving in flooded areas is available by
visiting www.rac.co.uk/advice/winter-driving/
driving-in-heavy-rain-and-flooding

The Environment Agency   spent £8 million in 2007  improving flood defences
along the River Trent in   Burton.

That investment, according to the agency, means that the chance of flood echoing
that of the one in 2000 or those seen in recent weeks up and down the UK, were
small.

A spokesman told the Mail that the defences mean there was a '0.5 per cent'
chance of the river flooding every year.

This is the equivalent of a major flood happening once in every 200 years.

Emma Roberts, operations manager from the Environment Agency, previously  said
it has several flood defences in Burton to protect more than 7,000 properties
from flooding.

The Environment Agency's £8 million scheme nine years ago was to upgrade crucial
flood defences.

These  provide protection from a flooding event with a 0.5 per cent chance of it
happening every year, providing a high standard of protection, the department
said.

The agency said staff  regularly inspects  and maintains the defences to make
sure they perform as they should.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: hy h yhy h yhyhy h
Flooding on the Washlands off Meadow Ln, Burton
Flooding on the Washlands off Meadow Ln, Burton
FLOODING on the Washlands, off Meadow Lane, Burton.
Flooding on the Washlands off Meadow Ln, Burton
Floods - Rolleston Cricket Club
Floods - Rolleston Cricket Club
Floods - River Dove
Floods - River dove burst its banks but being held back on Church Rd Egginton
THE River Dove burst its banks as a driver braves the flood at Church Road,
Egginton.
Floods - River dove burst its banks but being held back on Church Rd Egginton
Floods - River dove burst its banks but being held back on Church Rd Egginton
Floods - River dove burst its banks but being held back on Church Rd Egginton
Floods - River dove burst its banks but being held back on Church Rd Egginton
Floods - in fields adjecent the river Dove by the A38 Stretton
Floods - in fields adjecent the river Dove by the A38 Stretton
Floods - in fields adjecent the river dove by the A38 Stretton
Floods - in fields adjecent the river dove by the A38 Stretton
Floods - in fields adjecent the river dove by the A38 Stretton
Floods - in fields adjecent the river dove by the A38 Stretton

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2016 Localworld
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 296 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          Newcastle Herald (Australia)

                             March 6, 2008 Thursday
                                  Late Edition

Hardly a level playing field for flood plains;
OPINION & ANALYSIS

BYLINE: write Wilton Boyd and Chas Keys

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 811 words


IN Australia, flooding imposes higher economic costs than do any of the other
agents of natural disaster with which we have to contend bushfires, cyclones,
hail and windstorms, earthquakes, landslides and droughts.

This is not understood in the community, and nor is the fact that the adverse
effects of flooding can be mitigated more effectively than those associated with
the other hazards.

Governments, once heavily involved in flood plain management initiatives aimed
at mitigating the costs brought by floods, have in recent years increasingly
withdrawn from the field. The stance of the state and federal governments poses
several questions.

Why do our political leaders largely ignore what is needed to protect our
communities from the most manageable of natural disasters?

Why is the Federal Government launching a campaign to map the increase in
coastal flooding as a result of climate change, but is silent on the mapping of
flood plains?

Why is it that the insurance industry is preparing flood-risk maps, but our
state and national governments refuse to do so?

And why is staffing in the state's flood plain management unit the repository of
our expertise in the field being diminished to critical levels?

Government interest in flood mitigation in Australia has collapsed. Because of
the immediacy of the past decade of drought, it appears that the political focus
and therefore the funding have shifted to bushfire mitigation and relief, water
security and drought relief.

Despite costly, disastrous and repeated flooding in all four eastern states over
the past nine months, the flood threat is increasingly ignored. The latest loss
of funding being the failure of the Federal Government to recommit to its joint
flood mitigation program, funding of which has been available since 1963.

For the first time in four decades, the Commonwealth has not called for
applications for project funding and the Government remains silent.

As councils complete flood risk management plans, more and more flood mitigation
projects have been identified and found to pass the tests that governments apply
in relation to benefit-cost ratios and environmental impacts. Flood plain
management initiatives have always, and rightly, had to meet stringent tests in
relation to the cost of their implementation. And they have done so.

An example from the Hunter Valley is illustrative. From 2000-03, almost $8
million was spent to refurbish the levees which protect 1600 dwellings and the
central business district of Maitland. Last year the system protected the town
from flood.

If we conservatively assume an average saving of $10,000 per dwelling and accept
that half of the houses would have been flooded in last year's flood had the
levees not been in place, that's a saving of $8 million to say nothing of the
savings in the CBD and the mitigation of the longer term economic and social
costs that have followed the flood.

These savings can be readily quantified and identified by the government's own
experts.

Meanwhile, Newcastle lacks a flash flood warning system, which would have
allowed some mitigation of the damage experienced in the disastrous flooding of
last June. Will funding for this system and its ongoing maintenance still be
forthcoming?

The Prime Minister, Mr Rudd, spoke recently of helping councils to map future
areas of coastal inundation because of sea level rises associated with climate
change. Riverine flood and flash flooding already affects many more people and
property than will be affected by sea level rises, and the number will increase
further with the additional flooding expected to accompany the more intense
rainfall that climate change will bring.

Governments should fund urgently the mapping of our flood plains to identify the
risk and to develop controls over the inappropriate use of flood plains. As
things stand, increasing development in flood liable areas simply guarantees
that flood losses will rise in the future not only on the coast but on the flood
plains of the rivers and urban drainage systems as well.

The Rudd Government has not committed to a new cycle of funding of Natural
Disaster Mitigation, a program for which funding ceases in June. Pointedly, the
Government has not called for submissions for flood mitigation initiatives for
2008-09. And it appears that only the independent Bush Fire Mitigation program
will survive in 2008-09.

Councils have a duty of care to their communities. Councils must be free to
inform property owners of the flood potential, but they often lack relevant
mapping information.

Do we need a New Orleans experience, with hundreds dead, and a community still
dislocated years after the event before this irrational approach is exposed?

Wilton Boyd is executive officer of the Floodplain Management Authorities. Chas
Keys wrote the recently released book Making Communities Safer in Times of
Flood.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: NATURAL DISASTER: Governments have increasingly withdrawn from flood
plain management.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 Newcastle Newspapers Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 297 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                           October 8, 2003 Wednesday
                                  Late Edition

Tidal change over flood insurance

BYLINE: Linda Morris

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 553 words


Councils have been given legal protection for the first time against the advice
they offer for the development of flood-prone land, as insurers consider ways to
give home owners coverage for flood damage.

After a delay of almost three years, the State Government is about to gazette
its guidelines, ending the legal uncertainty councils face over the information
they provide on flood risks.

The changes will limit the right of residents or developers to sue in the Land
and Environment Court and provide greater planning certainty across NSW.

The decision meets one of several conditions demanded by insurers before they
will offer flood coverage.

In a separate move, the NRMA, the country's largest insurer, has outlined the
conditions under which it could for the first time cover flood damage as part of
household cover.

About 55,000 properties in NSW are in areas prone to one-in-100-year flood
levels. In the Hawkesbury-Nepean catchment alone, there are 35,000 properties
vulnerable to flooding.

But floods from rising river or canal waters are rarely covered by insurers,
especially if the damage is inflicted days after initial flash flooding and
storms.

The insurer IAG pays out for flash flooding and damage by storm water run-off.
But it has always excluded damage from rising waters from canals or rivers from
its household policies, saying there is not enough information to adequately
assess risk and not enough being done to mitigate against potential disasters.

An NRMA discussion paper to a flood summit in July said greater public
awareness, more funding of flood mitigation works and making public flood maps
could make insurance more widely available.

"IAG doesn't insure for all flood types because it's difficult to offer
affordable premiums when flood risk is high," said its spokeswoman, Melanie
Monaco. "We'd be in a better position to do this if there was better town
planning and mitigation works, which would decrease the likelihood and severity
of flood and its consequences. Then flood insurance would be more affordable."

The NRMA's review coincides with a push to overturn a 19-year ban on the public
availability of flood maps, considered to be a key impediment to gaining
insurance.

Without the maps, insurers say, they cannot reliably determine premiums, and
property owners do not know if insurance is needed. In 1984, the state's flood
mapping was abandoned after home owners complained they undermined property
values.

Cr Allan Ezzy, chairman of the State Flood Plain Mitigation Authority, told the
summit that affordable insurance could be offered after detailed risk surveys
had been carried out.

Councils were under pressure from developers to allow development on flood-prone
land, creating future flood issues, he said.

Stephen Lees, executive officer of the Upper Parramatta River Catchment Trust,
said risk-based premiums would serve to counter growing public complacency.

With 47 per cent of the market, the NRMA's entry could persuade others to follow
and ease consumer confusion, Dr Lees said. "It will make a big difference by
reminding people of the risk of flood damage," he said.

PRICE OF THE DELUGE

The cost of flood damage nationally between 1967 and 1999 is estimated at $10.4
billion. It is the most expensive of all disasters other than drought. The
costliest floods since 1990:

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2003 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 298 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                            October 11, 2005 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

Watered down;
INSURANCE

BYLINE: Lucinda Schmidt

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 921 words


Exemptions to flood cover could mean home owners end up feeling soaked, reports
Lucinda Schmidt.

When stormwater seeped under a garage door after torrential rain in NSW's Hunter
region, the home owner was confident that insurance would pay for the $2000
damage to stored furniture.

His house and contents policy covered storms, and he had also taken out optional
flood cover.

But his insurance company knocked back the claim, arguing that the storm cover
required the water to enter the garage through an opening made by the storm, and
the flood cover required the water to come from "the overflow of any lake,
river, dam, creek, canal or other watercourse".

The Insurance Ombudsman agreed with the company, allowing it to reject the
claim.

For consumers, what is and what isn't covered, and how the insurance applies,
can be perplexing.

A report by the Australian Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC) in 2000
found that flood cover was not offered in most house and contents policies.

Damage caused by stormwater and rainwater is usually covered, and many insurers
also cover flash flooding, where heavy local rain floods an area within a few
hours.

But "riverine" or "mainstream" flooding, where a river, lake, dam or other
watercourse bursts its banks, is usually excluded.

The report found that consumers did not realise that storm damage was often
treated differently from flood damage, and that they may have no cover at all
for floods.

Greg Tanzer, ASIC's executive director of consumer protections, says little has
changed in the five years since the report was released.

"Flood damage is still commonly excluded, so consumers need to ask their
insurance company whether it's offered [as an extra]," he says.

The flood damage exclusion means that every time there is a major storm,
consumers and insurers become bogged down in a semantics nightmare about whether
the damage was caused by stormwater or floodwater.

In the US, for example, New Orleans residents are bracing for huge legal battles
with insurance companies who argue that flooding, rather than a wind-driven
storm surge, caused most of the damage in the recent Hurricane Katrina.

Unlike Australia, the US has a flood insurance scheme, backed by the government.
The problem is, not everyone pays to participate in the scheme, with initial
estimates suggesting that only 40 per cent of those hit by Katrina had flood
damage cover.

Here, the Insurance Council of Australia is considering several options,
including a government-backed scheme like that of the US, to cover flood damage.

"Flood insurance is our No. 1 priority in terms of a problem we have to solve,"
says the council's corporate affairs manager, Rod Frail.

Every time there is a major flood, and insurance claims are knocked back, it's a
public relations nightmare for the insurers.

Frail says that flood cover is not a standard part of house and contents
insurance policies because there has not been enough accurate data on floods for
insurers to assess the risk. Also, there has been a lack of planning control to
prevent people building in flood-prone areas, and not enough has been spent by
governments on flood mitigation.

Another problem is that a recent report prepared for the council suggests that
only about 170,000 homes are flood-prone (meaning the risk of a major flood is
one in 100 years). If they were the only ones to take out flood insurance, the
premiums would be thousands of dollars.

Another alternative being considered is for all households to pay a levy to
contribute to a flood insurance fund - but that raises issues of
cross-subsidisation, with those in dry areas supporting those in flood-prone
ones.

Meanwhile, until the mess is fixed, consumers need to read their policies
carefully and work out whether their home is at risk of flood.

Tanzer says the local council or water authority, and people who have lived in
the area for many years, are good sources of flood information.

Only a handful of companies offer flood cover as an optional extra, and usually
only to consumers in areas that are not flood-prone.

"Many people think they're automatically covered, but they're not," says Ragini
Rajadurai, the manager of corporate and legal services for the Insurance
Ombudsman.

She suggests people ask about flooding when they are buying or building, and
check with their insurer whether flood cover is available.

If you are flooded, Rajadurai says, it's important to write down what happened
as soon as possible, perhaps taking photos, and to be very accurate about when
the water entered your home and from where.

WHAT TO ASK YOUR INSURER

* Is flood cover included in my house and contents policy?

* If not, do you offer flood cover as an optional extra?

* Does it include: flash flooding, riverine flooding, storm surge, tsunami,
landslip?

* Are there any other exclusions?

* Am I covered for losses under both my building and contents policies?

Source: Insurance Council of Australia

ARE YOU COVERED?

Storm damage Rainwater enters the home through an opening caused by the storm.

Covered by all household policies

Urban drainage overflow Council stormwater drains/gutters are blocked and
overflow.

Usually covered

Flash flooding Intense rain causes rivers, lakes, etc, to overflow.

Covered by some insurers

Riverine/mainstream flooding Rivers, lakes, etc, overflow over a wide area,
flooding lasts for days or weeks.

Usually excluded

Other common exclusions Storm surge (high tides, often from cyclones); tsunami;
landslip (damage is caused by soil saturation).

Source: Insurance Council of Australia

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Flood warning ... Hurricane Katrina left behind an insurance
nightmare. Photo: David J. Phillip/AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2005 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 299 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              March 9, 2014 Sunday

Washington: With Spring Comes Flood Season; Make Sure Your Business Remains
Liquid With The Proper Insurance

LENGTH: 770  words

DATELINE: Washington


Insurance Information Institute has issued the following news release:


The above average snowfall this year is likely to create optimal conditions for
widespread flooding this spring that could wreak havoc on businesses. Without
flood insurance, many businesses may soon find themselves under water, according
to the Insurance Information Institute (I.I.I.).



Cash flow is the lifeblood of all businesses. But in the wake of a flood, too
many business owners are forced to divert substantial funds to repairing
flood-damaged property, instead of growing their business. And just a few inches
of water can cause tens of thousands of dollars in damage, the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) reports.

Even worse, almost 25 percent of small businesses never reopen their doors
following a disaster, according to the Insurance Institute for Business and Home
Safety (IBHS).

"Ninety percent of all natural disasters involve flooding," said Loretta
Worters, vice president with the I.I.I. "From 2008 to 2012, the average
commercial flood claim was more than $87,000; a substantial amount of money for
a business to have to come up with on their own."

Flood and sewer back-up is excluded under most standard commercial property
insurance policies. Sewer back-up can be added to a policy as an endorsement.
Coverage for flood-caused damage to a business is available from the federal
government through the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and a few private
insurers. When used in tandem with private insurance, NFIP coverage can mitigate
or "buy down" large deductibles associated with commercial flood policies or
simply provide additional coverage.

A standard commercial flood insurance policy covers direct physical losses
caused by flood as well as losses resulting from flood-related erosion caused by
heavy or prolonged rain, coastal storm surge, snow melt, blocked storm drainage
systems and levee or dam failure.

For small business owners, flood coverage is available as an endorsement to a
Business Owners Policy (BOP), available through some private insurance
companies, usually if the business is located outside a flood zone. But check
with your insurer. Flood insurance for small businesses is also available from
the NFIP.

The I.I.I. offers four key strategies for protecting your business during flood
season:

1. Find out if your business is located in a flood zone. Your local government
office or commercial bank should be able to provide this information. Knowing if
a property is in a floodplain is critical in order to keep your employees and
property safe during a storm, as well as to properly insure the business. Be
aware that the NFIP is rolling out updated flood maps that will expand flood
zones in many parts of the country. Do not assume that because you were not in a
flood zone last year you will not be in one today!

2. Consider buying flood insurance. Flood insurance premiums are calculated
based on a number of factors: flood risk to the structure; the year the building
was constructed; building occupancy; number of floors; the location of the
contents; the deductible chosen; and the amount of building and contents
coverage, among other things. You may buy a policy that covers flood damage to
both the structure and contents, or a policy that covers damage to only one. A
business may need only one type of coverage if, for example, it does not own the
building in which it is located, and the lease agreement does not require it to
insure the premises. However, even if the property is leased, you may want to
buy flood insurance to cover any improvements to the site. If your property is
in a high-risk flood area and you have a mortgage from a federally regulated or
insured lender, you will be required to purchase a flood insurance policy. The
maximum allowable commercial property limit for a small business is $500,000.

3. Include comprehensive coverage for your commercial vehicles. Flood damage to
commercial or fleet vehicles is covered under the optional comprehensive portion
of a standard commercial auto insurance policy.
4. Don't wait until a flood is imminent to buy flood insurance. There is a
30-day waiting period for a new or modified flood insurance policy to become
effective, unless the lender requires that flood insurance be purchased in
connection with a mortgage loan, in which case there is no waiting period.

"Business owners should talk with their insurance professional about their flood
risk and how best to protect against it," said Worters, adding, "And act
now--March 20 is the first day of spring."

For more information please visit: http://www.iii.org/

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 300 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                   The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 23, 2011 Tuesday

Scranton residents learn that a new flood designation can reduce their flood
insurance rates

BYLINE: Josh Mrozinski, The Times-Tribune, Scranton, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 416 words


Aug. 23--Over the past five years, Kevin Clarke's flood insurance has
skyrocketed from $690 to just under $2,000 a year.

Mr. Clarke, who lives in the Plot section of Scranton, said he wants relief
soon. He and about 30 other people turned out at Scranton High School on Monday
to hear federal officials explain that a change in flood designation in the Plot
and other sections of the city where levees have been built as part of the
Lackawanna River Flood Control Project may result in about a 20 percent savings
in flood insurance.

While Mr. Clarke learned it could be years before he may not have to carry flood
insurance, he said the meeting was helpful. He also said it is "kind of
ridiculous" he is paying flood insurance since his home is now protected.

To take advantage of a change in the federal flood designation of the project
area to Zone A99 effective July 6, residents must contact their insurance
providers, the officials said.

"We've had conference calls and meetings with insurance agents and lenders,"
said Gene Gruber, Federal Management Emergency Agency Region III mitigation
director. Mr. Gruber, who also encouraged people to maintain flood insurance,
said data show the project area does not have the 100-year flood protection FEMA
wanted.

The project area -- encompassing the Plot, Weston Field and Green Ridge sections
of the city -- is located in what is known as a special flood hazard area.

Federal regulations mandate that buildings in high-risk flood areas with
mortgages from federally regulated or insured lenders have flood insurance.
Without flood insurance, property owners would need a presidential declaration
to receive compensation for flood damage.

While walls and levees have been completed as a part of the flood control
project, FEMA cannot provide accreditation that the levees offer protection
against a 100-year flood event because the levees are not tall enough. The flood
zone is in an area that FEMA considers to have a 1 percent annual chance of
flooding.

Since the project was designed in 1986, the river's elevation has increased
because of storms, requiring the levees be increased from a few inches to a few
feet, Jack Connolly, project manager with the Army Corps of Engineers, said.

"Now, the levees are there providing you protection," Mr. Connolly said.

Contact the writer: jmrozinski@timesshamrock.com

___ (c)2011 The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pa.) Visit The Times-Tribune (Scranton,
Pa.) at thetimes-tribune.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20110823-YT-Scranton-residents-learn-that-a-new-flood-designation-can-reduce-the
ir-flood-insurance-rates-0823-20110823

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: YT


                        Copyright 2011 The Times-Tribune


                          FOCUS - 301 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                              July 4, 2016 Monday

Minister directs to re-examine Flood Fighting Plan to remove flaws

LENGTH: 637 words

DATELINE: New York



FAISALABAD: Punjab Minister for Zakat & Ushr/Incharge flood fighting
arrangements of Faisalabad Division Malik Nadeem Kamran on Saturday directed the
concerned departments to re-examine Flood Fighting Plan for removal of its all
minor flaws to cope with any emergency like situation due to flood in rivers.


 He was presiding over a meeting to review the flood fighting arrangements in
Faisalabad division at Commissioner Office here. Secretary Irrigation Punjab
Saifullah Anjum, Director Punjab Disaster Management Authority Dr. Khurram
Sehzad also participated in the meeting.  Divisional Commissioner Momin Agha,
RPO Bilal Siddique Kamyana, Chief Engineer Irrigation Muhammad Nawaz and other
officers of Irrigation department were present.
 The Minister stressed the need to complete preparedness of district
administration and other concerned departments to meet challenges of possible
heavy flood during monsoon and rainy season.
 He said that full coordination among the departments should be ensured for
fulfilling responsibilities during rescue operation in case of heavy flood in
rivers Jehlum and Chenab.
 He called for activating early warning system and to keep close liaison with
Meteorological department for having prediction of rains and discharge of water
in the rivers for timely evacuation of people from low-lying areas in case of
any threat of flood.
 He advised that all machinery should be placed near vulnerable points and
relief centers should be equipped with all necessary arrangements.
 He stressed the need to make foolproof arrangements by Health and Livestock
departments for availability of necessary medicines in sufficient quality,
vaccination and fodder for animals in flood affected areas.
 The Minister said that Chief Minister Punjab Muhammad Shehbaz Sharif was
himself supervising flood fighting arrangements and no lethargy or carelessness
would be tolerated in this regard.
 He said that Punjab government had devised a comprehensive strategy for
providing all-out relief to flood affectees.
 He asked divisional and district administration to remain in touch with PDMA
for seeking support in resources and relief.
 The Minister directed administration of districts Jhang and Chiniot to remain
at high alert for flood operation and flood protection bunds should be checked
for making proper arrangements by keeping in view previous history of flood.
 He asked police authorities to extend full support to civil administration in
flood relief operation and patrolling of police should be enhanced in possible
flood affected areas.
 He appreciated steps for carrying out mock exercises near rivers to check
emergency response of the concerned departments.
 Secretary Irrigation Saifullah Anjum informed the meeting about threat of flood
in rivers Jehlum and Chenab and said that necessary arrangements of Irrigation
Department for flood fighting had been checked besides carrying out on-spot
inspection near Head Tareemu and other vulnerable areas.
 Chief Engineer Irrigation Muhammad Nawaz gave briefing about previous history
of the flood and flood fighting arrangements of the department.
 He informed that Chiniot Flood Bund, Jhang Flood Bund and Thatha Malah Flood
Bund were important for protection of Jhang and Chiniot City which had been made
more strengthened.
 Divisional Commissioner Momin Agha informed the Minister that he had visited
the possible flood hit areas in district Jhang and Chiniot.
 He said that flood fighting arrangements had been reviewed in the four
districts of the division besides put on high alert of concerned departments.
 He said that District Flood Control Rooms had also been set up in the four
districts equipped with all necessary arrangements and staff duties for ensuring
coordinated efforts in rescue and relief operations in case of any emergency.


LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 302 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 9, 2017 Thursday

Washington: Bilirakis Introduces Legislation to Improve Flood Insurance Maps

LENGTH: 264  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office of the MP Gus Bilirakis has issued the following news
release:



 U.S. Representative Gus Bilirakis (FL-12) today introduced legislation to
ensure accountability and transparency when it comes to calculating flood
insurance rates. The Flood Insurance Integrity Act would require the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) to regularly review FEMA's National Flood Insurance
Program to make sure flood insurance maps are updated.





 Bilirakis recently spoke on the House floor in support of the legislation. See
below for his prepared remarks.



 "Mr. Speaker, I rise today to discuss important legislation I will soon be
introducing in this Congress, the Flood Insurance Integrity Act.



 Flooding and flood insurance are major issues for the people of my district in
Florida.



 Our community along the coast is prone to experiencing hurricanes and tropical
storms on a regular basis--flood insurance is a must where we live.



 But right now, the National Flood Insurance Program bases its flood insurance
rates on maps that can be 50 years or older.



 Many are completely out of date and often inaccurate.



 It's also one of the reasons that NFIP is over $23 billion in debt.



 The Flood Insurance Integrity Act would require an open and transparent annual
review of flood maps.



 Americans who need flood insurance should be able to trust that their flood
insurance premiums accurately reflect their flood risk.



 That's what my bill seeks to do. Thank you."





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 303 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                The Western Mail

                            December 11, 2015 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Modern-day flooding is not unprecedented, claim experts;
After Storm Desmond caused chaos across the country, Aberystwyth University's
Professor Mark Macklin says present-day floods are not unprecedented and there
are many historic examples of such flooding. Robin Turner reports...

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 708 words


THE recent "unprecedented" flooding in north-west England might be more common
than currently believed, a Welsh scientist is warning.

Professor Mark Macklin, an expert in river flooding and climate change impacts
at Aberystwyth University, says analysis shows 21st century floods are not
unprecedented in terms of either their frequency or magnitude.

Working with other experts from the universities of Cambridge and Glasgow, he
has drawn on historic records to build a clearer picture of the flooding.

They conclude that 21st century flood events such as Storm Desmond are not
exceptional or unprecedented in terms of their frequency or magnitude and that
flood frequency and flood risk forecasts would be improved by including data
from flood deposits dating back hundreds of years, not just a few decades.

Prof Macklin said: "Sometimes we are talking about a 'one in a hundred year
flood' based on records going back just 30 years."

He added: "UK documentary records and old flood deposits dating back hundreds of
years indicate that these floods are not unprecedented, which means we are
grossly underestimating flood risk and endangering people's lives.

"The truth is flood plains are made by floods and, after the industrial
revolution and because of need for land, we are building on them.

"For flooding to occur in flood plains and for it to be termed 'unprecedented'
therefore does not make much sense."

Prof Macklin points out the floods in Talybont in 2012 followed on from a long
series of floods in the area, some going back to the 1600s.

He has studied flood deposits from flood plain area across the UK including a
number in Wales using "lichen clocks".

He explained that by examining the rate at which lichen grows on boulders
disturbed by floods, the date of the floods can be determined and he has found
severe flooding going back hundreds of years.

He warned: "It is of concern that historical data suggests there is far more
capacity in the North Atlantic climate system to produce wetter and more
prolonged flood-rich periods than hitherto experienced in the 21st century.

"Looking forward, an increased likelihood of weather extremes due to climate
change means that extending our flood record using geomorphology science must be
placed at the centre of flood risk assessment in the UK."

Professor John Lewin, also from the University of Aberystwyth, said: "What is
needed is far more resilience for already-developed floodplains, and much more
serious insistence that future floodplain development should be virtually
curtailed.

"Somewhere along the line floodplain development has been allowed by local
authorities and the UK government to continue regardless." "  Lewin, Macklin and
their colleagues are members of the British Society for Geomorphology's Wor-king
Group on Stormy Geomorphology, who are currently finalising a global analysis of
the role geomorphology science can play in an age of extremes.

MAJOR FLOODS IN WALES INCLUDE...¦ January 30, 1607: Floods around the Bristol
Channel coasts extended in South Wales from Laugharne, Carmarthenshire, to above
Chepstow in Monmouthshire. Cardiff was the worst hit with the foundations of St
Mary's Church destroyed. Overall, 2,000 or more people drowned with houses and
villages swept away by what might have been a tsunami.

Rheidol, September 1842: One witness said: "A noise was heard resembling distant
thunder...a tremendous body of water rolled several feet above the waters of the
River Rhydol, stripping the fields of hay, wheat, oats and barley."

March 18, 1947: Ceredigion and Powys, Dyfi and Teifi - due to the rapid thaw and
heavy rainfall, hundreds of acres of farmland were inundated. In Cardiganshire,
considerable flooding resulted.

December 1960: The River Ogmore bursts its banks in the centre of Bridgend
hitting shops, businesses and many homes in the town centre, the abattoir,
Bridgend rugby field and clubhouse while Newbridge Fields became a lake.

March 1972: Around 500 homes flooded when the River Afan bursts its banks in the
centre of Port Talbot.

February 26, 1990: 2,800 houses evacuated in Kinmel Bay and Towyn as the sea
flooded the area.

June 8, 2012: Widespread flooding hit areas including Talybont. The Leri,
Rheidol and Clarach areas were worst affected.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: <BA Christmas tree is surrounded by water as flooding blights the
market town of Cockermouth, Cumbria, again this week Christopher Furlong

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WWM


                    Copyright 2015 Western Mail and Echo Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 304 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                             August 7, 2016 Sunday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

FLOOD BILL COMES DUE

BYLINE: JEFF HARRINGTON, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3359 words



HIGHLIGHT: Painful insurance increases were delayed in 2014; now, homeowners are
hit again.


Three years ago, Tampa Bay was roiling over massive flood insurance rate hikes.
Home sales in some neighborhoods literally stopped. Real estate agents warned
the market could collapse. Lawmakers held town halls and rallied from
Tallahassee to Washington for help.

Then Congress passed a temporary reprieve, and nearly all fears subsided. "It
went from screaming loud madness to not even a whisper," said Robin Sollie, head
of the Tampa Bay Beaches Chamber of Commerce.

Brace yourself for the chorus of discontent to rise up again. That 2014
congressional fix slowed down - but didn't stop - the first wave of higher flood
insurance premiums that is now hitting homeowners.

"There's nothing you can do about it," said Sollie, who this summer got the
sticker shock of a 21 percent increase for her beachfront home in St. Pete
Beach's Belle Vista neighborhood.

"You can shop the private market or you pay it or you have to sell your house.
As these higher rates are coming in, people are starting to put their houses
up."

The good news: Owners of low-lying homes won't endure a repeat scare of annual
flood premiums immediately jumping five- or six-fold into the tens of thousands
of dollars. But like a rising tide lapping at doorsteps, year after year of
flood rate increases of 9 percent to more than 20 percent in some cases are
coming, eventually pushing homeowners toward that higher, unsubsidized level.

Some real estate agents caution prospective buyers that their flood rates will
double within four or five years.

As Jay Neal, president and CEO of the Florida Association of Insurance Reform,
puts it: the flood insurance crisis is "a little quieter ... but no less
painful."

The sharply higher rates are an attempt to stabilize the National Flood
Insurance Program, which was financially decimated by Hurricane Katrina and
Superstorm Sandy and left desperate to climb out of a $23 billion deficit. Its
solution was to target the 20 percent of NFIP properties in low-lying areas that
had enjoyed lower, subsidized rates for decades.

With more affected homeowners than any other state - and more subsidized
properties in Pinellas than any other county in the country - Florida has led
the awareness campaign and tried to find answers, says state Sen. Jeff Brandes,
R-St. Petersburg, an advocate of private insurance options.

Yet, nearly all the solutions Florida has come up with so far have a downside:

- Raising the level of existing homes can be costly and in some cases
impractical. "How would you raise (flood-susceptible) Shore Acres?" Brandes
says. "How many times would you be spending more to raise a home than what it's
worth?"

- A few private insurers, like Tampa-based Homeowners Choice and Sarasota-based
Centauri Insurance, are offering a limited number of private flood policies that
undercut the federal NFIP rates. But they're choosy on who qualifies and not all
mortgage companies outside Florida allow private insurance anyway. (Centauri
recently became the first insurer to have its flood endorsement certified by the
Office of Insurance Regulation, making it acceptable by mortgage companies.)
More problematic: If homeowners are later dropped by a private insurer and
forced back into the NFIP, they may have to pay for a new, unsubsidized flood
policy. That could immediately boost their bill from under $1,000 up to tens of
thousands of dollars.

- Actuaries from the Milliman consulting firm are creating new models to
determine elevation levels house-by-house. Their goal is to offer clients -
private property insurers - a way to sell targeted flood policies to owners of
higher-elevated homes much cheaper than NFIP. But that program could take years
to gain widespread adoption.

Brandes worries about having enough time to build a viable private flood
insurance marketplace before the cost of the public option becomes untenable for
many. "We're between the lightning and the thunder," he said.

To real estate agent Cyndee Haydon, who sells homes on Clearwater Beach, none of
the solutions goes far enough; they only "help us move real estate in the
short-term."

Haydon has her share of clients either avoiding purchase of a home in a
high-risk, flood zone area or trying to sell one before market conditions
worsen. She dissuades buyers from seeking private flood insurance, saying it's
too risky if they're dropped and then have to pay full-boat for a new NFIP
policy.

So far, the overall impact on selling prices for flood-prone homes has been
remarkably muted.

Pinellas County Property Appraiser Pam Dubov surprised herself when she began
dissecting some of the latest home sales figures.

Perhaps it wasn't a shock that beachfront homes are getting more expensive with
a flood of cash buyers betting on rising property values. But then Dubov turned
to Shore Acres, poster child for a low-lying, less upscale, inland Pinellas
community that would have been hit hard if Congress had not overhauled the
Biggert-Waters Act of 2012 (the law that triggered the high rate increases in
the first place).

She examined sales over the year in a smattering of Shore Acres neighborhoods
where anywhere from 65 percent to 92 percent of the homes have subsidized flood
insurance rates. "I'm looking at double-digit (sales price) increases for all of
them," Dubov said.

Haydon sees such rising real estate values as an indication buyers may be
clueless to how a few years of exponentially higher rates will hit their
pocketbooks.

"Because of the tight inventory at the beaches, some home buyers are more likely
to buy a home in this seller's market that requires flood insurance and utilize
higher deductibles, not really understanding the rate at which their flood
insurance will rise," she said.

"At current rates, most homeowners will see their (flood insurance premiums)
doubling every four to five years depending on whether it's their primary or
second home."

Cristy Assidy said a 10 percent rate increase to the $2,300 flood insurance tab
for her family's home in Riviera Bay near Weedon Island is not enough to push
them out of their home. It's certainly better than the $17,000 bill they had
faced if Biggert-Waters hadn't been changed.

But is it fair? Hardly, she says.

"It's still unreasonable," said Assidy, a 42-year-old nurse. "They have to take
another look at this. It's not an acceptable answer for anybody to say that ...
after five years it would be unaffordable. They put a Band-Aid on it, but we're
still hemorrhaging."

Like many owners of homes that have never flooded, she challenges the accuracy
of federal flood maps used to set rates.

What's particularly irksome to many is that Florida is not responsible for
NFIP's shortfall even as it shoulders the brunt of the financial fix. An
oft-noted 2011 study by the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton Center for Risk
Management and Decision Processes found that Florida has paid in four times more
in premiums than it has gotten back in payouts since the National Flood
Insurance Program started.

The study's author, Erwann Michel-Kerjan, said last week that since there has
been no major hurricane since his analysis, his key finding hasn't changed.
Florida is still, by far, a net donor into the federal flood insurance program.

- - -

Strategies to avoid high rates

Ray and Kate Leone made it through the first flood insurance scare.

In 2013, they learned their flood insurance premium was set to jump from $2,200
to $12,700.

The Biggert-Waters fix postponed their financial pain - their current flood
policy is about $2,300 with a $5,000 deductible - but they don't want to face
the same nightmare again.

Since they don't have a mortgage for their Madeira Beach home, they're not
required to have flood insurance. They're investigating whether to self-insure
like some of their neighbors. "If it goes up too much," Kate Leone said, "we're
just not going to have flood insurance and we'll hope that's the right call."

Ray Leone, 68, considers himself "a numbers guy," having spent a career in
finance with banks, a computer leasing company, a medical equipment leasing
company and his own investment fund. He toys with setting aside $12,000 a year
now sitting in investments into a family emergency fund that may never be
tapped, rather than give the money to NFIP.

Mike and Sandi Bryce live on a canal in Madeira Beach and, like the Leones,
don't have a mortgage. And like the Leones, they're considering dropping flood
coverage.

Mike Bryce, 68, a retiree who was in the U.S. Navy for 34 years, says he has
been paying flood insurance since he and his wife bought their house in 2010.
But living on a fixed income, he's wary about how much their $1,800 in flood
premiums will rise when the October renewal rolls around. If it's too much,
"flood (coverage) would be the first thing I would let go," he said. "One of our
friends two streets over from us who lives on a canal ended up dropping flood
insurance already."

Verla and Robert Waldo, retirees who live in an 864-square-foot home in
Seminole, managed to cut their flood premiums by knocking their mortgage down to
$22,000. But Verla Waldo, 75, said that reduced annual expense - $467 for
$45,300 in coverage - is still too much for a house that has never had flood
damage. "We're right on the edge of the flood zone and I think it's ridiculous
we even have to have it at all," she said.

Homeowners Randy and Stephanie Sessions seized on another rate-fighting
strategy.

The former residents of East Lake Woodlands in Oldsmar wanted to move closer to
the beach but also wanted a home elevated out of the flood zone. So they bought
a Tierra Verde townhome where the living quarters are on the second story above
the garage with all electrical systems elevated.

"We're still required to have flood (coverage) but because we're elevated, that
flood insurance is much, much less," said Stephanie Sessions, executive director
of Suncoast PACE, a nonprofit that helps Pinellas County seniors with chronic
health problems. Not only are their current flood rates a fraction of nearby
Tierra Verde homes (about $700 a year compared to more than $2,500 that some
neighbors are paying), they won't have sharply higher insurance bills every
year.

"We probably would not have bought a home in a flood zone, knowing what we
know," she said. Added her husband, Randy, 58, a self-employed contract design
engineer: "We didn't even look at homes that were basically on the ground. It
had to be 11-and-a-half feet above flood stage. That's all we were interested
in."

- - -

Private flood insurance

When the flood insurance crisis struck in 2013, Homeowners Choice Insurance was
one of the first to tiptoe into selling private insurance, saying it could
undercut NFIP rates.

Eventually Homeowners Choice's parent company, HCI Group, carved out a
subsidiary called TypTap that was devoted to flood insurance.

Paresh Patel, HCI's chief executive, said TypTap has been well-received by both
agents and policyholders. Between TypTap and Homeowners Choice policies, HCI now
offers flood coverage to just shy of 1,000 policyholders.

About 400 new policies were rolled over into TypTap in the second quarter, he
said, with property owners saving as much as 50 percent compared to an NFIP
policy.

"I don't want to put out a slogan, 13 seconds could save you 50 percent or
something, but (homeowners) have seen those kinds of savings, yes," Patel said
in an earnings conference call with analysts last week.

A catchy slogan only goes so far, however, if TypTap or any other private
insurer later drops that flood policy and forces a homeowner back into NFIP,
this time paying the unsubsidized rate. "It's scary," said Patty Latshaw of St.
Petersburg-based Wright National Flood Insurance, the biggest provider of
federal flood insurance policies in the country.

In an interview, Patel said that concern is overblown and many property owners
would not have to pay the top-end rates if they wind up back in NFIP.

Regardless, private insurance has yet to gain a foothold, let alone widespread
acceptance. The Florida Office of Insurance Regulation estimates there are a
mere 3,000 private flood policies compared to 2 million federal flood policies
statewide.

Neal, of the Florida Association of Insurance Reform, maintains the answer to
Florida's insurance woes lies elsewhere.

Just as hurricane-prone Florida has focused on wind mitigation techniques such
as installing storm shutters and stronger windows, it should embrace flood
mitigation the same way, he says.

Mitigation could be raising a structure. Or raising electrical systems. Or
installing products like the one marketed by New Jersey-based Smart Vent
Products. Smart Vent sells a system that is designed to let water pass through
the bottom of a home so a flood wouldn't rise up through the house or damage the
foundation.

"We have to focus on mitigation," Neal insists. "It's the only way that Florida
remains sustainable."

- - -

Not counting on the feds

Like many, Neal isn't banking on another quick federal fix. This time, there is
no burgeoning congressional support for keeping flood rates in check. There is
no outcry; no community forums; no rallies.

"My appraisers aren't even hearing from people that flood insurance is an
issue," said Dubov, the county property appraiser. "It's like a lot of things.
If it's not staring in your face as a crisis, it's out-of-sight, out-of-mind."

For all of the statistics that abound in her office, Dubov is most concerned
about one stat she doesn't know: How many owners of flood-prone homes who don't
have a mortgage have decided the cost of buying flood coverage isn't worth it?
And how many will drop it in the months and years to come?

"What keeps me awake at night," she said, "is wondering what's going to happen
if we do have a terrible storm and we have so many people who don't have flood
insurance at all."

Times researcher Caryn Baird contributed to this report. Contact Jeff Harrington
at jharrington@tampabay.com Follow @JeffMHarrington.

* * *

Understanding flood insurance

What is Biggert-Waters?

After Hurricane Katrina and Superstorm Sandy, the federally run National Flood
Insurance Program was more than $23 billion in debt. To make NFIP fiscally
sound, lawmakers approved the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012,
which removed the subsidies on about 20 percent of policies nationwide for homes
that were built prior to 1975 and had enjoyed grandfathered, low flood insurance
rates. Florida had more affected policies than any other state. Pinellas County
had more subsidized policies than any other county nationwide.

- - -

Wasn't that law changed?

Two-and-a-half years ago, Congress passed the Homeowner Flood Insurance
Affordability Act of 2014 to push back the rate hikes and removed the provision
in Biggert-Waters in which the buyer of a subsidized home would lose the flood
insurance subsidy entirely. However, the hiatus on higher rates was only
temporary.

- - -

So what's happening now?

The two-year reprieve ended beginning with renewals on April 1. Rates for some
subsidized second homes and businesses are going up more than 20 percent.
Increases for primary residences are about half that steep. But they are
expected to continue for years, eventually doubling or tripling current
insurance premiums.

The higher rates include a $25 annual surcharge for a primary home and $250 for
other homes or businesses.

- - -

Isn't this a rich person's problem?

To the contrary. Many older, modest properties both on the beach and inland are
affected. And unlike those who are mortgage-free, if you have a mortgage and
live in a flood zone, you're required to have flood insurance.

- - -

I just received a renewal notice with a 21 percent flood insurance increase.
What can I do?

Talk to your agent. If you have a flood elevation certificate that shows you
live on higher ground, you may qualify for a lower rate.

In some cases, less expensive private flood insurance may be available, either
with a company like Lloyds of London (a surplus lines carrier that isn't
regulated by the state) or a standard homeowners insurer that offers flood
coverage. Talk to your agent about pros and cons, including the risk of later
being dropped by that private insurer and then having to pay a full,
nonsubsidized rate to get coverage again through the NFIP.

Among other options: Accept a higher deductible to lower your premium or take
steps to reduce your home's flood risk (and rates) by raising the structure,
moving all electrical connections to a higher level or taking other mitigation
steps.

If you have no mortgage on your home, you could drop flood coverage altogether,
although that could be a risky option unless you are self-insured for a
catastrophe.

- - -

Any other fixes on the way?

Lawmakers are pushing for improvements to the private flood insurance market and
making the National Flood Insurance Program more accountable in explaining how
it determines flood zone designations and how that relates to risk and rates.

U.S. Rep. Dennis Ross, R-Lakeland has sponsored a measure to make private flood
insurance more acceptable to mortgage lenders, but it has not been embraced by
the Senate.

Separately, emergency management officials continue to work toward improving
what's known as Community Rating System scores. The voluntary federal program
gives a range of discounts on NFIP rates to communities based on how much
they've done with floodplain management and helping residents prepare for a
flood emergency. With a handful of exceptions on both ends, most Florida
communities currently fall in the range of a 10 percent to 20 percent CRS
discount.

- - -

What's the future of the National Flood Insurance Program?

That's up to Congress. The long-troubled program is up for re-authorization in
September 2017. Unlike the last time the program renewed, there is greater
interest in pushing a private market option because higher NFIP rates have made
coverage more competitive.

- - -

Where can I find more information on flood maps and flood coverage?

Visit the National Flood Insurance Program's website: floodsmart.gov.

* * *

A different way to map flood risk

The flood zone maps the federal government uses to determine how much people pay
for flood insurance are - in a word - imperfect.

That has some in the private market ready to step in, thinking they can do a
better job using better models - and offer much cheaper rates for some
homeowners as a result.

The National Flood Insurance Program carves up areas of high, moderate and low
flood risk into a series of zones. High-risk zones, also known as Special Flood
Hazard Areas (SFHAs), begin with the letters "A" or "V." Moderate- to low-risk
zones, known as Non-Special Flood Hazard Areas (NSFHAs), begin with the letters
"X," "B" or "C."

More than half of Florida's 2 million flood policies are in the "X" zone.

"In the 'X' zone there's currently one rate," Matt Chamberlain, a principal with
the Milliman consulting firm, points out. "If you're in the higher risk part of
the X zone then your rate is probably currently being underestimated, but if
you're in the lower risk part, it's probably been overestimated."

Instead, actuarials at Milliman are working for several private insurers to take
a more granulated approach to mapping elevation levels, using vastly improved
modeling technology. The private market has had storm surge catastrophe models
but, until recently, nothing to determine property risk for inland flooding or
non-surge flooding.

"We went from zero models to three or four active models," said Nancy Watkins,
another Milliman principal who focuses on the Florida market.

Milliman draws a distinction between what some private insurers like Homeowners
Choice are doing - basically discounting NFIP rates - and using more granulated
models.

What that lets them do is determine flood risk house-by-house, so companies can
pinpoint which properties are paying too much for flood compared to their risk.

The new models are largely untested, so insurers will likely be fairly
conservative using it at first.

But surging federal flood insurance pricing has piqued the interest of private
carriers. "They wouldn't be doing it," Watkins said, "if they didn't think some
significant part of the market may be overpriced."

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - JOHN PENDYGRAFT - Times: Aidan Gummere, 12, looks out from his
grandparents' Tierra Verde townhome. "We wanted to get closer to the water, but
we didn't want to get stuck with flood insurance going up," said the homeowner,
Randy Sessions, 58. The living quarters are on the second story, and the
electrical system is elevated. PHOTO - CHERIE DIEZ - Times: Verla Waldo and her
husband, Robert, dramatically reduced the mortgage on their Seminole home, which
helps keep their flood premiums low. But the house has never flooded, she says.
PHOTO - JOHN PENDYGRAFT - Times: Randy Sessions and his grandson Aidan Gummere,
12, stand outside Sessions' home in Tierra Verde. To avoid high flood insurance
rates, Sessions and his wife bought a home with a large garage that is at the
base of the house. The electrical system is elevated. PHOTO - JIM DAMASKE -
Times (2013): Pinellas County Property Appraiser Pam Dubov is applauded during a
news conference held by Gov. Rick Scott and other leaders to call for a remedy
to national flood insurance rate increases. PHOTO - DOUG CLIFFORD - Times
(2005): Historic flooding in New Orleans from Hurricane Katrina in 2005 - plus
Superstorm Sandy in the Northeast - contributed to a $23 billion deficit within
the National Flood Insurance Program. To make up the shortfall, the program is
aggressively raising flood insurance rates for properties that had been
subsidized with lower rates for decades. PHOTO - SKIP O'ROURKE - Times (2004):
Hurricane Frances inundated Shore Acres, where anywhere from 65 to 92 percent of
the homes have subsidized flood insurance rates, Pinellas Property Appraiser Pam
Dubov said. PHOTO - Times (2013): In September 2013, members of a grass roots
group called Stop FEMA Now rallied to protest the end of flood insurance rate
subsidies under the Biggert-Waters Act.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2016 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 305 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                 Times of Oman

                            September 1, 2014 Monday

New government measures to help in flood protection

BYLINE: ELHAM POURMOHAMMADI

LENGTH: 377 words


Muscat: The Ministry of Regional Municipalities and Water Resources has
introduced new policies and standards to assist other organisations in making
flood protection decisions.

According to Dr Aisha Mufti Al Qurashi, an adviser at the ministry, the
organisation is responsible for conducting studies, developing policies and
introducing standards. It also provides advice regularly to the authorities
concerned.



In her speech at the first annual drainage rehabilitation and flood control
meeting here on Monday, she said that the Nationwide Flood Study Programme of
flood-prone urbanised areas of Oman was carried out for the main towns.

The purpose of the programme was to provide data and information required for
development planning in flood-prone areas and floodplain management.

She explained that factors contributing to flood severity in Oman include
occasional cyclones, steep mountains, impermeable nature of the rocks covering
some catchments and narrow wadi gorges.

The ministry's role covers hydrological analysis and flood management meant for
developing guidelines and standards, producing maps showing flood risk zones,
providing flood frequencies for wadi development locations and other purposes,
Al Qurashi added.

Flood management policies
In her presentation, the official noted that flood control measures will be
introduced in existing areas of development which are subject to flooding in
order to minimise its effects and minimise restrictions on re-development.

Owners of properties which are situated in a floodway where flooding occurs at
high frequency and who are at high risk, will be advised of its dangers so that
they can take measures to protect their property.

In areas to be developed, the effects of flooding will be minimised by use of
the approved standards, and further development should be forbidden in areas
subject to flooding.

Flood area standards are applied to certain areas including floodway areas that
are directly in the paths of wadis, active floodplain areas which flood when the
flow in the floodway exceeds its capacity, and areas of passive inundation which
are low-lying areas that fill up with water during heavy rain.

Reporter can be contacted at elham@timesofoman.com
 Muscat Press and Publishing House SAOC 2014

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 89


     Copyright 2014 Times of Oman - Muscat Press & Publishing House (SAOC)
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 306 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 13, 2017 Friday

FEMA's Outdated and Backward-Looking Flood Maps

LENGTH: 647  words



New York: Natural Resources Defense Council has issued the following news
release:
The recent hurricanes, which inflicted severe damage from Puerto Rico to Texas'
Gulf Coast, have underscored the value of not only ensuring flood maps are
accurate and up-to-date, but also that future conditions, like changing rainfall
patterns, are accounted for in the depiction of flood risk. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is responsible for mapping the nation's
hazardous flood areas, including coastal areas susceptible to storm surge.
However, a recent investigation by the Department of Homeland Security's
Inspector General revealed that 58% of all FEMA flood maps are considered
inaccurate or out-of-date.  Inaccurate and out-of-date flood maps put
communities at risk.


Currently, Congress is set to reform and reauthorize the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) by December 8th. Congress should direct FEMA to include
future conditions assessments as an information layer on all flood maps and to
ensure that the process of creating and adopting flood maps receives proper
oversight. Floodplain mapping reform must be a priority, and part of a
comprehensive effort to reform the NFIP.
FEMA's Flood Mapping Program
Congress enacted the NFIP to better protect the United States from flooding by
providing a unified national program for floodplain management. The program
provides more than cheap insurance, but also serves to promote sustainable
floodplain development and flood risk identification.  The program requires all
three legs - insurance, mapping, and building and land use regulations - to
function.
FEMA's floodplain maps are a fundamental element of the flood insurance program,
providing a basis for flood insurance rates and floodplain management
regulations. The flood maps depict the 1% annual chance flood (100-year flood)
and the .2% annual chance flood (500-year), and provide mapped communities with
knowledge about their flood vulnerability. FEMA's minimum floodplain building
and land use requirements only apply in areas that are mapped to the 100-year
flood level.  As such, flood maps are used by government officials, developers,
and planners to decide where it is safe to build. Therefore, FEMA's flood maps
must be accurate and up-to-date, otherwise, communities will be misinformed
about their true flood exposure.
FEMA is required to update flood maps every five years. If a map is not assessed
within the five-year window, the level of flood risk is considered "unknown."
FEMA must reassess flood maps regularly because flood risks are not static.
Flood risks change over time due to a variety of factors, like changing land use
patterns.
Climate change impacts, like rising sea levels and more intense rain storms,
also influence flood risk. Climate change is loading the dice in favor of more
frequent and severe floods. For example, as sea level rise, storm surge can
reach further inland and affect a greater number of properties during a
hurricane.  However, FEMA's flood maps do not currently depict future
conditions. Instead, FEMA's flood maps look backwards in time and determine the
size of the 100-year and 500-year floodplain based on past events.
FEMA's Flood Map Program Needs Reform
FEMA's flood mapping program is falling short in protecting people and property
from flooding. According to a September 2017 report by the Department of
Homeland Security's Office of Inspector General, FEMA is unable to "provide
members of the public with a reliable rendering of their true flood
vulnerability or ensure that NFIP rates reflect the real risk of flooding."
Almost 2/3rds of FEMA's flood maps have not been updated in the last 5 years.
Numerous communities have not had a map update in more than 30 years. For
example, many areas that flooded when Sandy struck in 2012 had maps that were
last updated in 1983.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 307 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                            August 11, 2009 Tuesday

Floods 2nd most destructive natural disaster in Turkey

LENGTH: 550  words

DATELINE: Pakistan


Pakistan, Sept. 11 -- Floods are the second most destructive type of disaster in
the country following quakes, according to reports prepared by the Ministry of
Public Works' General Directorate of Disaster Affairs and the State Waterworks
Authority (DSI). According to the General Directorate of Disaster Affairs, 287
floods have occurred in Turkey in the past 20 years.Data provided by the
International Emergency Disasters Database (EM-DAT) also states that 32 major
floods took place in Turkey between 1903 and 2003, claiming lives of 1,272
people. However, experts say this number rises to 2,000 when those missing in
the floods are added to the total.

Approximately 100,000 people were also displaced because of these disasters.
Speaking to Today's Zaman, DSI officials stated that 39 people died in floods in
2007 and 43 died in 2008. As for 2009, more than 30 people have died due to
floods, not including those killed in the recent flash floods which have hit
Istanbul and Tekirdag.According to reports by the General Directorate of
Disaster Affairs, a total of approximately 50 million hectares of agricultural
land and populated areas were flooded in the past, which has led to $165 million
in damages each year. The cost of the damage caused by floods in last 20 years
amounts to $2 billion.The leading causes of floods are climate change and
environmental damage. Insufficient flora in dry areas and steep slopes increase
the speed of flash floods. Erosion and unplanned urbanization are also among the
leading factors of flooding. Insufficient rain water drainage systems in some
cities and the improper usage of the land during periods of urban planning in
particular play majors role in floods. Istanbul, Ankara, Izmir, the western
province of Bursa and the southern provinces of Adana, Gaziantep, Hatay, Mersin
and Antalya are the areas where floods occur most frequently.DSI says 1,316 died
in 1,452 floods in last 53 yearsAccording to data provided by the DSI, which is
affiliated with Ministry of Environment and Forestry, 1,452 floods have hit
Turkey in the past 53 years, killing 1,316 people. It also reports that more
than 60,000 houses were damaged in these floods.The DSI's figures regarding the
cost of the floods also differ from others. According to the DSI, the annual
cost of the damage caused by floods exceeds $100 million. Drawing attention to
Turkey's deficiencies in terms of taking preventive measures against floods, the
DSI's reports reveal that Turkey spends $30 million each year for infrastructure
measures to prevent flooding. The DSI data shows that more than 80 floods occur
in Turkey on average annually; however, since most of them do not result in
fatalities, they do not attract the necessary attention. The DSI, which has been
implementing a program to prevent flash floods since 1970, says the number of
annual flash floods have decreased significantly. DSI officials note that
annually 35 to 40 people are killed in floods in Turkey on average. The most
destructive floods to hit Turkey occurred in 1995, killing a total of 160 people
in the provinces of Izmir, Isparta and D'zce. Published by HT Syndication with
permission from Right Vision News. For more information on news feed please
contact Sarabjit Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2009 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 308 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                 Daily The Post

                             August 19, 2013 Monday

Indus River in high flood at Taunsa, Flash flood hits Sindh

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: LAHORE


The Indus River was flowing in a high flood at Taunsa and its water level is
falling.

It is in a medium flood at Chashma and Kalabagh and the water level is falling
at both points[#x201a] while it is in low flood at Tarbela and water is falling.

According to the Flood Warning Centre Lahore[#x201a] the Chenab River is in
medium flood at Qadirabad. The water level is falling and it is in low flood at
Marala[#x201a] Tarrammo and Khanki and water level is falling all these points.

The Sutlej River is flowing in a low flood at Ganda Singh Wala and Suleimanki.
Its water level is falling at both these points.

High flood in River Chenab is likely to enter in the limits of Multan and
Muzaffargarh districts today and administrations of both districts have made all
necessary arrangements to meet any situation.

District Administration Multan has set up sixteen relief camps and four
companies of Pak Army have been deployed for relief and rescue work.

One thousand tents and medicines along with food items have also been arranged
for flood affected people.

Due to the ongoing monsoon rains in the catchment areas, Spillways of Tarbela
Dam were opened on Sunday as the water level started rising rapidly.

Sirens of danger were blown before opening the spillways. People living in the
vicinity of the dam have been directed to shift to safer places.

Meanwhile, the flash flood of River Indus has now entered Sindh. The Provincial
Disaster Management Authority told that the flood water has inundated thousands
of acres of land in Katcha area of Ghotki District. The District government has
sought help from the PDMA to evacuate the people marooned in flood water.

Flash floods in rivers and nullahs of Punjab have played havoc in various areas
of the province adversely hurting the daily life besides depriving people of
their life long belongings and leaving them homeless.

The flash floods besides disrupting the routine life have also adversely damaged
the communication links as various areas remained cut off without shelter, food
commodities medicines and other basic life amenities.

The flash flood at Tarimo Headworks submerged Jhang-Sargodha Road near Pakaywala
closing it for traffic. More than 50 persons trapped in the flooded village
Lohaywala were rescued after hectic efforts of concerned authorities.

At least 50 villages of Chinot were cut off with the urban areas due to onrush
of flood, while the standing crops in Shorkot suburban areas were severely
damaged by flash flood.

Nine villages near Multan also were inundated as water lever in river Chenab
mounted. Pak Army contingents, Rescue 1122 and Civil Defence volunteers were
busy in relief and rescue works in the flood-affected areas.

On the other hand, thousands of acres of cultivated land in 72 villages of
Hafizabad and Qadirabad was adversely hit by Chenab river flash flood. Sialkot
remained flooded by overflowing Nullah Aik water, while several villages of
Narowal and Pasrur remained marooned by Nullah Dek overflowed.

In Dera Ghazi Khan, flood water from River Sindh has entered hundreds of
villages. According to sources 470,000 cusec of water passed from Taunsa during
the last 24 hours. Overflow water of River Sindh gushed into villages of Dera
Ghazi Khan. At least 0.5 million people of DG Khan villages moved towards the
safer places and in the relief camps.

According to the ISPR of district Multan, two companies of Pakistan Army have
been deployed for the victims of flood affected areas.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 309 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        The Huddersfield Daily Examiner

                           January 22, 2015 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Flood defences 'need £1bn a year'

SECTION: PROPERTY;FEATURES; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 501 words


FLOOD defence spending must rise to £1bn a year over the next decade to cope
with the rising threat of flooding, insurers and campaigners have urged.

There should also be an end to building new homes in flood-risk areas, to
prevent communities living in "constant fear of flooding", the Association of
British Insurers (ABI) said, as it launched the Flood Free Homes campaign.

Despite planning rules, some 20,000 new properties are being built on the
floodplain each year, including 4,000 in places where there is significant risk
of flooding, the ABI warned as it called for a "zero tolerance" approach to the
problem.

Stopping house-building in the floodplain has high support, with nine out of 10
people (90%) believing residential housing developers should be completely
banned from building in high-risk areas, according to a poll carried out for the
launch of the campaign.

The Flood Free Homes campaign, which is supported by Friends of the Earth, the
National Flood Forum, the Know Your Flood Risk campaign and the Property Care
Association's Flood Protection Group, aims to raise the issues of long-term
flood defence investment and land and water management.

It comes a year after parts of the UK were hit by devastating flooding as the
country was battered by a series of extreme winter storms.

The survey of 2,500 people by YouGov for the ABI found that flood defences
topped the list of environmental issues that should attract Government spending,
with more than a third (36%) saying it was the most important recipient of
funding.

And almost three-quarters (73%) thought that local authorities were primarily
responsible for ensuring new homes are built in suitable locations, with an
acceptable level of flood risk.

The campaign is calling for spending of £1bn a year on flood defences by 2025, a
zero tolerance approach to inappropriate new developments in flood-risk areas
and cross-party political consensus on long term solutions for tackling
flooding.

Huw Evans, deputy director general at the ABI, said: "The need for this campaign
to address the UK's rising flood threat has never been more www.important.No
action is not an option.

"Last winter's floods highlighted the trauma and devastation flooding brings.
How we manage our land and water has to become central to government
decision-making across the UK, whoever is in power," he said.

"Without adequate long-term investment in flood defence protection that reflects
the increasing threat, a zero tolerance approach towards building in flood risk
areas and political agreement, too many communities will continue to live with
the constant fear of flooding."

Guy Shrubsole, Friends of the Earth climate campaigner, said: "With climate
change pushing up flood risk, it's vital that the Government ramps up its
investment in flood defences and stops building homes on floodplains.

"It's not right that the human and economic costs of climate change are pushed
onto those most vulnerable to flooding - we need to tackle this huge problem
together."

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Whitesands area of Dumfries was under water on Thursday last week
when the River Nith burst its banks, flooding roads and shops and causing
traffic disruption

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HDE


                           Copyright 2015 MGN Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 310 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                             The Northlines (India)

                             April 8, 2017 Saturday

JK needs master plan for flood prone areas

LENGTH: 549 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR


SRINAGAR, April 8 -- As Kashmir is on the brink of floods, it is a clear
indication for the preventive measures needs to be taken by the government.

It seems so far government has not been well prepared how to deal with any
eventuality. The Irrigation and Flood Control department has prepared a draft
for the first ever 'State Water Policy but there has been no work on part of the
government whether it will be implemented to prevent floods in the future.

In it, the department has stressed for preparation of a master plan for flood
prone areas, and called for various measures to prevent valley from floods in
the future.

"Measures to establish the extensive networks for flood forecasting to give
timely warnings to the people likely to be effected shall also be outlined. A
roadmap for determination of the limits of the flood basins and the necessary
exercises to be carried out shall be prepared," it reads.

Further, it has emphasised for measures to protect the natural drainage systems
with a view to removing artificial barriers in the path of flow of excess
drainage water. "Operating procedures for reservoirs shall be evolved, and
implemented in such a manner so as to have flood cushion, and reduce trapping of
sediments during flood seasons."

Kashmir has a history of floods since 1990. As per the official records, the
state has witnessed major floods in 1900, 1902, 1903, 1905, 1912, 1929, 1948,
1950, 1955, 1957 and 1959. Floods were also witnessed in the years 1976, 1987,
1988, 1992, 1993, 1995, 1997 and in September 2014 and now almost on brink of
flood. The floods of September 2014 caused immense damage resulting in loss of
land, lives, houses and public infrastructure and people fear the situation may
emerge again if their is further rise in the water level.

A study titled 'A satellite-based rapid assessment on floods in Jammu &
Kashmir-September, 2014' conducted jointly by the Department of Environment &
Remote Sensing (DERS) and ISRO has warned that intensity of rainfall and
frequency of rainy days in the Himalayan region may increase in 2030s, leading
to another flood in Kashmir if immediate steps are not taken to restore the
drainage system of Jhelum.

According to a disaster management report, 13 districts in J&K out of 100
districts in India have been identified as 'multi hazard districts'.

"Majority areas of the valley, especially Sonawari, Awantipora and Srinagar,
along with parts of Jammu are prone to floods. Upper catchments of all the
tributaries of the Jhelum, Indus, Chenab and Tawi rivers are prone to flash
floods," the report says. All these areas were worst hit by September 2014
floods.

A senior official of the Irrigation and Flood Control department said the Wular
Lake which is the largest flood absorption basin has lost the water carrying
capacity due to host of factors. "Several surveys have found that gross human
interference, deforestation, encroachments, chocking of water ways and reduction
in capacity of wet lands due to heavy siltation posing an imminent threat of
floods even by average downpour," the official said. "

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from The Northlines.
For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2017 The Northlines
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 311 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 11, 2015 Wednesday

Flood Protection is Topic of Conversation in Virginia and California

LENGTH: 886  words

DATELINE: New York


Natural Resources Defense Council has issued the following news release:

On Wednesday, March 11 two of my NRDC colleagues, Joel Scata and Ben Chou, will
be attending listening sessions on the updated federal flood protection
standards that President Obama wisely put in place with his January 30th
executive order.

With our climate and precipitation patterns changing, floods become much more
likely than previously understood. That's why it's so important to ensure that
when the federal government funds bridges, roads, schools, water treatment
systems, and other critical infrastructure, they ensure that these facilities
are built to a more protective standard.

Joel will be attending the meeting in Norfolk, Virginia while Ben will be at the
meeting in Mather, California. Neither state is a stranger to floods.

On Wednesday, March 11th two of my NRDC colleagues, Joel Scata and Ben Chou,
will be attending listening sessions on the updated federal flood protection
standards that President Obama put in place with his January 30th executive
order. Joel will be attenVirginia experiences flood risks from every imaginable
angle. Flash floods can affect small streams in the mountainous western part of
the state, while the larger rivers in the eastern portion of the state
experience larger flooding. But the scariest flood risks may be those associated
with sea level rise. Virginia's coastline is experiencing some of the fastest
rates of sea level rise in the world. This is particularly bad news for the U.S.
Navy, since the largest base it owns on the planet is located in Norfolk, so in
a very real sense, sea level rise and future flood risk have national security
implications.

While drought is the main problem on the minds of Californians these days,
floods are still an all-too regular occurrence. According to the state's
disaster preparedness plan (also known as a hazard mitigation plan), there were
49 federal disasters declared in California for flood-related disasters alone
between the years 1954 and 2011. And the state has a lot at risk from future
floods. More than $575 billion worth of property is located in areas defined by
the 500-year floodplain. One in five Californians lives within the 500-year
floodplain, either along the state's long coastline or its rivers, many of which
tend to be flashy, high-gradient streams susceptible to flash floods.

The new standard is a big improvement. It gives federal agencies the flexibility
of selecting one of three benchmarks when evaluating project designs or deciding
whether to fund public infrastructure projects: elevating infrastructure based
on a projection of how much higher flood elevations may rise in response to
climate change; the 100-year flood level plus at least two additional feet of
elevation; or the 500-year flood level.

Reliance on the current 100-year flood elevation as the standard is predicated
on two faulty assumptions.

First is the assumption that flood frequency projections made by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and FEMA mirror reality. In fact, these projections often
underestimate the true risk of flooding. One study found the 100-year flood
stage calculated for Hannibal, Mo. - Mark Twain's historical Mississippi River
hometown - should more realistically be defined as the 10-year flood stage.
Researchers at University of Iowa recently published a study that found floods
are occurring with increasing frequency throughout the Midwest, confirming what
most of us already realized -- that floods are happening more often.

Second, the way flood frequencies and elevations are calculated is based
exclusively on past historical experience and our present knowledge of land use
and hydrology. No accounting is made for future conditions, particularly those
conditions that will arise in response to climate change. Currently, FEMA's
flood maps and the Corps' projections of flood elevations fail to take into
account the likelihood of more frequent extreme precipitation events, future sea
level rise on our nation's coasts, and other conditions that may contribute to
floods being more likely or more severe.

Critics wrongly claim that the new standards will raise premiums for the
National Flood Insurance Program and will dramatically increase the costs of
public projects -- but they're wrong. The new standards should have no impacts
on how flood insurance premiums are calculated. And as far as project costs go,
it's often far cheaper to either build outside the floodplain or build to a
higher level of protection, than to rebuild a school, water treatment plant, or
bridge that's damaged repeatedly by flooding.

The new standards will require federal agencies to use a more conservative
estimate of flood risk when making decisions about what to build, where to
build, and which local and state projects receive federal funding.

This is exactly what we need. Climate change is dramatically increasing flood
risks, and it's time we help communities in Virginia, California, and beyond
prepare.

Image Franklin, Va., September 22, 1999 -- Aerial view of flooded downtown
Franklin, VA, shows oil contamination resulting from propane tanks and cars
under water. Photo by: Liz Roll/ FEMA News Photo

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 312 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            Kashmir Monitor (India)

                            April 1, 2015 Wednesday

'Any 2 day rainfall can cause floods'

LENGTH: 912 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR


SRINAGAR, April 1 -- Despite Kashmir having a history of floods, there has been
reduction in carrying capacity of water bodies over the years due to siltation
and encroachments.

Even though flood threat may have been reduced following improvement in weather
in past two days, the Kashmir valley would always remain at risk of floods as
government had failed to take measures to prevent the region from catastrophe in
future.

According to the official figures, the Valley has a history of floods for 130
years. The first flood which has been recorded on the Shergari gauge dates back
to July 21, 1893. The Shergari gauge, the first gauge in valley was set up in
1893. Since than, some major floods hit the Valley in 1900, 1902, 1903, 1905,
1912, 1929, 1948, 1950, 1957, 1959, 2014 and now again in 2015.

The Wullar Lake which is the largest flood absorption basin has lost the water
carrying capacity due to host of factors. Several surveys have found that gross
human interference, deforestation, encroachments, chocking of water ways and
reduction in capacity of wet lands due to heavy siltation posing an imminent
threat of floods even by average downpour.

The government woke up following the last year September floods with officials
of Irrigation and Flood Control department said some of the concrete measures
needs to be taken to prevent the Valley from floods in future.

"The capacity of retaining water in water bodies has reduced over the years. 20
percent of the Wullar Lake has been reduced due to the siltation. Other water
bodies like Hokersar, Shalbugh have also witnessed siltation which leads
reduction in retaining water capacity. Even the moderate rainfall poses a threat
of flood in the Valley," Chief Engineer I&FC department, Javeed Jaffar said. He
said government has taken measures since last year devastating floods.

He said they can't make the water storage on rivers due to Indus Water Treaty
that could have helped the Valley during floods.

The Indus Water Treaty signed between India-Pakistan has placed curbs on the
construction of storage reservoirs on rivers in J&K which could ensure the
provision of requisite water flow. The successive governments in J&K have been
saying that the requirements of the state were not taken into account while
India-Pakistan negotiated the Treaty.

"We are working on dredging to increase the water capacity in water bodies,"
Jaffar said.

According to the official documents, in 1902, when Kashmir witnessed a major
flood, the then ruler Maharaja Pratap Singh was concerned about the problems
posed by repeated floods. He approached the British engineers and asked them to
suggest ways to deal with the problem.

The British engineers studied the problem in details and it was on their advice
that the construction of flood spill channel was carried out in 1903-1904 and
this channel was used as Bye-Pass flood channel.

It is on records that in the devastating floods, the flood channel carried a
discharge of 20,000 cusecs flowing through the Gunde Aksha, Hokersar and further
carried it after addition to Mirgund Jheel, Nowgam Jheel and Haigam Jheel upto
the Wullar Lake, which has now got reduced with the passage of time due to
various factors.

However, the Chief Engineer said a new flood channel would be created from
Dogripora to Wullar to carry the surplus flood discharge of Jehlum which is
expected to cost over Rs 18,000 crore and would prevent Valley from the future
floods. He said the Central government has sought a Detailed Project Report
(DPR) from the state for it before its implementation.

According to a disaster management report, 13 districts in J&K out of 100
districts in India have been identified as 'Multi Hazard Districts' and called
for pro-active, holistic and comprehensive approach towards disaster risk
reduction and management

"Majority areas of the Valley, especially Sonawari, Awantipora and Srinagar,
along with parts of Jammu are prone to floods. Upper catchments of all the
tributaries of the Jhelum, Indus, Chenab and Tawi rivers are prone to flash
floods," the report says.

All these areas were hit by the last year floods. Again various parts of the
Valley have been flooded for the past several days and the flood alert has been
sounded across the Valley. However, water levels have started receding which has
evaded flood threat to some extent. "The political interference in facilitating
illegal constructions on the embankments of rivers has reduced the water
bodies," official sources said.

The poor drainage system is another reason for water logging in most parts of
the state especially in Srinagar city. Official sources said there was a lack of
coordination between different departments which was one of the main reasons for
non-improvisation of drainage system here.

"People thrown litter into the drainage pipes which leads to over flow and
create water logging. It was one of the main reasons for water logging in
Srinagar on Sunday," an official of SMC said. "Government has allowed
permissions of constructions in a haphazard manner which was the reason for
blockade of drains."

A senior official of HUDD said government had made a comprehensive master plan
which will overcome drainage and sewage problems in the state but would require
a lot of central funding.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from The Kashmir Monitor. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 The Kashmir Monitor
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 313 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            Kashmir Monitor (India)

                             April 1, 2017 Saturday

Now, a 'preventive master-plan' for flood-prone areas

LENGTH: 518 words

DATELINE: Srinagar


Srinagar, April 1 -- The Irrigation and Flood Control department is considering
a preventive master plan for flood-prone areas in the state.

A draft has been prepared for the first-ever 'State Water Policy' by the
Irrigation and Flood Control department and uploaded on the General
Administration Department's website for feedback.

The draft stresses on preparation of the master plan for the flood-prone areas,
and called for various measures to protect the valley from floods in future.

"Measures to establish the extensive networks for flood forecasting to give
timely warnings to the people likely to be effected shall also be outlined. A
roadmap for determination of the limits of the flood basins and the necessary
exercises to be carried out shall be prepared," it reads.

It also emphasises on measures to protect the natural drainage systems with a
view to removing artificial barriers in the path of excess drainage water.

"Operating procedures for reservoirs shall be evolved and implemented in such a
manner so as to have flood cushion and reduce trapping of sediments during flood
seasons," it read.

Kashmir has a history of floods since 1990.

As per the official records, the state has witnessed major floods in 1900, 1902,
1903, 1905, 1912, 1929, 1948, 1950, 1955, 1957 and 1959.

Floods were also witnessed in the years 1976, 1987, 1988, 1992, 1993, 1995, 1997
and in September 2014.

The floods of September 2014 caused immense damage resulting in loss of land,
lives, houses and public infrastructure.

A study titled 'A satellite-based rapid assessment on floods in Jammu &
Kashmir-September, 2014' conducted jointly by the Department of Environment &
Remote Sensing (DERS) and ISRO has warned that intensity of rainfall and
frequency of rainy days in the Himalayan region may increase in 2030s, leading
to another flood in Kashmir, if immediate steps are not taken to restore the
drainage system of the Jhelum.

According to a disaster management report, 13 districts in J&K, out of 100
districts in India, have been identified as 'multi-hazard districts'.

"Majority areas of the valley, especially Sonawari, Awantipora and Srinagar,
along with parts of Jammu are prone to floods. Upper catchments of all the
tributaries of the Jhelum, Indus, Chenab and Tawi rivers are prone to flash
floods," the report said. All these areas were worst hit by September-2014
floods.

A senior official in the Irrigation and Flood Control department said Wular
Lake, the largest flood-absorption basin, has lost the water carrying capacity
due to a host of factors.

"Several surveys have found that gross human interference, deforestation,
encroachments, chocking of water ways and reduction in capacity of wet lands due
to heavy siltation posing an imminent threat of floods even by average
downpour," the official said. "Government should prepare a master plan and issue
directions to implement it," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from The Kashmir
Monitor. For any query with respect to this article or any other content
requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2017 The Kashmir Monitor
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 314 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                            Sunday Times (Islamabad)

                              July 31, 2011 Sunday

Root causes of floods

LENGTH: 1010  words

DATELINE: Pakistan


Pakistan, July 31 -- THE flood inquiry commission formed in the wake of the 2010
floods, under the Supreme Court's directive, has unveiled that a major cause of
the devastating breach of Tori dyke was brazen negligence by the irrigation
department.The report acknowledges that most embankments are not being
maintained properly under standard operating procedures.Earlier inquiries
revealed that senior officials responsible for flood management had not even
read the manual. Likewise, the president's parliamentary committee on the
monitoring of repair and rehabilitation of Sindh's irrigation works conceded
that the dykes damaged by last year's floods cannot be fully repaired by the
targeted timeline.The work was initially delayed due to relief operations and
later because of procedural delays in the approval of schemes.The provincial
government proposed 76 schemes costing an estimated Rs14bn to repair various
dykes. However, the federal government provided only Rs5bn. Resultantly, the
province was constrained to repair 41 high-priority sites to avert further
disaster.

Such is the bureaucratic procedure that only 17 per cent of the targeted work
has been completed so far.The fact that needs to be considered is that the
repair and upgradation of dykes will not in itself guarantee full safety against
even floods of lower intensity. Historical data of floods in Sindh indicates
that last year's floods were not unprecedented in terms of their magnitude;
however, the scale of the disaster was.The Indus witnessed floods on a similar
scale in 1973, 1975, 1976, 1978, 1986, 1988 and 1992. Clearly, the breaches of
the dykes were not the sole cause of the devastation. In fact, the root cause of
last year's catastrophe was the irreversibly altered regime of the river. The
sustained flow of 1.1 million cusecs of water for 11 days at three Sindh
barrages corroborates the fact that the obliteration of the river's regime has
altered the flood pattern.If the real causes are not addressed, the treatment of
the physical infrastructure will leave the problem only half-solved.That is not
to deny that the repair of the crumbled infrastructure should be the top
priority, yet failing to contemplate other dimensions would amount to lack of
prescience.Three key factors would determine the scale of future floods in the
Indus river basin - climate change, deforestation in watershed areas and flood
plains, and tampering with the river's regime. If these long-term issues are not
addressed, the Indus river basin will remain under the perennial peril of
disasters, oscillating between drought and flood cycles. The unpredictability of
weather is an attribute of climate change. Considering that the problem has no
localised solutions, adaptation is the only option. This involves a mixture of
biological, social and technical responses. Alterations in flood plains through
climatically insensitive engineering works have introduced an irreversible
distortion in the river regime to which floods are a sequel.In the years before
Tarbela Dam was built, Sindh would receive a flood of 300,000 cusecs almost
every year - and 500,000 cusecs in a number of years. This flood pattern shaped
the river regime over the decades and all social and administrative systems were
developed in consonance with it.However, in the post-Tarbela years, high- or
medium-level floods became a rare phenomenon. This exposed vast swathes of
katcha land for human settlements and agriculture. According to some estimates,
approximately 500,000 acres of katcha land is under human settlement in Sindh.
The population bulge in settled areas, coupled with a toothless administrative
apparatus, has resulted in massive encroachments on the flood plains. Other
structures such as bridges and barrages have choked flood plains with obstacles,
interfering with the natural stream. Illegal local dykes to protect agricultural
activity on the flood plains has also disturbed the river and caused it to swell
with high waves near flood-protection embankments.Since flood disasters are
seldom examined from these aspects, most of the discourse is confined to
administrative failures, cloaking the fundamental causes of the cataclysm.
Before embarking on further engineering solutions such as big dams, the impact
of existing engineering structures should be studied. Climate change can
potentially render most engineering solutions antediluvian very soon. The
conventional approach of solving problems through complicated solutions will
only aggravate the situation. Prudence is required.Pakistan's once enviably
well-managed watershed apparatus is now in ruins. Unbridled deforestation in the
upper reaches and in the plains of Sindh and Punjab has deprived the river of
its wave-absorbing shield. Pakistan is amongst those countries that have the
lowest levels of forest cover. According to some estimates, the country loses
some 66,718 acres of forest cover annually. Approximately 5,683 acres of
riverine forest is lost every year. Riverine forests not only retard the
momentum of floods, they also stabilise the riverbed and river banks.In recent
decades, these forests have been erased by the timber mafia in hilly areas and
by land grabbers in the plains. In Sindh and Punjab, forests were systematically
chopped down to clear land for agriculture and new settlements. Any serious
effort to regenerate the lost forest does not seem afoot either. Yet a flood
plain bereft of forest cover will remain susceptible to floods.While taking the
short-term steps, the government ought to mull over long-term remedies too. The
Himalayan glacial ecosystem is negotiating its way through a climatic onslaught
and increased melting is likely to generate even more ferocious floods in the
catchments of Pakistan, India, Bangladesh and Nepal. This merits the
consideration of integrated solutions. Published by HT Syndication with
permission from Sunday Times. For any query with respect to this article or any
other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2011 Sunday Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 315 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                            August 7, 2013 Wednesday

Pakistan: Floods played havoc in 50 countries in five centuries

LENGTH: 1278 words

DATELINE: LAHORE


LAHORE, Aug. 7 -- Still reeling from the adverse effects of the deadly July 2010
floods, which had claimed over 2,000 lives and had directly affected about 20
million people mostly by destruction of property, livelihood and infrastructure,
Pakistan is again bracing up for yet another catastrophe of similar nature in
2013.

In 2010, approximately one-fifth of Pakistan's total land was underwater as
heavy monsoon rains had lashed the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Sindh, Punjab and
Balochistan regions, making the then United Nations Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon publicly state that the flood was the worst disaster he had ever seen.

Just to recap, Ban Ki-moon had initially asked for $460 million for emergency
relief, though only 20 percent of the relief funds requested had been received
by August 15, 2010, mainly because the donors were unhappy with the poor
handling of international donations and charities after the October 8, 2005,
earthquake had rocked the country.

Remember, the World Health Organisation had reported in 2010 that over 10
million Pakistanis were forced to drink unsafe water due to the floods.

Pakistan's Finance Ministry, Ball State University of America's Centre for
Business and Economic Research, numerous local and international media outlets
had estimated three years ago that the total economic impact of the 2010 floods
might well have been to the tune of $43 billion, which included $4 billion
damage to structures and over $500 million wheat crop losses.

History tells us that the1950 Pakistan floods had killed 2,910 people while the
1992 Pakistan and Northern India monsoons had left 1,834 human bodies flowing
with the ruthless water tides.

A cumbersome research conducted by 'media' reveals that during the last five
centuries or so, over 50 countries-both developed and under-developed- have been
badly hit by massive flooding, resulting in huge loss of life, damage to
buildings, bridges, ruining and choking of sewerage systems, roadways and
canals.

It goes without saying that floods anywhere across the globe have also
subsequently led to the spread of various waterborne diseases like typhoid,
diarrhoea and cholera.

The countries that have experienced worst flooding since the 16th century
include China, Norway, Holland, Japan, United States, Spain, Bangladesh, India,
Indonesia, Pakistan, Algeria, Italy, Haiti, Dominican Republic, North Korea,
Mozambique, Colombia, South Korea, Tunisia, Portugal, Malawi, Brazil, Argentina,
Yemen, Mexico, Sudan, Nigeria, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Kenya, Hungary, Jordan,
Tajikistan, Ecuador, El Salvador, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Poland, Czech Republic,
Lebanon, Thailand, Malaysia, Guatemala, North Vietnam, Germany, Denmark,
Venezuela, Iran, Russia, Central Europe, Peru, Nepal, Afghanistan, Philippines,
Cambodia, Myanmar, Laos, Belgium and United Kingdom.

Here follows a list of some of the deadliest global floods that have caused most
number of fatalities during the last 500 years or so:

According to an American commercial broadcasting television network National
Broadcasting Company (NBC)'s research report "Worst natural disasters in
history," the 1931 China floods had led to a death toll ranging between 2.5
million and 3.7 million-the largest loss of human lives ever recorded in a
single natural calamity of the kind.

A glance through books like 'The World's Largest Floods, past and present: Their
causes and magnitudes' by Jim O'Connor and John Costa (published by the US
Department of Interior and US Geological Survey), one finds that the 1887 Yellow
River (Huang He) flood in China had claimed between 0.9 million and 02 million
lives and the 1938 flooding in the same Chinese river had made between 0.5
million and 0.7 million humans perish.

In 1975, the Banqiao Dam failure in China had claimed 86,000 lives while another
145,000 had died owing to subsequent diseases. The net death tally was thus put
at 231,000.

The December 26, 2004, Indian Ocean tsunami or the Indonesian tsunami had
triggered a series of devastating tsunamis along the coasts of most landmasses
bordering the Indian Ocean, killing over 230,000 people in 14 countries.

The disaster had also inundated coastal communities with waves rising up to 30
metres. It was one of the deadliest natural disasters in the recorded history.
Indonesia was the hardest-hit country, followed by Sri Lanka, India and
Thailand.

The 1935 Yangtze River flood in China had caused 145,000 deaths.

The 6,418 kilometre-long Yangtze River is the longest river in Asia and the
third longest in the world, draining one-fifth of the land area of the People's
Republic of China. Along with the Yellow River, the Yangtze is the most
important river in the history, culture and economy of China.

Holland has had some worst floods during the last five centuries.

For example, the St Felix's Flood of November 1530, over one hundred thousand
people were washed away by the merciless waters.

According to Audrey Lambert's book "The Making of the Dutch landscape: A
historical geography of the Netherlands," a large part of the country was
literally washed away in this disaster.

Similarly, the 1971, the Hanoi and the Red River Delta flood in North Vietnam
had led to a loss of over one hundred thousand lives.

The 1911 Yangtze River flood in China again had killed 145,000 people.

The 1949 Eastern Guatemala flood had sent over 40,000 people to their graves.

The 1939 Tianjin floods in China had left 20,000 dead, and the 1954 Yangtze
floods had killed another 30,000 Chinese.

In 1980, the Sichuan floods in China had killed some 6,200 people, and the 1951
Manchuria floods in this country had accounted for 4,800 precious lives.

The 1989 Sichuan floods in China had killed 3,814 people while another 1,723
people had lost their lives in the 1991 floods.

Similarly, some 1,348 more Chinese lives were lost during the 1995 flooding,
more than 1,100 Chinese had met unnatural flood-related deaths in 2004, and over
1,100 had to perish due to the same cause in 2010.

The North Sea flood of 1953 had killed 2,142 people in Belgium, England and
Holland (combined). The 1974 Bangladesh monsoon rain had claimed 28,700 lives.

The 1961 Bihar floods in India had killed over 1,000 people.

The 1999 Vargas mudslide in Venezuela had killed 20,006 people.

The 1927 Algerian floods had killed between 2,000 and 3,000 humans.

The 1963 Vajont Dam flood in Italy had killed 1,909 people. The Great Iran flood
of 1954 had killed 10,000 Iranians.

The 1824 St Petersburg flood in Russia had washed away 10,000 Russians and the
2013 North India floods had killed 6,500 hapless inhabitants of the country.

The 1968 Rajasthan and Gujarat monsoon rains in India had killed 4,892 humans
and the 1943 Rajputana floods had claimed between 5,000 and 10,000 lives.

The 1998 Eastern India, Bangladesh monsoon rains had killed 3, 838 people.

In United States, which has also been a home to many water-related tragedies,
the 1889 Johnstown Flood had killed 2,209 people.

The 1953 Japan flood had left 2,566 dead and the 2009 Jeddah Torrential rains in
Saudi Arabia had killed 123 people who had found themselves struggling in the
middle of the flooded areas.

Japan was also struck by floods in 1868, 1938 and 1957, which had collectively
claimed around 3,000 lives.

The 1962 Barcelona flash floods in Spain had killed over 900 people.

In 2011, some 894 Brazilians had succumbed to floods.

The 2006 North Koran floods had led to 844 deaths and the 1941 floods in Peru
had claimed 5,000 lives. And the list goes on

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 316 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                            August 20, 2013 Tuesday

Pakistan: Indus River in high flood at Taunsa, Flash flood hits Sindh

LENGTH: 610 words

DATELINE: LAHORE


LAHORE, Aug. 20 -- The Indus River was flowing in a high flood at Taunsa and its
water level is falling.

It is in a medium flood at Chashma and Kalabagh and the water level is falling
at both points? while it is in low flood at Tarbela and water is falling.

According to the Flood Warning Centre Lahore? the Chenab River is in medium
flood at Qadirabad. The water level is falling and it is in low flood at Marala?
Tarrammo and Khanki and water level is falling all these points.

The Sutlej River is flowing in a low flood at Ganda Singh Wala and Suleimanki.
Its water level is falling at both these points.

High flood in River Chenab is likely to enter in the limits of Multan and
Muzaffargarh districts today and administrations of both districts have made all
necessary arrangements to meet any situation.

District Administration Multan has set up sixteen relief camps and four
companies of Pak Army have been deployed for relief and rescue work.

One thousand tents and medicines along with food items have also been arranged
for flood affected people.

Due to the ongoing monsoon rains in the catchment areas, Spillways of Tarbela
Dam were opened on Sunday as the water level started rising rapidly.

Sirens of danger were blown before opening the spillways. People living in the
vicinity of the dam have been directed to shift to safer places.

Meanwhile, the flash flood of River Indus has now entered Sindh. The Provincial
Disaster Management Authority told that the flood water has inundated thousands
of acres of land in Katcha area of Ghotki District. The District government has
sought help from the PDMA to evacuate the people marooned in flood water.

Flash floods in rivers and nullahs of Punjab have played havoc in various areas
of the province adversely hurting the daily life besides depriving people of
their life long belongings and leaving them homeless.

The flash floods besides disrupting the routine life have also adversely damaged
the communication links as various areas remained cut off without shelter, food
commodities medicines and other basic life amenities.

The flash flood at Tarimo Headworks submerged Jhang-Sargodha Road near Pakaywala
closing it for traffic. More than 50 persons trapped in the flooded village
Lohaywala were rescued after hectic efforts of concerned authorities.

At least 50 villages of Chinot were cut off with the urban areas due to onrush
of flood, while the standing crops in Shorkot suburban areas were severely
damaged by flash flood.

Nine villages near Multan also were inundated as water lever in river Chenab
mounted. Pak Army contingents, Rescue 1122 and Civil Defence volunteers were
busy in relief and rescue works in the flood-affected areas.

On the other hand, thousands of acres of cultivated land in 72 villages of
Hafizabad and Qadirabad was adversely hit by Chenab river flash flood. Sialkot
remained flooded by overflowing Nullah Aik water, while several villages of
Narowal and Pasrur remained marooned by Nullah Dek overflowed.

In Dera Ghazi Khan, flood water from River Sindh has entered hundreds of
villages. According to sources 470,000 cusec of water passed from Taunsa during
the last 24 hours. Overflow water of River Sindh gushed into villages of Dera
Ghazi Khan. At least 0.5 million people of DG Khan villages moved towards the
safer places and in the relief camps.

According to the ISPR of district Multan, two companies of Pakistan Army have
been deployed for the victims of flood affected areas

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2013 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 317 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                             May 22, 1999 Saturday
                                  Late Edition

Flood cover still in drought;
Weekend Money

BYLINE: Vita Palestrant

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 89

LENGTH: 1157 words


Flood mapping is just one difficulty for insurers wading through the murky
waters of insurance coverage products yet to be made available.

The issue of flood insurance was thrust back onto the agenda of NSW insurers
last August when angry victims of major flooding in Wollongong realised flood
damage was excluded from their general insurance policies. Since then, there has
been much talk and some action.

The question still is whether NSW policyholders will be able to buy policies
with flood cover, as they can elsewhere in the country where flood damage is
offered either as part of the policy or as an option for an additional premium.

NSW home and contents policies generally cover certain defined events such as
theft or burglary, fire or explosion, and lightning, earthquake, storm or
tempest damage. Water damage is covered only when it results from water pouring
in from above.

The State's consumers forced the issue last year when Wollongong was flooded and
victims had their claims refused. After much protest, the NRMA, the State's
largest insurer, reversed its decision and made ex-gratia payments, saying it
was "moved by public appeals".

The NRMA later said it would seek a summit to work with other insurers and with
government bodies to find a "workable solution" to the lack of flood cover.

Other insurers followed its lead in Wollongong. GIO, the State's second-largest
insurer, announced changes retrospectively covering flood to the tune of 20 per
cent of the sum insured. So far GIO is the only insurer to cover flooding in
NSW, as an interim measure. It has said, however, that it is worried that the
NRMA may have set a dangerous precedent and opened up the situation for people
in places like Bathurst, Nyngan, Coffs Harbour, Tamworth and Narrabri who have
been affected by flood.

Mark Kachor, the executive director of Rice Kachor Research, says the Wollongong
floodwater ran down from the escarpment after heavy rains and the question
revolved around the definition of flood. Some hydrologists said insurers didn't
have to pay while others said they did.

Nevertheless, Kachor says there is now some talk in the industry that insurers
will be offering flood cover. "It's a very difficult issue because many houses
are not subjected to this peril while others are. It becomes an industry issue;
either you have flood cover for everyone so it's inexpensive or you have it as
an optional extra - then it is quite a bit dearer. Those more likely to want it
as an option are those more likely to suffer floods."

Rod Frail, the executive manager of corporate affairs at the Insurance Council
of Australia, confirms that a couple of companies have indicated they may offer
flood cover by the end of this year.

Flood cover has been traditionally excluded, he says, because the industry has
had great difficulty gaining access to accurate information about flood-prone
areas. Many councils have poor quality flood mapping and made poor planning
decisions in the past.

Says Frail: "Councils don't encourage people to ask for flood mapping and some
councils don't have flood mapping, with a result that people are buying in these
areas unaware there is a problem."

He says there has been a reluctance among successive governments for flood
information to be turned into maps.

"The data is there but there was an outcry when this was done along the George's
River. Property values dropped, residents didn't want the information to get out
and councils were threatened with legal action. Residents threatened to sue if
they published flood maps on the basis that when they bought the properties they
didn't know it was flood-prone."

He says the Insurance Council wants access to accurate information held by
councils and government so that it can be passed on not only to the insurance
companies but also to residents.

"We need to get better information on what the flood-prone areas are. If the
insurers take a risk they have to be able to accurately assess it. We need
councils to look at the sorts of planning decisions they make and the recent
events in Wollongong underline that."

The Insurance Council has a blueprint for how councils should put their flood
information together. "The insurance industry is doing everything it can to
impress on all levels of government the need for better mapping."

The insurer that got the ball rolling, the NRMA, has not yet introduced flood
cover.

Annette Torrington, the business development manager at the NRMA, says the NRMA
is reviewing the situation as promised after the Wollongong flood.

"At the moment we have nothing. Even though we paid the claims it was because of
the nature of the flood. It is still excluded from the policy. But, as always,
we are reviewing things."

The review is a "fairly major project", because some properties are at higher
risk than others.

"The question of premiums is a big issue. Do you do it for everyone or offer it
as an option? Some in the marketplace may need it but then it's very expensive.
We're working through all of that."

She says one of the companies that covers flood insurance in Queensland offers
it as an option. "But it's very expensive if you live anywhere near a flood
zone."

The dilemma is: "Would consumers rather not have it or choose it as an option if
they feel at risk. Those that don't need it may feel they are wasting their
money." All those issues need to be researched first, she says.

Since GIO changed track, Ian Williams, the GIO's general manager for personal
insurance products, says all its policyholders are covered for flood.

"What we did with Wollongong is, we made it retrospective for all policyholders.
As policies are being renewed, flood cover is being included in the policy
document."

This is, however, an interim arrangement. Policyholders will be able to decide
whether they want it as part of their cover, or not, once GIO has completed its
research. "We're doing a fair bit of work on it right now. It will be available
by December this year. But we're not that fussed about it [timing] because we
want to get it right."

He says GIO will "price the product to where the risk will be".

HOT TIP

Water damage is usually only covered in insurance policies when it results from
water pouring in from above.

DEFINITION

Flood mapping

Shows region-by-region information on which areas are prone to flooding.

INSURERS' ISSUES

Insurers have two hurdles to cross when it comes to flood cover.

The first is getting access to accurate information about flood - prone areas
and flood mapping from councils and government so they can assess the risk.

The second is how to price the cover and still keep everyone happy. Only a
minority of homes are in flood - prone areas.

If flood cover is included as a defined event for everyone, those consumers not
at risk may resent paying more for something they don't need. If the insurer
offers it as an optional extra, those at greatest risk are most likely to take
it and premiums will be a good deal dearer.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ILLUS: PHOTO: By Peter lorimer

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 1999 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 318 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                             August 28, 2017 Monday

Ways to improve flood insurance

SECTION: A; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 711 words


The current National Flood Insurance Program reauthorization expires Sept. 30.
As flood insurance is an important issue for the North Dakota Insurance
Department, for our state and for the thousands of consumers in North Dakota who
are affected by the decisions being made at a federal level regarding flood
insurance, I want to share a few thoughts I have and recommendations I've
recently made to Sens. John Hoeven, R-N.D., and Heidi Heitkamp, D-N.D.

Currently, the NFIP is seeking to reduce the costs and consequences of flooding
for policyholders while at the same time encouraging flood mitigation and
decreasing our dependence on federal disaster assistance. Given these
objectives, Congress faces a real challenge in trying to maintain a balance
between improving the financial solvency of the program and reducing taxpayer
exposure while maintaining affordability for the consumer.

First and foremost, the North Dakota Insurance Department fully supports
legislative efforts that facilitate the growth of a state-regulated private
flood insurance market to help provide consumers with more choices and coverage
potentially at more affordable prices. While the NFIP has historically served as
the primary source of flood coverage in the U.S., more sophisticated risk
mapping and modeling has been developed in recent years and is now generating
new interest among private insurers to provide such coverage.

NFIP reauthorization could be an opportunity to remove some of the barriers that
preclude the creation of a robust private flood insurance market. Opponents of
such a market are concerned that growth within the private flood insurance
market could lead to a "cherry picking" of the best risks by the private market.
This concern, however, is unfounded and represents a fundamental
misunderstanding of catastrophe insurance, which is largely driven by risk
concentration and high potential losses.

Hurricane Katrina and Superstorm Sandy, for example, resulted in unprecedented
losses to the NFIP because of the high number of insured properties that were
damaged. The NFIP was the sole "insurer" for both disasters and subsequently
sustained enormous losses. Allowing a more robust private market would have
helped spread that substantial risk and devastating loss across a broader
market.

Spreading the risk and adequately rating that risk has and will continue to work
in the property insurance world. A private market can actually help make the
NFIP more competitive and more sustainable.

The department also supports efforts being made that would clarify state
insurance regulators' authority over private flood insurance and provide a clear
definition of "private flood," therefore removing confusing language and
encouraging more insurers to enter the market. Facilitating the entry of
additional carriers into the market will provide consumers with access to
additional options for flood insurance products.

In addition to supporting the creation of a regulatory environment that allows
for a private flood insurance market, it is critical that reauthorization
legislation focus on increasing flood mitigation efforts. Encouraging investment
in flood prevention and preparedness measures is critical to minimizing the
impact of damage and economic loss.

The department supports mitigation discounts, such as premium discounts or
insurance rate reductions, to persons who build, rebuild or retrofit certain
residential properties to better resist flood events, along with legislation to
allow individuals to set aside funds in a tax-preferred savings account for
disaster mitigation and recovery expenses.

Finally, the department encourages legislative reforms that ensure accurate
flood mapping. FEMA needs to provide increased transparency regarding its
decision-making processes for developing and updating its flood maps along with
its approach to rate making so that policyholders understand their current flood
risk. Any reauthorization legislation should include strategies to increase
flood insurance usage, including facilitating opportunities to educate consumers
about flood insurance policy options and encouraging the purchase of flood
insurance for those outside of special flood hazard areas.

Jon Godfread is the state insurance commissioner.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2017 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 319 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                             August 28, 2017 Monday

Ways to improve flood insurance

SECTION: A; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 711 words


The current National Flood Insurance Program reauthorization expires Sept. 30.
As flood insurance is an important issue for the North Dakota Insurance
Department, for our state and for the thousands of consumers in North Dakota who
are affected by the decisions being made at a federal level regarding flood
insurance, I want to share a few thoughts I have and recommendations I've
recently made to Sens. John Hoeven, R-N.D., and Heidi Heitkamp, D-N.D.

Currently, the NFIP is seeking to reduce the costs and consequences of flooding
for policyholders while at the same time encouraging flood mitigation and
decreasing our dependence on federal disaster assistance. Given these
objectives, Congress faces a real challenge in trying to maintain a balance
between improving the financial solvency of the program and reducing taxpayer
exposure while maintaining affordability for the consumer.

First and foremost, the North Dakota Insurance Department fully supports
legislative efforts that facilitate the growth of a state-regulated private
flood insurance market to help provide consumers with more choices and coverage
potentially at more affordable prices. While the NFIP has historically served as
the primary source of flood coverage in the U.S., more sophisticated risk
mapping and modeling has been developed in recent years and is now generating
new interest among private insurers to provide such coverage.

NFIP reauthorization could be an opportunity to remove some of the barriers that
preclude the creation of a robust private flood insurance market. Opponents of
such a market are concerned that growth within the private flood insurance
market could lead to a "cherry picking" of the best risks by the private market.
This concern, however, is unfounded and represents a fundamental
misunderstanding of catastrophe insurance, which is largely driven by risk
concentration and high potential losses.

Hurricane Katrina and Superstorm Sandy, for example, resulted in unprecedented
losses to the NFIP because of the high number of insured properties that were
damaged. The NFIP was the sole "insurer" for both disasters and subsequently
sustained enormous losses. Allowing a more robust private market would have
helped spread that substantial risk and devastating loss across a broader
market.

Spreading the risk and adequately rating that risk has and will continue to work
in the property insurance world. A private market can actually help make the
NFIP more competitive and more sustainable.

The department also supports efforts being made that would clarify state
insurance regulators' authority over private flood insurance and provide a clear
definition of "private flood," therefore removing confusing language and
encouraging more insurers to enter the market. Facilitating the entry of
additional carriers into the market will provide consumers with access to
additional options for flood insurance products.

In addition to supporting the creation of a regulatory environment that allows
for a private flood insurance market, it is critical that reauthorization
legislation focus on increasing flood mitigation efforts. Encouraging investment
in flood prevention and preparedness measures is critical to minimizing the
impact of damage and economic loss.

The department supports mitigation discounts, such as premium discounts or
insurance rate reductions, to persons who build, rebuild or retrofit certain
residential properties to better resist flood events, along with legislation to
allow individuals to set aside funds in a tax-preferred savings account for
disaster mitigation and recovery expenses.

Finally, the department encourages legislative reforms that ensure accurate
flood mapping. FEMA needs to provide increased transparency regarding its
decision-making processes for developing and updating its flood maps along with
its approach to rate making so that policyholders understand their current flood
risk. Any reauthorization legislation should include strategies to increase
flood insurance usage, including facilitating opportunities to educate consumers
about flood insurance policy options and encouraging the purchase of flood
insurance for those outside of special flood hazard areas.

Jon Godfread is the state insurance commissioner.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2017 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 320 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                  The Guardian

                    November 19, 2014 Wednesday 12:36 PM GMT

Local authority flood defence funding cut by a third next year;
New cuts to councils' flood budgets in England will leave them under-resourced
and ill-prepared, say community groups

BYLINE: Damian Carrington

SECTION: ENVIRONMENT

LENGTH: 660 words


Funding for councils to deal with flooding has been slashed by a third by
ministers, prompting community groups and Labour to say the government is going
backwards on managing flood risk.

Last winter, the wettest on record, saw devastating flooding across the country
and forced David Cameron to reverse earlier cuts to flood defence budgets.

The revelation of the new cuts to council flood budgets in England comes as the
Met Office's three-month outlook indicates this winter is likely to be wetter
than average. The government's own report concluded in 2012 that flood risk is
rising due to climate change.

County councils and unitary authorities have legal responsibilities as Lead
Local Flood Authorities (LLFAs) such as playing "a lead role in emergency
planning and recovery after a flood event ". The responsibilities also include
creating flood risk management strategies, investigating the causes of
significant floods and raising local awareness, according to the Local
Government Association. But the £10m funding now set for 2015-16 is £5m less
than in the previous year.

"This is dire," said Paul Cobbing, chief executive of the National Flood Forum,
which represents community flood action groups. "LLFAs are at the heart of flood
risk management. They are already under-resourced and this puts flood risk
management backwards at the very point when a step change forwards is needed."

Mary Dhonau, a national flood campaigner, said: "Cameron stood there saying
'lessons will be learned' and ' money was no object ' and then ministers go and
make these sweeping cuts. He has clearly pressed the snooze button yet again and
gone back to sleep. LLFAs are very much on the frontline." She said the cuts
would mean job losses among council flood staff.

A spokeswoman for the Department of environment, food and rural affairs (Defra)
said: "The funding to LLFAs was always going to be initially higher in order to
allow them to gather information on local flood risk and understand how to
manage the risk. The planned reduction does not affect emergency planning and
recovery funding."

She added: "We absolutely recognise the importance of tackling flooding which is
why we are investing £3.2bn in flood management and defences. This is more than
ever before."

However, a National Audit Office (NAO) report published earlier in November
concluded flood spending had actually fallen by 10% under the coalition
government, increasing the risk of homes being flooded and leaving half the
nation's flood defences with "minimal" maintenance.

Furthermore, the NAO found that despite the higher initial funding, just 14% of
LLFAs had managed to publish their flood risk strategies since being required to
do so in 2011. "Their workload is absolutely enormous," said Dhonau.

Dan Rogerson, the Lib Dem flooding minister, said on 4 November : "With winter
on its way, we need local authorities to play their part in this and ensure they
are fully prepared to respond and give clear advice to residents and businesses
on how to plan for emergencies."

Maria Eagle, Labour's shadow environment secretary, said: "The public will be
looking to the government for assurances that we are better prepared for
flooding this winter than we were last year. The news [of LLFA budget cuts] will
do little to provide such assurances."

She said: "There is no doubt that flood risk management has gone backwards under
this government. David Cameron abandoned the last Labour government's robust
plans for reducing flood risk, slashed the budgets, crossed his fingers and
hoped for the best." The nation's preparedness for flooding is being debated in
parliament on Wednesday.

Climate change is increasing flood risk in Britain by driving more extreme
weather events. The government's official advisors, the Committee on Climate
Change, calculate there is a £500m hole in the government budget for flood risk
management, with damages of £3bn likely to be incurred in the future as a
result.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2014 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 321 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                             July 6, 2013 Saturday
                                 Early Edition

It's foolish to think worst flood is behind us

BYLINE: Jerry Osborn, Calgary Herald

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 936 words


How big a flood does it take to inspire homeowners to plant signs protesting
insurance-company policies, to generate arguments over whether the Stampede
should proceed, and to produce such outpourings of community spirit that Herald
columnist Kevin Brooker is almost euphoric about living in the flood zone? In
the case of the Elbow River, a pretty big one. In the case of the Bow River, a
not-so-big one.

Peak flow on the Bow River upstream of the Elbow was about 1,740 cubic metres
per second (cms). That makes the Bow flood somewhat bigger than the 1932 flood,
which peaked at 1,520 cms. But since the founding of Fort Calgary in 1875, there
have been two floods significantly greater than our recent flood, in 1879 and
1897. High-water marks allowed estimates of 2,265 cms for those floods. In
addition, there was a 1902 flood the same size as our recent flood, and a
handful of other floods in the early 20th century larger than the 2005 flood
peak of 790 cms.

What to make of these data? The lack of floods between 1932 and 2005 (and even
that was a piker) apparently was not due to construction of the small
power-generation dams upstream in the Bow basin, but rather to meteorological
luck: large flood-producing storms went north or south, but did not stall over
the Bow basin. Now it looks like they're back.

Meanwhile, statistical processing of the Bow River record establishes that the

recent flow of 1,740 cms is not a particularly rare event. The original flood
studies in Calgary, by Montreal Engineering, settled on an average recurrence
interval of 70 years for a Bow River flow of 2,270 cms. That would make our
recent Bow flood smaller than a 50-year flood.

The subsequent 1983 study by Alberta Environment, using different methods,
yielded a 100-year flood of 1,970 cms and a 50-year flood of 1,630. According to
this scheme, the recent Bow flood would be something intermediate, perhaps a
70ish-year flood.

Jerry Osborn This was not a huge, "unprecedented" flood except in terms of
damage, and that's not the river's doing. For huge, consider the "probable
maximum flood" in Calgary, generated virtually by Montreal Engineering, which
placed the worst meteorologically likely storm over the basin in the way that
would generate the most runoff. The result: 6,145 cms - three-and-ahalf times
bigger than our recent flood and eight times bigger than the 2005 flood.

As for the Elbow River, the 1983 study calculated 100-year floods of 883 cms
above Glenmore dam and 758 cms below the dam. The recent flood numbers were a
little above 600 above the dam and around 700 (available data are still
incomplete) below the dam. The Elbow flood was something less than the 100-year
variety.

In the long lull after 1932,

the city grew up with an increasingly dim memory of a flood hazard, gradually
losing track of the definition of floodplain: a plain that floods. Houses were
built in the most hazardous places, such as on point bars on the insides of
meander bends (think Bow Crescent) and adjacent to abandoned meander loops
(think Roxboro).

Outside of Calgary, the town of High River, which Municipal Affairs Minister
Doug Griffiths has described as "a collection bowl," expanded, although it was
still experiencing floods. In Canmore, town authorities allowed development on
an active mountain alluvial fan. I and other university teachers of applied
geology annually cite the Cougar Creek subdivision as one of the finest examples
in the world of inane mountain development.

The future may be worse than the past. For one thing, the recent flood shifts
the statistics; annual probability of any particular high flow will rise
slightly. Then there is the matter of climate change. The best way to get to the
heart of that is to avoid left-wing and right-wing vested interests and go
straight to two sources that are politically detached, but put a lot of effort
into figuring out what's happening. Those are the insurance industry and the
U.S. military. Both are banking on and preparing for more extreme weather
events, with shorter recurrence intervals, in the future.

There are solutions to the ever-expanding expense of flood relief; they are all
right there in the Groeneveld

report. But it's safe to say the province considers the solutions politically
unpalatable. Restricting floodplain development draws flak, whereas paying out
flood relief draws praise (even from Herald columnist Don Braid and Wildrose
Leader Danielle Smith!). But there is an interesting dilemma at play here.
Inundated floodplain residents accrue plenty of grief and misery, but not nearly
as much as they would if they paid their own way. They can't get overland-flow
insurance (the premiums would be too high, because living on the floodplain is
too risky) and most wouldn't be able to afford the river proximity if they
weren't subsidized by the rest of society in the form of disaster relief and/or
engineered flood protection.

In the United States, they are moving away from flood-relief payouts and toward
required insurance, but Canadian administrations are less inclined to disturb
the status quo.

So what does the future hold? More flooding, continued lack of overlandflow
insurance, higher premiums for sewer-backup insurance, and, ironically, more
people living on the floodplain. It wouldn't hurt to remember that the two
largest floods in history occurred 18 years apart. Immigration Minister Jason
Kenney has called the June flood a "once-in-a-century event," but that claim is
way premature. There's a lot more century to go.

Jerry Osborn is a professor of geology in the geoscience department at the
University of Calgary.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: / Jerry Osborn; Getty Images, Files;  Jerry Osborn says he and other
university teachers of applied geology annually cite Canmore's Cougar Creek
subdivision as one of the best examples in the world of inane mountain
development.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Opinion

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2013 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 322 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              China Business News

                        July 5, 2013 Friday 6:30 AM EST

People's Government of Jilin Province: Jilin Province Made Good Preparation in
Flood Control

LENGTH: 458  words


Beijing, July 5 -- In allusion to the rainfall and flood in 2013, the province's
flood control system made deployment ahead, assigned responsibilities,
strengthened measures, and carried out each work for flood control and drought
relief in a solid way. All localities, based on controlling big floods, fighting
against big droughts and reliving big disasters, actively deployed and was ready
to respond to any possible flood.



Last winter and spring, the climate was very special (abnormal) in Jilin
Province. The provincial Party committee and government attached great
importance (paid much attention) and made a special deployment. The provincial
flood control and drought relief headquarters has issued 15 documents early or
late, sent 10 working groups to carry out in-depth inspection and supervision in
all localities and urged all localities to make scientific scheduling and
reasonable storage and discharge. All localities took positive actions,
conducted in-depth investigation of risks, switched off 586 reservoirs with
super-normal operation for discharge, and made timely rectification of 258 river
flood embankments and dilapidated buildings affecting safety in the flood period
and 876 problematical and dangerous reservoirs to eliminate safety hazards. Up
to now, the province's emergency water conservancy projects have completed
construction investments of RMB 113 million.

In 2013, Jilin Province strengthened flood control materials and personnel
reserves. The province has totally reserved RMB 125 million worth of flood
control materials, implemented seven provincial professional rescue teams
consisting of 416 persons, set up 71 flood control expert groups consisting of
598 persons, revised and improved eight categories of 285 flood control and
drought fight plans, and formulated protection plans for in-progress and
dangerous projects in the flood season. In addition, the province has
strengthened the basic work of flood control and drought fight and developed the
provincial water conservancy meteorological and hydrological information sharing
system to achieve sharing of meteorological information and real-time hydrology
information and enabling real-time check of rainfall information of more than
2,600 rainfall stations and basic information of river embankments and reservoir
in the province; established a flood control and drought fight supervision
system and issued the "Implementing Rules for Jilin Province on Flood Control
and Drought Fight Supervision". So far, the province has made good preparation
for flood control and all levels of flood control departments have repaired and
maintained emergency and relief equipment to ensure it to be available for
scheduling and using in the great flood period.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2013 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 323 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              China Business News

                        July 8, 2013 Monday 6:30 AM EST

People's Government of: Jilin Province Made Good Preparation in Flood Control

LENGTH: 450  words


Beijing, July 8 -- In allusion to the rainfall and flood in 2013, the province's
flood control system made deployment ahead, assigned responsibilities,
strengthened measures, and carried out each work for flood control and drought
relief in a solid way. All localities, based on controlling big floods, fighting
against big droughts and reliving big disasters, actively deployed and was ready
to respond to any possible flood.



Last winter and spring, the climate was abnormal in Jilin Province. The
provincial Party committee and government paid much attention and made a special
deployment. The provincial flood control and drought relief headquarters has
issued 15 documents early or late, sent 10 working groups to carry out in-depth
inspection and supervision in all localities and urged all localities to make
scientific scheduling and reasonable storage and discharge. All localities took
positive actions, conducted in-depth investigation of risks, switched off 586
reservoirs with super-normal operation for discharge, and made timely
rectification of 258 river flood embankments and dilapidated buildings affecting
safety in the flood period and 876 problematical and dangerous reservoirs to
eliminate safety hazards. Up to now, the province's emergency water conservancy
projects have completed construction investments of RMB 113 million.

In 2013, Jilin Province strengthened flood control materials and personnel
reserves. The province has totally reserved RMB 125 million worth of flood
control materials, implemented seven provincial professional rescue teams
consisting of 416 persons, set up 71 flood control expert groups consisting of
598 persons, revised and improved eight categories of 285 flood control and
drought fight plans, and formulated protection plans for in-progress and
dangerous projects in the flood season. In addition, the province has
strengthened the basic work of flood control and drought fight and developed the
provincial water conservancy meteorological and hydrological information sharing
system to achieve sharing of meteorological information and real-time hydrology
information and enabling real-time check of rainfall information of more than
2,600 rainfall stations and basic information of river embankments and reservoir
in the province; established a flood control and drought fight supervision
system and issued the "Implementing Rules for Jilin Province on Flood Control
and Drought Fight Supervision". So far, the province has made good preparation
for flood control and all levels of flood control departments have repaired and
maintained emergency and relief equipment to ensure it to be available for
scheduling and using in the great flood period.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2013 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 324 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              India Insurance News

                      July 23, 2014 Wednesday 6:30 AM EST

InsuraMatch Launches Flood Insurance Portal

LENGTH: 551  words


July 23 -- US-based InsuraMatch issued the following news release:

New Jersey home owners may obtain National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
coverage through InsuraMatch, which is part of the Plymouth Rock Group of
Companies.

In the coming weeks and months, the new site will expand its coverage areas to
New York, Pennsylvania and nationally.

"Our mission is to help people make good decisions about their insurance," said
Larry Pentis, Chief Executive Officer of InsuraMatch, which is based in Boston.
"We're starting with flood insurance because regulation is undergoing a lot of
change, and no one has really stepped up to help people navigate what can be an
overwhelming process to get into the right plan. So we invested to develop
really helpful online resources, got access to FEMA-backed insurance, and
trained a specialized group of flood insurance experts to make it a lot easier."


InsuraMatch offers flood insurance policies for property owners in high-risk
flood zones, and competitive rates and coverage for those who live in lower-risk
flood areas.

InsuraMatch has partnered with National Flood Services to provide access to the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), which is managed by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), to provide both building and contents flood
insurance coverage.

InsuraMatch offers a full range of online resources for those seeking quality
flood insurance, including:

* Instant and customized flood risk mapping

* 24/7 personalized flood insurance quotes

* Articles and other resources

* FAQs and tips to help get the right coverage at the lowest cost

* Option to schedule a call with a flood expert for a free evaluation

In addition to online resources, InsuraMatch is fully staffed with New
Jersey-based, licensed insurance agents who have personally witnessed the
devastation of major flooding events, including Superstorm Sandy in 2012.

InsuraMatch agents will provide a free flood analysis, quotes, and can sign you
up for the National Flood Insurance Program. Agents may be reached at
800-625-9051 from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. ET Mon-Fri, and 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Saturday.

Nationally, flooding is the leading cause of property damage and about 1 in 4
claims are made by property owners who are in low-risk areas. Last year, there
were 42 major flood disasters across the U.S. The typical flood insurance claim
averages $42,000, according to federal statistics. Unfortunately, many people
find out too late that their home insurance doesn't provide coverage for damage
from flood.

Recent major flooding events, including Hurricane Katrina and Superstorm Sandy,
underscore the need for flood insurance. Flood insurance is required by your
lender if you live in a high-risk flood zone, but many property owners in
lower-risk flood areas are adding flood coverage. A policy in a low- to
medium-flood risk zone can cost as little as $11 per month. Now as the 2014
hurricane season enters its second month, InsuraMatch plans to educate consumers
about coverage, including that there is a 30-day wait period before flood
insurance coverage begins unless you need it for a home purchase closing.

InsuraMatch is part of The Plymouth Rock Group of Companies, which writes or
manages more than $1 billion in personal and commercial auto and homeowner's
insurance.

Source: InsuraMatch

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2014 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 325 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              India Insurance News

                      January 20, 2015 Tuesday 6:30 AM EST

Launch of Campaign for Flood Free Homes

LENGTH: 556  words


Jan. 20 -- Association of British Insurers issued the following news release:

The campaign for Flood Free Homes has today been launched by the Association of
British Insurers, supported by Friends of the Earth, Know Your Flood Risk,
National Flood Forum, and the Property Care Association's Flood Protection
Group.

The aim of the campaign is to raise the issue of long term flood defence
investment and land and water management.

That is why we are campaigning for:

* INVEST. By 2025 1 billion per year to be spent managing flood risk in order to
keep pace with climate change.

* ADAPT. A zero tolerance of inappropriate new developments in areas at risk of
flooding.

* PLAN. Cross party consensus on ambitious long term solutions that manage all
types of flood risk.

How to get involved and find out more information:

* Visit the campaign website www.floodfreehomes.org.uk

* Follow us on Twitter @FloodFreeHomes

* Like us on Facebook Facebook.com/floodfreehomes2025

* Email us floodfreehomes@abi.org.uk

Flooding has long been recognised as the greatest natural threat the UK faces.
With Environment Agency data showing around 2 million homes in England and Wales
at flood risk now from the rivers and sea, with over 500,000 of these at
'moderate' risk or greater, and around 2.4 million additional homes at risk of
surface water flooding, we know this is a serious problem facing the country
today.

Without action to reduce the risk across the UK, the effect on our homes,
businesses, communities, infrastructure and way of life is potentially
devastating.

Huw Evans, Deputy Director General at the ABI, said:

"The need for this campaign to address the UK's rising flood threat has never
been more important.  No action is not an option. Last winter's floods
highlighted the trauma and devastation flooding brings.  How we manage our land
and water has to become central to government decision making across the UK,
whoever is in power.

"Without adequate long-term investment in flood defence protection that reflects
the increasing threat, a zero tolerance towards building in flood risk areas and
political agreement, too many communities will continue to live with the
constant fear of flooding."

Guy Shrubsole, Friends of the Earth climate campaigner, said:

"With climate change pushing up flood risk, it's vital that the government
massively ramps up its investment in flood defences and stops building homes on
floodplains. It's not right that the human and economic costs of climate change
are pushed onto those most vulnerable to flooding - we need to tackle this huge
problem together."

Paul Cobbing, Chief Executive of the National Flood Forum, said:

"Flooding destroys lives as well a property.  Managing flood risk should be a
national priority across Government, with everyone playing their part and we
still have a long way to go."

Mary Dhonau, Chair of the Flood Protection Group Property Care Association and
Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk Campaign, said:

"Extreme weather events are becoming too common place to be ignored, flooding is
the biggest natural threat faced by the UK. We urgently need a cross party
consensus for managing floods, one that will address all forms of flood risk,
one with an ambitious  long term goal that will embrace innovation and
investment to reduce flood risk.

Source: Association of British Insurers

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2015 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 326 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                             Kashmir Times (India)

                            October 4, 2014 Saturday

The price of lessons unlearnt

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: Jammu


Jammu, Oct. 4 -- The Hindu festival of Rakshabandhan was never a Kashmiri Pandit
event. Instead, they celebrate zarm satam, which marks the onset of cooler
weather. And just after that, Kashmir gets rains, which bring floods in their
wake. So, the festival also has rituals associated with the river. Around that
time, the mosques too reverberate with incantations seeking the protection of
crops. Both are instances of following the ancient practice of trying to tame
the fury of nature through prayers.

To placate the Jhelum, which is venerated as the sustainer of life in Kashmir,
it was given the status of mother, whose birthday was celebrated every year. The
normally placid river is the only outlet in the Valley that drains out water
from at least five major sub-basins, which bring in glacial melts and join the
Jhelum at various points. Beyond Sopore town, the waters flow from the mountain
bowl of Kashmir towards the Punjab plains.

Floods occur when the water flow due to continuous rainfall in the catchment
areas exceeds the river's carrying capacity. This time, five days of incessant
rain caused the river to swell to enormous levels, causing destruction on an
unprecedented scale.

Kashmir has always been expecting and preparing for floods. The traditional
knowledge on floods had been processed into a protocol of precautionary measures
at least by the early 19th century. After the 1902 floods, village headmen were
asked to oversee the raised flood-protection platforms (bunds) that run along
streams and rivers. The local community would invariably be involved in
repairing and strengthening the bunds and guarding them during floods.

The canals in the Valley, too, have had the dual purpose of irrigation and flood
control. A flood-spill channel was constructed in 1905 to divert excess waters
that would otherwise inundate Srinagar.

A flood control wing was created in the state in the early 20th century and
subsequently upgraded to a department. Until the 1980s, there used to be
functional District Flood Committees (DFC), headed by the deputy commissioner
and with a senior engineer as the secretary. The DFCs used to hold regular
meetings and after spring, flood rehearsals would be undertaken in every
district.

The state had a flood manual much before the rest of the country. It detailed
how the administration should respond to various levels gauged at the Sangam, an
upstream location in Anantnag. A flood alert at Sangam entailed setting up of
control rooms throughout the administrative units in Kashmir, which would
marshal supplies such as sandbags required for filling the breaches.

It was a prime responsibility of the state administration to strengthen the
bunds and protect the flood channels and canals. These assets were regularly
inspected and protected by the state, which also employed bund-watchers.

How much the state machinery has moved away from this time-tested protocol is
evident from just one example. The flood control department has been trumpeting
a 2010 report that had predicted a massive flood and inundation of Srinagar. The
department was given Rs 97 crore to restore the flood channel to its installed
capacity of 16,000 cusecs from the current reduced capacity of 6,000 cusecs.
Under this project, while the channel was being dredged, a fully macadamised
causeway was constructed on its bed close to its origin at Wazir Bagh. This
causeway hampered the flow in the channel, created a reverse flow and breached
it, resulting in water rushing into the uptown colonies. This criminal act
speaks volumes about the callousness and incompetence of the state
administration.

Indeed, Kashmir has never been so unprepared in facing floods. We are told that
nobody anticipated such a fury. Srinagar was flooded on 7 September. Facebook
was replete with warnings from 3 September. A post by one of my friends read:
"My sense of things here tells me that we are in for a major flood." The
weatherman gave precise forecasts of heavy rains for five days. If only anyone
in the administration had the time, inclination and sense of responsibility,
Srinagar would have been saved from the horrors inflicted by the flood, if not
the flood per se.

-(First published in Tehelka Magazine)

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Kashmir Times. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2014 Kashmir Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 327 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                Himalayan Times

                             July 26, 2016 Tuesday

Topics: Flood control

BYLINE: Khilendra Basnyat

LENGTH: 397  words


Flood is the result of excessive rain or snowmelt. It is one of the natural
disasters in Nepal.

Steep mountain slopes, poor land use practices and acute shortage of firewood
are contributing more to floods in Nepal every year.

The damage is increasing mainly due to human action toward disturbing the
ecological balance and human inaction and flood preparedness and prevention.

The past experience in many parts of the world has shown that the structural
flood control measures as a means of reducing flood damage have been effective
for medium and small-sized floods; but they are of little value for the control
of every large and rare events.

The damage can be much more disastrous if the structure fails.

Till now, the general conception of accomplishing the prevention and safeguard
of flood loss has been the structural control measures, which are mainly the
construction of dams or dykes to regulate or control the flood flow.

However, the basic question here is whether the structural flood control
methods, which are favored for many years, are fully satisfactory or not.

The major constraint associated with structural flood control methods are the
increasing cost of construction and the rising environmental concern. The
channelization of flood flow at upstream can cause detrimental effect by
increasing flood peaks in downstream flood plains.

The construction of dams can have some value only if the benefit is shared in a
regional basis with neighboring countries since the flood protection with this
approach is useful for areas much more downstream.

The magnitude of floods directly depends on the rainfall capacity of watersheds.
Hence, the best approach to reduce the flood peaks would be to conserve the
water where it falls.

The massive deforestation and the unscientific land use are believed to be the
main reason behind increasing flood peaks in recent years. The solution lies in
increasing the rainwater retention capacity of the watershed by formulating and
implementing proper management policies.

Actually, effective watershed management is possible only if the land users are
willing to cooperate well.

If they realize that the top soil is vital for better production and if they
protect it by consuming the rainwater falling on their farms, the result would
be better than what the governments of many countries could achieve by spending
huge funds in flood control.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2016 Himalayan Times, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 328 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                         Morning Star (Wilmington, NC)

                           November 4, 1999, Thursday

Applications double for flood insurance

BYLINE: BETTIE FENNELL, Staff Writer

SECTION: Local/State; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 572 words


Applications for federal flood insurance have more than doubled in North
Carolina and Virginia, since floodwaters from Hurricane Floyd caused millions of
dollars in damage and left thousands of people homeless and without insurance to
cover their losses.

The majority of applicants live in moderate- to low-risk zones, said Mary Beth
Cramer, a State Farm spokesman. Communities that participate in the National
Flood Insurance Program are designated as being in certain zones, based on the
level of risk. Moderate- to low-risk areas are in the 500-year flood zone, she
said.

"I know our Raleigh agents were very busy and they weren't flooded," she said.
"They were just watching all those poor people in Greenville and Tarboro."

Hurricane Floyd dumped 20 inches of rain in Southeastern North Carolina.

Generally, State Farm doesn't insure people who live outside flood zones, Ms.
Cramer said, because they don't apply.

"If you are not in a flood plain, the likelihood of being flooded is low," she
said.

The new applications for flood insurance indicate people are rethinking the need
for it, she said.

A misconception by many property owners is that they must be in a flood zone to
be able to buy flood insurance. But people can buy flood insurance regardless of
where they live.

"For less than $ 400 (a year), an individual may get up to $ 100,000 worth of
flood insurance protection," said Wayne Goodson, a spokesman for the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. "That's very little to pay for peace of mind,
because North Carolinians know better than anyone that floods can hit most
anywhere."

Even streams on mountaintops can overflow their banks and flood nearby
structures, he said.

"People can buy insurance no matter where they are, provided they are in a
community that participates in the National Flood Insurance Program and are in
good standing," Mr. Goodson said.

People who live outside flood zones rarely ask Walker Taylor IV about buying
flood insurance.

"It's like earthquake insurance. It's available. We're not in a quake zone. If
you're not in a flood zone, you don't think about flood insurance," said Mr.
Taylor, co-owner of Walker Taylor Agency. "You can buy it if you live on the top
of Mount Mitchell if you want."

But most people buy it, he said, because they are required to do so by their
lender when they apply for a mortgage and the property is in a flood zone.

Premium costs, he said, are based on location of the property, value of the
house, level of risk and other factors. But the average cost is about $ 300 a
year for most homes, he said.

Bolivia is one community in Southeastern North Carolina that doesn't participate
in the federal flood insurance program, but after Floyd struck, the town's mayor
said it has asked FEMA about participating.

Bolivia wasn't flooded after Floyd, said Mayor Dewey C. Smith. The only ditch
that borders the town overflowed into the back yard of one house, he said, but
the owner doesn't know if he wants to buy flood insurance.

People's attitude, he said, seems to be: If it didn't flood this time, it
probably isn't likely to flood in the future.

Regardless, he said, the town has asked for more information about the program
and will hold a public hearing to discuss participation.

Mr. Smith said if the town wants to participate, it would have to upgrade its
building codes to comply with federal rules.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1999 Wilmington Star-News, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 329 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright (c) 2009 University of Miami
                    International and Comparative Law Review

                                  Spring, 2009

          University of Miami International and Comparative Law Review

                     16 U. Miami Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. 183

LENGTH: 11579 words

ARTICLE: THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM: MAINTAINING ITS HEAD ABOVE WATER

NAME: Aparna Kirknel Majmudar *

BIO:


* Harvard University (B.A., cum laude, 2003); University of Miami School of Law
(J.D., cum laude, 2009).

HIGHLIGHT: SUMMARY

   National flood insurance programs implement flood prevention, create flood
zone land-use policy, and establish protocols for relief With climate change and
development raising the risk and exposure of human populations to flood, the
United States' National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) has been heavily
scrutinized, especially in the wake of Hurricane Katrina. This article examines
the validity of the two main criticisms of NFIP, and seeks to inform a better
understanding of NFIP's integrity through a comparative analysis between NFIP
and several different flood insurance models in Europe. As a result, this
analysis yields recommendations that can benefit NFIP, as well lives and
properties vulnerable to flood risk in the United States.

   "In Nature, there is no flood damage."  n1

TEXT:
 [*184]  A. INTRODUCTION

   Fundamentally natural events, "[f]loods only lead to damage when uses by
human beings are detrimentally affected. The more intensively and the less
suitably the flood basin is used, the greater the potential for damage and then
the actual damage when flood occurs."  n2 Furthermore, as the most frequent
natural disaster in the world, flooding accounts for the greatest human and
economic losses in the world.  n3

   Floods are increasing in frequency and severity due to both climate change
and development that is catalyzed by a growing and expanding human population.
The prevalence of floods  n4 makes it impractical to relocate all human
settlement away  [*185]  from flood risks; thus it is imperative to explore ways
to reduce the destruction caused by floods.

   Beyond the purview of legislation that directly regulates flood zone
management, flood insurance programs provide an especially important vehicle for
the implementation of flood prevention and flood zone land-use policy and
relief. By examining the validity of the criticisms of United States' National
Flood Insurance Program ("NFIP"), especially in the aftermath of Hurricane
Katrina, this paper will compare NFIP to different flood insurance models in
Europe -- the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and the Netherlands - in terms of
(1) governmental role, (2) mitigation of flood risks, and (3) participation of
the national population. Compared to itsEuropean counterparts, from a policy
standpoint, NFIP provides a progressive and comprehensive flood management
program. Nonetheless, a comparative analysis of European flood insurance models
yields several improvements that could benefit NFIP, as well as the lives and
properties at risk in the United States.

B. DESIRABILITY AND CHALLENGES OF FLOOD INSURANCE

I. Why have flood insurance in the first place?

   Society is challenged with promoting behavior and investments in flood risk
reduction, while placing the burden of compensation on those who suffer the most
and mitigate flood risks the least.  n5 Policy-wise, "[flood] insurance is one
the most effective policy tools for achieving both objectives, because it
rewards investments in cost-effective mitigation with lower premiums and
provides indemnifications should a disaster occur."  n6

    [*186]  Additionally, flood insurance can reduce post-disaster governmental
assistance funded by taxpayers because flood insurance premiums can provide an
independent and significant source of funding. Furthermore, when the
availability of flood insurance is tied to the enforcement of flood-risk
reduction, land-use activity and construction, flood insurance can reduce the
need for -- or amount of -- post-disaster governmental assistance for relief,
recovery, and reconstruction.  n7

II. Centralized risk and skewed risk perception make it difficult to sustainably
provide flood insurance.

   In order for an insurer to compensate an insured party for a loss resulting
from an event, the insurer must "amass relatively small contributions, premiums,
from many persons who are exposed to risk of occurrence of an unforeseen event
in order to create a fund to reimburse those clients who actually suffer from
such an occurrence."  n8

   Flood events threaten the sustainability of flood insurance given the
difficulty of predicting floods and the high human and economic tolls of flood
disasters.  n9 Independence of events assures that funding is not depleted with
one occurrence, which is the main difficulty of providing flood insurance
because when many properties are damaged by the same event, funds may be heavily
tolled, thus jeopardizing the ability of an insurer to pay out claims and
continue to provide coverage.  n10 Additionally, funds to pay out claims are
even more threatened by the adverse selection of individuals who live in high
flood risk zones, realize the risk of flood, and thus dominate flood insurance
policies.  n11

    [*187]  Although the difficulty in spreading risk deters potential
providers, flood insurance is not necessarily unsustainable. In order to assure
the independence of events, insurance can be spread over many different types of
flood zones and areas, such as river and lake basins, and coastal areas.  n12
Also, re-insuring flood risk with other catastrophic events adds another layer
of risk spreading for insurers.  n13

   Skewed flood risk perception and expectations of governmental disaster
assistance exacerbate the difficulty of spreading the risk of flood over
populations.  n14 Often individuals perceive the probability of a flood "causing
damage to their home as being sufficiently low that the investment in [a]
protective measure will not be justified."  n15 This results in deterring people
from investing in flood insurance or activity that would reduce flood damage,
such as retreating from potential flood zones.

   Conversely, insuring against flood damage may lead to moral hazard: insured
individuals perceive that they and their properties are insulated from risk and
devastation. This may inadvertently encourage inappropriate development (and
redevelopment) in flood zones.

    [*188]  C. BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF VARIOUS FLOOD INSURANCE MODELS

   Across the globe, flood insurance programs come in numerous combinations of
policies. Nonetheless, flood insurance programs can roughly be identified by the
following characteristics:


     1. Primarily private or public insurance
     2. Mandatory or voluntary insurance
     3. Available compensation schemes by the government:

          A) none or vague
          B) ad hoc
          C) by law  n16


   An analysis of the flood insurance programs in the United States, United
Kingdom, France, Netherlands, and Germany illuminates the advantages and
disadvantages of the various characteristics listed above, and provides a
foundation to make recommendations for a more effective flood insurance program
in the United States.

D. NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM

I. Background and mechanics

   The United States' National Flood Insurance Program, 42 USC §§ 4001 et seq.
("NFIP"),  n17 is an example of public flood insurance, which was enacted in
1968 as the government's "primary tool for managing flood hazards through a
combination of incentives and regulations."  n18 Before NFIP's enactment, flood
insurance in the United States was prohibitively expensive or  [*189]
unavailable for most high risk flood property.  n19 Also, before NFIP, flood
victims depended on "federal, taxpayer-financed, ad hoc disaster assistance."
n20 By creating NFIP, Congress intended to primarily "alleviate the heavy
financial burdens and economic distress that recurring flooding has often
created for individuals, local economic and for the nation as a whole."  n21

   NFIP operates as a partnership, requiring cooperation between local
municipalities (or more generally, communities), the Federal Emergency
Management Agency ("FEMA"), and property owners.  n22 In order to receive NFIP
coverage, communities must agree to adopt and administer local floodplain
management aimed at protecting lives and property from future flooding.
Specifically, Section 4022 of Title 42 of the United States Code prohibits flood
insurance coverage as authorized under the NFIP, "unless an appropriate public
body shall have adopted adequate land use and control measures (with effective
enforcement provisions)" determined by the local NFIP Director.  n23

   Critical for the enforcement of NFIP land use policy, FEMA provides local
communities with four types of informational documents: the (1) Flood Hazard
Boundary Map, the (2) Flood Insurance Study, the (3) Flood Insurance Rate Map,
and the (4) Flood Boundary-Floodway Map.  n24

II. Flood Boundary Map

   The Flood Hazard Boundary Map ("FHBM") is a basic map provided by FEMA and
given to a community when it joins the initial, or Emergency Phase of NFIP,
which provides a preliminary delineation of the 100-year floodplain, also known
as  [*190]  a "Special Flood Hazard Area" ("SFHA") or base flood, in a
community.  n25

   The 100-year floodplain does not mean that a flood occurs in these zones only
once every 100 years.  n26 Rather, the 100-year flood refers to the probability
that a given event has a one-in-one hundred chance (1 percent) of occurring in
any given year.  n27 Communities in SFHAs are required by NFIP to both undertake
the program's floodplain management regulations and also purchase insurance.
n28

III. Flood Insurance Study

   In conjunction with local officials, FEMA reports on its examination,
evaluation, and determination of flood hazards for participating NFIP
communities in its Flood Insurance Studies ("FISs").  n29 FISs provide
background on a community's flooding history, and, where applicable, include:
"stream profiles [and] coastal transects used to calculate water surface
elevations for various flooding conditions, including the 100-year flood. Data
on the width, base flood elevation, and cross-sectional area of  [*191]
floodways are also given in the FIS for each stream segment studied in detail."
n30

   The most important characteristic of FISs is that these studies inform and
lead to the production of Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway
Maps.  n31 These maps form the basis of a community's floodplain management
activity by providing critical information on flood zones for potential lenders
of construction/re-construction projects and insurers.  n32

IV. Flood Insurance Rate Map

   Flood Insurance Rate Maps ("FIRMs") signal a community's transition from the
Emergency Phase to the Regular Phase of NFIP. Compared with FHBMs, FIRMs
generally have more detailed floodplain content and accuracy.  n33 Also, FIRMs
are the most widely distributed flood map.  n34

   In FIRMs, base flood elevations are denoted in conjunction with
categorizations within SFHAs. Unlike the content in FHBMs, within FIRMs, SFHAs
and other areas are further refined into zones, depending on the severity of
flood risk and the type of flood risk present (e.g., coastal, riverine) which
are identified by the following letters: A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR,
AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE, and V.  n35

    [*192]  These distinctions inform community officials, insurance agents,
lenders, and both federal and state agencies on the nature and estimates of
high-risk flood areas throughout a community.  n36 Properties located in mapped
zones AE, AO, A, or VE are required to have flood insurance if the owner has a
federally backed mortgage on the property.

V. Flood Boundary-Floodway Map

   Finally, FEMA's Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FBFMs) "delineate the
boundaries of designated floodways within which local officials must enforce the
NFIP's floodway non-encroachment standards... FBFMs also indicate the locations
and designations of stream cross-sections."  n37 Since 1986, FBFMs have been
incorporated into FIRMs.  n38

   Equipped with FEMA's studies and maps detailing their flood history and
estimated flood risk, communities can make better-informed decisions about
applying for NFIP insurance and committing to its land management regulations,
n39 if not already required. Impressively, "[o]ver 20,000 communities in all 50
[*193]  States, representing about 95 percent of the highest risk floodplains,
participate in the NFIP. The NFIP is now the nation's largest single-line
property insurer in the United States, with 4.8 million policies insuring in
excess of $ 800 billion in assets."  n40 Without NFIP, it is likely that most of
these policy-holders would not have had the incentive to develop active programs
to manage flood risks.  n41

E. CRITICISMS OF THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM

   Despite FEMA's mandatory requirement of flood insurance and compliance with
NFIP regulations in high flood-risk zones and its encouragement of participation
in NFIP in other communities, NFIP faces several challenges in being as
effective as possible. The two main criticisms of NFIP are that 1) NFIP
exacerbates skewed risk perception, worsening the moral hazard  n42 of flood
insurance, and 2) it is not actuarially sound due to subsidized insurance
premiums and the toll of repetitive-loss properties, threatening the
sustainability of the program.

I. Risk perception

   Despite the proactive flood risk mapping undertaken by FEMA and its
contracted experts, the flood maps are based on estimates. Actual rainfall,
coastal storms, or other events that lead to flooding may be more or less
frequent and severe than expected. The potential mismatch between FEMA estimates
and actual flood events has three negative consequences.

   The first consequence is that individuals outside the highest risk zones,
SFHAs, in FEMA's FIRMs are not required to obtain flood insurance and comply
with NFIP, resulting in the  [*194]  misperception that they are immune to
floods.  n43 This perceived immunity results in lower investment in land use and
control programs, flood insurance, and general awareness of flood risks that may
not be captured by FISs and FIRMs. Unfortunately, too many individuals are
caught unprepared when their communities are flooded, as "[n]ationwide,
one-third of the flood loss claims are from property located outside of the
mapped 1% (100-year) floodplain."  n44

   The second consequence is that this false sense of immunity may also impact
individuals who do have flood insurance but their communities have been
flood-free for a number of years. These communities may view their recent
flood-free experience as indicators of future flood risk and evidence that FEMA
over-estimated flood risk. Too often, individuals with flood insurance cancel
their "policies if they have not made a claim after a few years."  n45 An
estimated one in every five policyholders under NFIP cancels their coverage each
year.  n46

   The third consequence of the limitations of FISs and FIRMsto estimate actual
flood events is that individuals who do live in high-risk flood zones may
perceive that compliance with NFIP regulations is enough to protect themselves
and their property from loss. Assuming that flood threats are sufficiently
mitigated, this sense of immunity thwarts retreat from high risk flood zones.

   Too often the assumption that compliance with NFIP sufficiently protects
against the unpredictability of nature is coupled with the expectation that the
government, either through  [*195]  NFIP or ad hoc emergency relief, will
compensate damage or loss  n47 once a flooding disaster occurs. The main
weakness of this assumption is that the government has a limited ability to pay
for flood insurance claims given the limited ability of NFIP to fund itself.

II. Actuarial imbalance

   National flood insurance is "available in high-risk areas where no private
insurer would be willing to write policies... [encouraging] more people to
locate in these areas, which has the effect of exposing more assets to flood
risk and increases the total economic losses from flooding."  n48 NFIP flood
insurance is marketed by private insurers who deposit the premiums in a
federally operated Flood Insurance Fund ("FIF"),  n49 which pays all claims.
n50 The flood insurance contract is written by NFIP, and published in the
Federal Register, with no deviation permitted, and not generally governed by
contract law.  n51 Private insurers enjoy benefits of selling flood insurance
policy by retaining 30 percent of premiums as commission, and being compensated
for additional loss-adjustment claims.  n52 However the government's control
over the terms of flood insurance policy retards the ability of the flood
insurance market from gaining the benefit of actuarially sound priced policies.

   By design, FIF is not actuarially sound.  n53 NFIP is 40 percent underfunded
with approximately 26 percent of NFIP policyholders paying explicitly subsidized
premiums.  n54 When NFIP began, it lacked thorough flood data to inform its
insurance rates.  n55 Therefore NFIP decided to "subsidize policies within the
[*196]  pool of flood insurance consumers while undertaking to create the
required data. These subsidies are substantial and reach deep into the risk
pool."  n56 However, NFIP has not phased out these subsidies within 25 years of
its inception as originally planned.  n57

   Also, during the first few years of NFIP (1968-1973), low participation rates
among high flood risk communities resulted in "federal ad hoc disaster
assistance payments remain[ing] largely unchanged, and land-use management
techniques were not adopted on a large scale."  n58 In response, Congress
authorized NFIP to subsidize property constructed pre-FIRMs in order to induce
participation.  n59 This effectively grandfathered-in older properties. Not only
did these older properties receive significant subsidies, "Congress also
exempted owners of these subsidized, or 'pre-FIRM,' structures from the NFIP's
floodplain management requirements, unless these structures are at some later
point substantially damaged  n60 or substantially improved. Either of those
events then trigger[s] a requirement to rebuild to current construction and
building code standards."  n61 The justification for leniency towards
grandfathered properties is that property built before the FISs and FIRMs were
prepared for the areas in which they are located were not constructed or priced
with flood risk in mind.  n62

   In order to avoid compliance with NFIP's land use codes, grandfathered
property owners resist investments in structural improvements that do not
directly translate into higher home  [*197]  prices.  n63 This results in
buildings that pre-date NFIP maps accounting for 90 percent of repetitive-loss
payments.  n64 Although this statistic "demonstrates the effectiveness and
success of NFIP building standards for new construction in flood-prone areas,"
it "also underscores the program's lack of authority for reducing the
vulnerability of older buildings."  n65

   Another financial burden of repetitive-loss properties, whether or not they
were grandfathered into NFIP, arises from challenges to local enforcement of
NFIP after flood damage. Although NFIP requires that substantially damaged
properties undertake land use and control measures such as removal or elevation,
n66 local governments in charge of determining substantial damage are reluctant
to qualify properties as such when property owners do not have the financial
resources to move or elevate their property.  n67

   The burden of repetitive-loss properties is clear: "[a]lthough only 2 percent
of NFIP covered properties have received repetitive-loss payments, they account
for 40 percent of overall NFIP payments, many at cumulative totals exceeding the
property's value."  n68

   Congress has addressed the issue of repetitive-loss properties with: 1)
Section 4030 of Title 42 of the United States Code, which empowers local NFIP
Directors with discretion to give grants for repetitive-loss properties to
undertake mitigation action,  n69 and 2) the Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2004.
The Bunning-Bereuter-Blumenauer Flood Insurance Reform Act of  [*198]  2004
(FIRA)  n70 reforms NFIP to disincentivize property owners from living in
repeatedly flooded areas. Instead of providing insurance compensation for
rebuilding, FIRA provides repetitive-loss property owners assistance in either
elevating or moving their homes away from flood waters. Those who refuse
mitigation assistance would pay the full actuarial costs for remaining to live
in a high risk flood area.  n71 Although proactive in addressing the repeated
claims of repetitive-loss properties, enforcement of both Section 4030 of Title
42 of the United States Code and FIRA are costly, illustrating the burden of
repetitive-loss properties.

   NFIP's accounting method compounds the burden of repetitive-loss properties
and subsidies, impacting the viability of the entire program. Using a cash-based
method for accounting and determining premiums, the program is not structured to
establish a reserve for significant losses in especially heavy flood years.  n72
"Instead, total premium income is preset annually to match a moving twenty-five
year average annual loss experience."  n73 This preset results in oscillating
and unstable finances, and budgeting that understates true flood liabilities.
With NFIP's statutory borrowing authority, both of these phenomena threaten to
pass flood losses onto taxpayers, undermining the purpose of NFIP.  n74

    [*199]  F. THE UNITED KINGDOM'S GENTLEMAN'S AGREEMENT

   Unlike the United States' National Flood Insurance Program, the UK has a much
less formalized approach to flood insurance, described as the "Gentleman's
Agreement" between the government and private insurance industry.  n75 The
Gentleman's Agreement divides responsibility between the government, which
provides flood defenses, and insurers, which compensate property owners when
there is flood damage.  n76 It is not an "explicit regulatory regime but an
invisible set of rules governing overall flood management."  n77

   The Gentleman's Agreement is governed by a substantially different policy
than NFIP.  n78 Specifically, under the Gentleman's Agreement: 1) private
insurance is not associated with land use measures,  n79 2) the insurance
industry guarantees to provide insurance for all (with premiums not to exceed
one-half percent of the sum insured),  n80 and 3) flood insurance is mandatory
and pooled with other risks.  n81

I. Disconnect between insurance and land use policy

   Historically, the UK experiences flooding regularly in many areas, however
"the threat of floods is not taken seriously."  n82 Despite the increasing
number of people exposed to flood risk, "the awareness about the economic and
social consequences is hardly developed."  n83 The disconnect between flood
vulnerability, public awareness of the risk, and land use regulation impedes
prevention and mitigation of flood disaster in  [*200]  the UK, contrasting
NFIPs attempt to affect and improve land use policy in light of flood risk.  n84


II. Guaranteed insurance

   Private flood insurers in the UK may guarantee insurance, but not without
qualifications. Private insurers can decline insurance for property regularly
exposed to flooding, which is akin to "repetitive-loss" properties. However,
there is no written agreement with the government that allows insurers
discretion to withhold insurance or charge especially high premiums in order to
reflect the risk of repetitive-loss properties.  n85

   Also, the Gentleman's Agreement implicitly makes the government responsible
for providing sufficient flood protection.  n86 However, no provisions exist
that define the sufficiency of flood protection, or financial commitments
required by the government assumed in this agreement.  n87 In recent years,
lacking a vested interest in the provision of flood insurance policies or
investments in the payouts of claims, the UK government has reduced investments
in flood management.  n88

   Private insurers bear huge potential losses for the government's failure or
negligence in providing adequate flood defenses, which also avoids the
responsibility of being an insurer of last resort.  n89 The distinct division of
responsibility between insurance provision and flood management and protection
has failed to mobilize the UK government to address flood losses or engage in
more proactive and socially beneficial policy-making.

 [*201]  III. Mandatory and pooled insurance

   Instead of experiencing an actuarial imbalance like the United States' NFIP,
private flood insurers in the UK maintain their financial viability despite a
lack of support from or burden on the government. UK flood insurers achieve this
sound economic foundation through a bundled and compulsory system. Flood hazards
in the UK are bundled with all natural hazards, which diversifies the risk and
helps protect against one singular event from giving rise to a deluge of claims.
Further, flood insurance in the UK is mandatory: mortgages are withheld from
potential homeowners unless there is full coverage for flood and other natural
disasters. Mandatory flood insurance among all property owners, who face varying
levels of flood risk, helps spread risk across the population.

   Under the Gentleman's Agreement, the main disadvantage of mandatory and
pooled flood insurance is that the "insurance industry has insufficient
incentives to identify weakness in flood defence, patterns of individual
behavior or their internal costs structure as they subsidise costs across
natural perils and the entire insurance population."  n90 Simply, moral hazard
plagues the sustainability of the Gentleman's Agreement. Despite increasing
flood risks,  n91 there is not enough mobilization among the government or
private insurers in the UK to identify flood risks and minimize them.

G. FRANCE

   In contrast to the UK flood insurance system, the French flood insurance
program attempts to incentivize individuals and the government to be aware of
flood risks and engage in flood mitigating activity. At the same time, the
French program faces its own challenges.

 [*202]  I. Flat rates, but deductibles available

   French flood insurance is mandatory as it is in the UK, and is similarly
pooled with other natural hazard risks. However the main drawback of flood
insurance in France is that there is no premium differentiation,  n92 which
reduces incentives for individuals to live in low-risk flood areas due to lower,
more attractive premiums, as in the US and UK. To overcome this disincentive,
insurers provide "deductibles, to stimulate loss-reducing measures."  n93

II. Governmental role

   Compared to the dominating role of the local, state, and federal governments
in NFIP and the disassociation of the UK government in the Gentleman's
Agreement, flood insurance in France aims to achieve a balanced public-private
partnership. Private insurance companies collect premiums, and handle claims.
n94 The government protects the solvency of these companies as insurer of last
resort, willing to pay claims in excess of the capabilities of private insurers,
setting this coverage by law.  n95 However, the government only steps in to
compensate flood damage when it "officially recognizes the flood as a disaster
and the area where the damage occurred as a disaster area."  n96 Because the
definition of disaster is unclear, and it is vague when and if the government
will provide flood assistance, some individuals obtain private insurance outside
of the public-private partnership.  n97

    [*203]  H. GERMANY

   Compared to the flood insurance programs in France, the UK, and the US, flood
insurance in Germany is the least effective in encouraging awareness of flood
risks and pro-action to mitigate losses. Flood insurance in Germany is available
from private insurance companies and bundled with other natural disasters like
earthquakes.  n98 However, this flood insurance excludes coverage of damage from
storm surges,  n99 and acts primarily to supplement either home contents or
building insurance.  n100

I. Low market penetration

   Severely low market penetration, ten percent for home contents and four
percent for residential buildings, thwarts efforts to spread risk over a large
population.  n101 Furthermore, achieving diversified risk for insurance
companies is a challenge because adverse selection distorts the pool of flood
insurance policyholders. At the same time, flood insurance is not available for
buildings in the most flood hazard prone areas, and, if available, comes at
especially high premiums.  n102

   Despite adverse selection challenges to the viability of private flood
insurance in Germany, flood insured households have "tended to be even better
informed about mitigation and  [*204]  tended to flood proof their building more
often than uninsured households."  n103

II. Ad hoc governmental compensation

   Exacerbating the high risk of flood loss in Germany is the uncertainty of the
extent of governmental aid in the aftermath of a flood disaster. Although
governmental recognition of flood disaster in France follows vague guidelines,
the French government at least has clear rules, set by law, for distributing
disaster assistance once a flood disaster is determined. In contrast, German
governmental aid for flood disaster leaves property owners exposed to
uncertainty of their losses because government aid "is not based on formal
legislation . . ."  n104 Instead, flood disaster compensation is distributed ad
hoc, and can depend "for example, on the extent of the disaster or the media
coverage."  n105

   In Germany's recent history, for instance with the August 2002 flood in the
catchment areas of the Elbe and Danube rivers, the government provided extensive
compensation for both insured and uninsured households. As a result of the
flood, "total losses in Germany were estimated at 11.6 billion euro, of which
only 1.8 billion were covered by insurance."  n106 Extensive governmental aid
helped fuel redevelopment, but at the same time disincentivized uninsured
individuals to purchase flood insurance and prepare for future loss.  n107

   Additionally, a lack of awareness and information about flood risks among
individuals and insurers impedes German flood loss mitigation and preparedness.
At the very minimum, flood insurance needs to be encouraged and this should be
combined with loss mitigation.  n108

    [*205]  I. NETHERLANDS

   The majority of damage and loss arising from Germany's 2002 flood were
sustained in the public sector (fifty-five percent), with "enormous damage to
infrastructure."  n109 This suggests that like private individuals, the German
government did not proactively prepare against flood events. In contrast, the
Netherlands almost entirely invests in flood prevention and loss through flood
defense, and neither private nor public insurance, in a traditional sense, is
available for flood risk.  n110

I. Non-existent traditional flood insurance

   In a country where seventy percent of properties lie below sea or river water
level,  n111 flood risk in the Netherlands has been considered uninsurable by
private insurers since the Dutch North Sea Flood of 1953.  n112 Also, the
government's general reluctance to compensate for flood loss, or be an insurer
of last resort, has made  [*206]  private insurance even less viable.  n113
However, in 1998, the Dutch government passed the Calamities and Compensation
Act (WTS), which provides ad hoc compensation for a flood when it "results in
considerable disruption of public safety and requires a coordinated effort of
organization and civil services."  n114

II. Extensive and impressive flood defense

   In an attempt to prevent repeat flood losses and mitigate against the most
rare flood risk, the Dutch government mobilized after the North Sea Flood to
design and install flood coastal defenses "to withstand floods with an
exceedance probability of 1/4000 up to 1/10,000 per year. The target probability
of failure for river dikes is between 1/1250 and 1/2000 per year and measures
are being implemented to reach this goal for inadequate dike sections."  n115
Impressively, the Dutch government has undertaken the task of engineering an
extensive dike system to withstand flood impact of overwhelming force. In
contrast, NFIP concentrates its efforts to mitigate the base line flood that has
a 1/100 chance of occurrence per year.

   However, the Dutch flood policy creates ambiguities as to the consequences of
potential government failure to maintain the dikes.  n116 Also, there is no
legislation that entitles individuals to flood compensation if the dikes fail or
in the event that the 1/10,000 year flood event occurs.  n117

    [*207]  J. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM INFORMED
BY FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM, FRANCE, GERMANY, AND THE
NETHERLANDS

   Under the Gentleman's Agreement, insurance companies in the UK bear the
burden of flood risk because 1) flood insurance is mandatory, 2) despite
differentiation in premiums, individuals are not incentivized to reduce flood
risk, and 3) the government has not undertaken explicit duties to maintain flood
defenses (at pace with the challenges of rising sea levels and increasing
storms)  n118 or compensate when flood losses overwhelm the insurance industry.
Mandatory but flat flood insurance premiums in France, coupled with the
government's insurance of last resort, insulate and reduce awareness of flood
risks for both insurance companies and individuals, resulting in moral hazard.
In Germany, market penetration for flood insurance is so low that the government
assumes most flood risk and addresses this responsibility through ad hoc
compensation. The Dutch government also assumes almost all flood risk by
building extensive flood defense systems; however, the lack of a flood insurance
program or government assumption of compensation for flood loss when the defense
systems fail or are inadequate is troubling.

   Compared to these flood insurance programs in the UK, France, Germany and the
Netherlands, NFIP most actively strives to achieve a burden sharing of flood
risks between individuals, insurance companies, and the government.
Recommendations to improve flood risk management in Europe even support the
policy model used by NFIP, stressing that: "[a] burden-sharing mechanism should
be established that targets investment in mitigation schemes launched by
governments, with support from the CEC  n119 to assist people living on the
floodplain (e.g. if the household complies with such schemes and invests in
flood-proofing  [*208]  initiatives, then their insurance premiums should
decrease)."  n120 However, various European flood insurance programs explored in
this paper offer examples of policies which could improve NFIP.

I. Mandatory flood insurance

   Insurance premiums should correspond to levels of flood risk, and will be
negligible for those living in high elevation areas. The first recommendation
for NFIP is requiring all property owners to carry flood insurance. Poor market
penetration of flood insurance in Germany and the lack of flood insurance in the
Netherlands place individuals in a precarious situation, where it is uncertain
if and how much they might be compensated for flood losses. At the same time,
the lack of a compensation guarantee in the event of flood losses can stimulate
retreat from areas that are known to have high flood risks.

   In the US, NFIP's delineation of flood zones in its FBHMs and FIRMs may
similarly raise awareness of flood risks and stimulate retreat. However, the
danger of these flood maps is that they may give a false sense of security to
individuals located outside SFHAs, who might assume they are protected from risk
and do not need to buy flood insurance or engage in flood mitigation.

   Or, these maps could create a sense of flood expectancy for individuals in
SFHAs, who might assume that their compliance with NFIP land use standards, such
as raising their basements or reinforcing their foundations, sufficiently
prevents flood loss. Mandatory flood insurance in the UK and France avoids
adverse selection and gaps in insurance coverage when floods occur outside of
high flood risk zones. Buildings in SHFAs that are not grandfathered-in are
required to follow higher standards of land use and control compared to property
outside of SFHAs. However, this may diminish the advantages of requiring  [*209]
mandatory flood insurance because the availability of flood insurance outside of
SFHAs may reduce awareness and incorporation of flood loss prevention and
mitigation when there is a guarantee that flood loss claims will be paid. To
address this moral hazard, NFIP should continue to tie insurance to land use
regulation and require minimum land use management requirements in all zones.
This would likely reduce flood loss and the need for ad hoc governmental
compensation. Also, NFIP should offer discounts when property owners implement
higher standards of land use management than what is required. NFIP itself
should strive towards the No Adverse Impact (NAI) model of floodplain
management, in which "the action of one property owner does not adversely impact
the rights of other property owners, as measured by increased flood peaks, flood
stage, flood velocity, and erosion and sedimentation."  n121

II. Premiums that reflect flood risk

   By spreading flood insurance premiums over a population that faces varying
levels of flood risk, mandatory flood insurance supports the second
recommendation for NFIP: attainment of actuarial balance. Actuarial balancing is
important because it guarantees the sustainability of flood insurance by
securing a funding source for the payout of claims, which reduces the burden on
taxpayers once flood losses occur and the lag time between flood loss and
redevelopment.  n122

    [*210]  NFIP can attain actuarial balance through mortgage or public
utilities availability conditional on flood insurance in and outside of SFHAs
(assuming that NFIP follows the first recommendation and requires mandatory
insurance). In cases where mortgages or utilities cannot be conditioned on flood
insurance because it is impractical or against public policy, NFIP should
enforce a property tax equivalent to the flood insurance premiums on these
properties.

   Additionally, flood insurance in the US should be bundled with other risks,
as it is in the UK, France, and Germany.  n123 Pooling many risks, such as
different types of disasters, reduces the threat of depleting or over-extending
funds to pay out claims because it is less likely that a deluge of claims will
arise out of a single catastrophic event. And in situations where one event
(such as a hurricane) gives rise to many claims due to a combination of various
perils (wind and flood), multi-peril insurance can deter evasion of paying out
claims because there is no need to distinguish between the sources of damages
(whether wind or flood) if the perils are covered in the policy.  n124

   Also, in an effort to attain actuarial balance, NFIP needs to phase out
subsidies. Where flood insurance exists in the European programs explored above,
there is no evidence of governmental subsidies. By charging premiums more
closely related to flood risk levels, individuals are likely to gain greater
[*211]  awareness of the severity of this risk and have lower incentives to live
in high flood risk areas.

   On the downside, charging full actuarial rates may excessively burden some
property owners, such as those still recovering from Hurricanes Katrina and
Rita.  n125 For example, in some instances "flood-insurance premiums would go up
so high that homeowners might decide not to rebuild their damaged or destroyed
homes if they couldn't afford the premiums or the cost of elevating their homes
above sea level, which would qualify them for lower premiums."  n126 Higher
premiums for owners of older properties could also potentially force individuals
to become delinquent on their mortgages and increase the potential for
foreclosure.  n127 These negative social consequences arise because of
unsustainable development in high risk flood zones without corresponding
mitigation of flood risks. As difficult as it may be, phasing out subsidies is
critical to achieving more rational behavior in response to flood risk, which is
necessary to protect people and property from future losses.

K. CONCLUSION

   Increasing sea levels and extreme storm events due to growing climate change
exacerbate flood risks. Although humans cannot directly control heavy
precipitation or extreme flood events, humans can learn to live with these
events, and "behave in a manner to mitigate potential risks for people and
[property]."  n128

   Within the United States, mandatory flood insurance and compliance with
minimum land use regulation will strengthen the existing NFIP. Also, protection
of NFIP's finances by achieving actuarial balancing and passing costs to
property owners will ensure sustainability of NFIP and encourage more rational
[*212]  behavior informed by serious and growing flood risk. Greater awareness
and preparedness for flooding events will help protect against unnecessary human
and economic loss, as experienced with Hurricane Katrina.  n129

   Although beyond the scope of this paper, in addition to strengthening NFIP,
the U.S. government needs more comprehensive  n130 and better maintained flood
defenses, especially when juxtaposed with Netherlands' extensive flood defense
system which, at the minimum, is able to withstand floods that have a
probability of occurrence of 1/2,000 per year.  n131 Investment in flood
defenses also reduces the need for ad hoc governmental assistance after a flood
disaster, which can be more expensive than the flood defenses themselves. An
integrated approach to flood disaster prevention and mitigation spreads the
burden of flood risk among property owners and the government, which depend on
each other's rational decision-making to stay above the water.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Banking LawNational Flood Insurance ProgramInsurance LawProperty InsuranceFlood
InsurancePublic Health & Welfare LawSocial ServicesEmergency Services

FOOTNOTES:





n1  Best Practices on Flood Prevention, Protection and Mitigation, 19 (2004)
(updating the United Nations and Economic Commission for Europe (UN/ECE)
Guidelines on Sustainable Flood Prevention (2000)), available at
http://www.floods.org/PDF/Intl_BestPractices_EU_2004.pdf [hereinafter Best
Practices].





n2  Id.





n3  M. Kok, J.K. Vrijling, P.H.A.J.M Van Gelder & M.P. Vogelsang, Risk of
Flooding and Insurance in The Netherlands, in FLOOD DEFENCE: PROCEEDINGS OF THE
SECOND INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON FLOOD DEFENCE, VOLUME II 146, 147 (Wu et al.
eds., 2002).





n4  "Flooding is the most common natural disaster in the United States. Most
homeowners insurance does not cover flood damage. Floods and flash floods happen
in all 50 states. . . . Every year, flooding impacts thousands of property
owners across the United States. Most of them don't expect it because their
property 'isn't in a flood zone.' The truth is: Everyone lives in a flood zone.
Just because a property has a low risk of flooding doesn't mean there's no risk.
Flooding can happen anywhere at any time, whether it's a flash flood from heavy
rains in the desert, an overflowing river, or simply water with nowhere to go
because of urban construction. One in four insurance claims for flood damage
comes from low-to-moderate risk flood zones. Properties in high-risk flood zones
have a 26% chance of flood damage over the period of a 30-year mortgage." First
American Flood Data Services, Flood Basics,
http://www.freaflood.com/flood/basics/ (last visited Nov. 12, 2007).





n5  Howard Kunreuther, Mitigating Disaster Losses through Insurance, 12 JOUR.
RISK & UNCERT. 171, 180 (1996).





n6  Id. at 180. The article notes as follows: "[t]his presumes that both
homeowners and insurers are aware of state-of-the-art technologies and can
determine what impact they will have on reducing expected losses from future
disasters." Id. at 185.





n7  NFIP HANDBOOK FOR RHODE ISLAND COMMUNITIES, at 1 available at
http://www.planning.state.ri.us/nfip/pdf/nfip.pdf (last visited Nov. 25, 2007)
[hereinafter NFIP RI].





n8  M. Kok, et al., supra note 3, at 147.





n9  See Kunreuther, supra note 5, at 178.





n10  See Kok, supra note 3, at 147.





n11  "The people most likely to buy insurance against flood losses are also the
most likely to suffer them. That is, the motivated pool of actual insurance
consumers is generally more risky than the pool of all potential consumers.
Adverse selection occurs when insureds know more about their risk profiles than
their insurers. . . . Adverse selection has long been thought capable of
creating a 'death spiral' in which an unfortunate insurance pool begins to
attract riskier insureds and to deter good risks - because the former are
getting a good deal and the latter are overpaying. In theory, such a pool will
eventually collapse, as the necessary rise in premiums reshapes the pool into an
increasingly narrow band of highly risky consumers who (at some point) can no
longer afford the actuarially correct premium." Adam F. Scales, A Nation of
Policyholders: Governmental and Market Failure in Flood Insurance, 26 MISS. C.
L. REV. 3, 8-9 (2006).





n12  Kok, supra note 3, at 147.





n13  Id.





n14  See Kunreuther, supra note 5, at 177.





n15  Kunreuther, supra note 5, at 175.





n16  See generally Kok, supra note 3, at 148 (categorizing flood insurance
solutions based on an analysis of programs in nineteen countries).





n17  The National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, and The Flood
Disaster Protection Act of 1973, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001-4129 (2005).





n18  U.S. COMMISSION ON OCEAN POLICY, Guarding People and Property against
Natural Hazards, in AN OCEAN BLUEPRINT FOR THE 21ST CENTURY, 121, 125 (2004).





n19  NFIP RI, supra note 7, at 1.





n20  Jason Thomas, Comment, National Flood Insurance Program: Crisis and Renewal
4 (George Washington University, Working Paper Series, 2006), available at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=989850 [hereinafter Crisis and Renewal].





n21  NFIP RI, supra note 7, at 1.





n22  Id.





n23  42 U.S.C. § 4022 (2005).





n24  NFIP RI, supra note 7, at 8.





n25  Id. at 11.





n26  Crisis and Renewal, supra note 20, at 9.





n27  Id. Furthermore, when the probabilities of flood are compounded, "[a] '100
year' flood has a 9.6 percent chance of occurring in 10 years, a 22 percent
chance of occurring in 25 years, a 39 percent chance of occurring in 50 years,
and an 86 percent chance of occurring in 100 years. Moreover, to reliably
predict a 100-year recurrence event, geologists 'would need 1,000 years of
records, which they do not have. Flood predictions, like those of the weather,
depend on a unique set of environmental variables which are almost never
repeated.' Based on participation rates, it seems unlikely that most residents
of a '100 year floodplain' realize that structures located there have a
26-percent chance of being flooded over the course of a 30-year mortgage,
compared to a 4-percent chance of fire over the same period. Yet homeowners who
avoid 'costly' flood coverage are unlikely to avoid fire insurance, even absent
lender requirements." Id. (internal citations omitted).





n28  Federal Emergency Management Agency, Special Flood Hazard Areas, available
at http://www.fema.gov/plan/prevent/floodplain/nfipkeywords/sfha.shtm (last
visited Nov. 17, 2007).





n29  NFIP RI, supra note 7, at 11.





n30  Id.





n31  Id. at 10.





n32  Id.





n33  Federal Emergency Management Agency, National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) Flood Maps,
http://msc.fema.gov/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/info?storeId=10001&catalogId=10001
&langId=-1&content=productFIRM&title=NFIP%20Flood%20MAPS&parent=productlnfo&pare
ntTitle=Product%20Information (last visited Nov. 18, 2007).





n34  Id. Note also that the information on FIRMs "is based on historic,
meteorologic, hydrologic, and hydraulic data, as well as open-space conditions,
flood control works, and development." Id.





n35  Id.; see also Federal Emergency Management Agency, Definitions of FEMA
Flood Zone Designations,
http://msc.fema.gov/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/info?storeId=10001&catalogId=10001
&langId=-1&content=floodZones&title=FEMA%20Flood%20Zone%20Designations.





n36  NFIP RI, supra note 7, at 12. Specifically FIRMs "provide data needed to
identify areas subject to flooding, determine the base flood elevation and flood
risks of specific properties, locate reference marks needed to establish the
elevation of specific sites, and locate the boundaries of floodways." Id. at 12.





n37  Id. at 15.





n38  Id.





n39  The most basic examples of NFIP land management are:

     1) required permits for all development, and within A or V zones,
     required delineation of the 100-year flood boundary and provision of
     base flood and structural component elevation data on site plans
     2) determination if proposed development has received other necessary
     permits
     3) prohibition of development or encroachment within designation
     floodways
     4) prohibition the modification of sand dunes in V-Zones
     5) location and construction of utilities to eliminate or minimize
     flood damage
     6) required elevation of newly constructed or substantially improved
     elevation above or at the base (100 year) flood elevation. See id. at
     21-39.







n40  Crisis and Renewal, supra note 20, at 5.





n41  Guarding People, supra note 18, at 167.





n42  "Moral hazard" may be defined as "the disincentive that being insured
removes to engage in the conduct insured against." Wausau Underwriters Insurance
Company v. United Plastics Group Inc., 512 F.3d 953, 959 (7th Cir. 2008).





n43  Crisis and Renewal, supra note 20, at 9.





n44  Tropical Storm Allison Recovery Project, Flood Insurance Rate Maps (Nov.
2004), http://www.tsarp.org/downloads/FloodInsuranceRateMaps.pdf.





n45  Kunreuther, supra note 5, at 177. Furthermore, "[I]t would not be
surprising to learn that many of these individuals purchased a policy at the
time that they took out a mortgage but failed to renew their policy the next
year or several years later after not experiencing any flood losses. The
financial institutions issuing the mortgage would have had to have looked the
other way." Id. at 177-78 (emphasis added).





n46  Id. at 177.





n47  See generally, id.





n48  Crisis and Renewal, supra note 20, at 7.





n49  The National Flood Insurance Fund is described in 42 U.S.C. § 4017 (2005).





n50  Kunreuther, supra note 5, at 173.





n51  Scales, supra note 11.





n52  Id.





n53  Kunreuther, supra note 5, at 173.





n54  Crisis and Renewal, supra note 20, at 5.





n55  Scales, supra note 11, at 15.





n56  Id. at 15-16.





n57  Id. at 16 (noting that in 2006 "38 years have passed, and approximately 28%
of NFIP policies remain subsidized. This in facts reflect substantial progress,
as the subsidization rate was originally 70%.").





n58  Crisis and Renewal, supra note 20, at 4.





n59  Id. at 5.





n60  A substantially damaged structure is one whose cost of repair (to bring it
back to its pre-damaged condition) equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred. 42 U.S.C. § 4011 b(2) (2006);
44 C.F.R. § 59.1 (2007).





n61  Crisis and Renewal, supra note 20, at 5.





n62  Scales, supra note 11, at 16; see also Kunreuther, supra note 5, at 173.





n63  Guarding People, supra note 18, at 168.





n64  Id.





n65  Id.





n66  Id.; 44 CFR § 60.3(c)(2).





n67  Guarding People, supra note 18, at 126.





n68  Id. Interestingly, [a]lthough a national problem, between 1978 and 1995,
Louisiana and Texas accounted for $ 1.1 billion, or 40 percent of the $ 2.75
billion in total repetitive-loss claims paid by the NFIP." Id.





n69  42 U.S.C. § 4030 (2005).





n70  Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2004, P.L. 108-264, 118 Stat. 712 (codified
as amended in scattered sections of 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq. (2005). The act
was called "Two Floods and You Are Out of the Taxpayers' Pocket Act of 2003"
when introduced to the House of Representatives in 2003.





n71  Rawle O. King, Federal Flood Insurance: The Repetitive Loss Problem,
CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE REPORT FOR CONGRESS, June 30, 2005, at 31.





n72  Scales, supra note 11, at 15.





n73  Id. at 16.





n74  Id.





n75  See Michael Huber, Reforming the UK Flood Insurance Regime, The Breakdown
of a Gentleman's Agreement, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RESEARCH COUNCIL CENTRE FOR
ANALYSIS OF RISK REDUCTION (2004).





n76  Id. at 2.





n77  Id.





n78  Id.





n79  Id. at 2, 4.





n80  Id. at 4.





n81  See generally Huber, supra note 75.





n82  Id. at 4.





n83  Id.





n84  See generally, id.





n85  Id. at 5.





n86  Id.





n87  Id.





n88  Id. at 7.





n89  Id. at 5. The UK government has, in rare instances, assisted flood victims,
and for example has provided "minimal help to flood victims in a poor, and
under-insured area." Id. at 7.





n90  Id. at 8.





n91  See Hilary Osborne, Flood Damage Could Hit £ 16bn, Warns Insurer, GUARDIAN
UNLIMITED, Nov. 7, 2006, available at
http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2006/nov/07/water.homeinsurance (last
visited Nov. 26, 2007).





n92  W.J.W. Botzen & J.C.J.M. van den Bergh, Insurance Against Climate Change
and Flooding in the Netherlands: Present, Future and Comparison with Other
Countries, 28 RISK ANALYSIS 413, 419 (2006).





n93  Id.





n94  Id.





n95  Id.





n96  Id.





n97  Id.





n98  Annegret H. Thieken et al., Insurability and Mitigation of Flood Losses in
Private Households in Germany, 26.2 RISK ANALYSIS 383, 386 (2006).





n99  Id.





n100  Botzen, supra note 92, at 423.





n101  Id. However, low market penetration in Germany is not uniform. "There are
two regions with a higher-insurance density: Baden-Wuerttemberg and the
territory of the former German Democratic Republic (GDR). Flood loss
compensation was generally included in mandatory building insurance in
Baden-Wuerttemberg until 1994. Due to EU regulations this monopoly insurance had
to be abandoned. Currently more than 80% of the property owners in
Baden-Wuerttemberg still have flood insurance coverage. Flood loss coverage was
also provided by the household insurance in the former GDR...thirty to fifty
percent of people in the new German states (former GDR) still have comparable
contracts." Thieken, supra note 98, at 387 (internal citations omitted).





n102  Botzen, supra note 92, at 423.





n103  Thieken, supra note 98, at 390.





n104  Id. at 384.





n105  Id.





n106  Id. at 383.





n107  See id. at 390.





n108  Id. at 392-394.





n109  Id. at 383.





n110  Botzen, supra note 92, at 414, 416. One exception is private motor-hull
insurance, which insures flood damage to cars. Id. at 416, n.7.





n111  M. Kok et al., supra note 3, at 148.





n112  Id. at 149; see also Botzen, supra note 92, at 414. "There is no flood
insurance since the flood event in 1953, because after the event it was realized
that insurance companies can become bankrupt if they continue to cover the flood
damage. At this moment, no insurance company offers standard compensation of
flood damage." M. Kok et al., supra note 3, at 149. In January 1953, spring
tides and a heavy storm combined to flood Zeeland, a province in the south
western part of the Netherlands. Almost 2,000 people were killed, 70,000 people
were forced to evacuate and over 4,000 homes were destroyed. Coupled with
rebuilding efforts after five years of German occupation, the flood deeply
affected the psyche of the Dutch population, mobilizing political activity. The
general national sentiment after the flood was that such a disaster should never
reoccur, which exposed "predisaster cracks in the social system" and catalyzed
innovative restoration. Uriel Rosenthal, Disaster Management in the Netherlands:
Planning for Real Events, in MANAGING DISASTER: STRATEGY AND POL'Y PERSP. 274,
276-78 (Louise K. Comfort ed. 1988).





n113  See Botzen, supra note 92, at 414.





n114  Id. at 416.





n115  M. Kok et al., supra note 3, at 148.





n116  See id. at 153.





n117  See id.





n118  Osborne, supra note 91.





n119  Commission of the European Community, also known as the European
Commission.





n120  A.L. Vetere Arellano, A. De Roo & J.P. Nordvik, Reflections of the
Challenges of EU Policy-Making with View to Flood Risk Management, in FLOOD RISK
MGMT IN EUROPE 433, 465 (Selina Begum et al. eds., 2007).





n121  Association of State Floodplain Managers, No Adverse Impact 2 (2008),
available at http://www.floods.org/NoAdverselmpact/NAI_White_Paper.pdf.
Additionally, the "No adverse impact philosophy can shape the default management
criteria: a community develops and adopts a comprehensive plan to manage
development that identifies acceptable levels of impact, appropriate measures to
mitigate those adverse impacts and a plan for implementation. No Adverse Impact
can be extended to entire watersheds as a means to promote the use of
retention/detention or other techniques to mitigate increased runoff from urban
areas." Id.





n122  See generally Jack Milligan, Under Water: The Federal Program to Insure
Property Owners Against Catastrophic Flood Losses is Badly in Need of a Fix,
MORTGAGE BANKING, Feb. 1, 2007, at 66.





n123  Botzen, supra note 92, at 422-23; see also M. Kok et al., supra note 3, at
147-48.





n124  See Multi Peril Insurance Act of 2007: Hearing on H.R. 920 Before the
Subcomm. of the H. Fin. Serv. Comm., 110th Cong. (2007) (statement of Rep.
Charlie Melancon) ("By bundling wind and water coverage into one plan,
multi-peril insurance would cover home damaged by hurricanes, regardless of
whether winds or flooding caused the damage. Not only will this provide
homeowners with peace of mind, it will indirectly save them money because they
will be able to avoid costly and time-consuming legal battles like those waged
after Katrina and Rita, when many homeowners had to hire lawyers and engineers
for independent assessments. A multi-peril insurance policy will also create
more efficiency in adjusting claims, and homeowners will receive their payments
much faster than under the current two-policy system.").





n125  Milligan, supra note 122, at 66, 68-69.





n126  Id. at 69.





n127  Id.





n128  See Best Practices on Flood Prevention, Protection and Mitigation, supra
note 1, at 29.





n129  See Michael D. Adler, Policy Analysis for Natural Hazards: Some Cautionary
Lessons from Environmental Policy, 56 DUKE L. J. 1, 4 (2006).





n130  Especially natural flood defenses, such as marshes, sand banks and
mangrove swamps. See Sami Grover, The Tide is Turning: Natural Flood Defence
Makes a Come-back, TREEHUGGER, July 9, 2006,
http://www.treehugger.com/files/2006/07/flood_defense.php.





n131  See M. Kok et al., supra note 3, at 148.


                          FOCUS - 330 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              The Express Tribune

                             July 28, 2015 Tuesday

16 killed, dozens injured in flood-related incidents in AJK

LENGTH: 336  words


At least 16 were killed as a result of torrential rains and floods in different
parts of Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) on Tuesday.

Six persons of a family, aboard a car, drowned during an attempt to cross a
flooded stream near Kasgumma in Bhimber district, sources said.

Read:Fresh advisory warns of more floods

Two others were swept away by speed currents in a flooded stream at the remote
village of Badhote Knaiker, while six people were reportedly killed in a roof
collapse.

As many as 35 houses were reportedly completely damaged, whereas 87 houses were
partially damaged following the heavy rainfall and floods.

Read:Round two: Flood warning issued as water levels rise

The AJK government has already established flood control rooms in all 10
districts in the wake of the floods.

River Indus in high flood

The Sindh Irrigation Department issued on Tuesday a high-level flood warnings at
Guddu and Sukkur barrages and said the river is in 'high flood' at Chashma due
to the current heavy rains.

Read:Old problems, unresolved: Floods in Bhudni nullah leave locals stranded

Nearly 600,000 cusecs of water is passing through the Sukkur and Guddu barrages
and the water flow is expected to rise in the next four days, Radio Pakistan
quoted the flood control centre as saying.

According to reports, more than 500 villages of Kashmore, Kandhkot, Larkana,
Sukkur and Khairpur districts have been inundated. There is medium flood in the
river at Kalabagh and Taunsa and low flood at Tarbela, reports said.

Read:Raining death: 15 die in flood-related incidents across K-P

River Kabul is in medium flood at Nowshera, while River Jhelum and River Ravi
are in low flood at Rasool and Sudhnai respectively, reports added.

A spokesman of Ghotki's district administration said the army and Rangers have
reached Qadipur Bund and are shifting the people from katcha area to safer
places as water levels rose to extremely dangerous level.

The post 16 killed, dozens injured in flood-related incidents in AJK appeared
first on The Express Tribune.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 The Express Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 331 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                               The Frontier Post

                              July 3, 2016 Sunday

Minister directs to re-examine Flood Fighting Plan to remove flaws

SECTION: Vol. 31 No. 185

LENGTH: 630  words


Punjab Minister for Zakat & Ushr/Incharge flood fighting arrangements of
Faisalabad Division Malik Nadeem Kamran on Saturday directed the concerned
departments to re-examine Flood Fighting Plan for removal of its all minor flaws
to cope with any emergency like situation due to flood in rivers.

He was presiding over a meeting to review the flood fighting arrangements in
Faisalabad division at Commissioner Office here. Secretary Irrigation Punjab
Saifullah Anjum, Director Punjab Disaster Management Authority Dr. Khurram
Shehzad also participated in the meeting.  Divisional Commissioner Momin Agha,
RPO Bilal Siddique Kamyana, Chief Engineer Irrigation Mohammad Nawaz and other
officers of Irrigation department were present.

The Minister stressed the need to complete preparedness of district
administration and other concerned departments to meet challenges of possible
heavy flood during monsoon and rainy season.

He said that full coordination among the departments should be ensured for
fulfilling responsibilities during rescue operation in case of heavy flood in
rivers Jhelum and Chenab.

He called for activating early warning system and to keep close liaison with
Meteorological department for having prediction of rains and discharge of water
in the rivers for timely evacuation of people from low-lying areas in case of
any threat of flood.

He advised that all machinery should be placed near vulnerable points and relief
centres should be equipped with all necessary arrangements.

He stressed the need to make foolproof arrangements by Health and Livestock
departments for availability of necessary medicines in sufficient quality,
vaccination and fodder for animals in flood affected areas.

The Minister said that Chief Minister Punjab Mohammad Shehbaz Sharif was himself
supervising flood fighting arrangements and no lethargy or carelessness would be
tolerated in this regard.

He said that Punjab government had devised a comprehensive strategy for
providing all-out relief to flood affectees.

He asked divisional and district administration to remain in touch with PDMA for
seeking support in resources and relief.

The Minister directed administration of districts Jhang and Chiniot to remain at
high alert for flood operation and flood protection bunds should be checked for
making proper arrangements by keeping in view previous history of flood.

He asked police authorities to extend full support to civil administration in
flood relief operation and patrolling of police should be enhanced in possible
flood affected areas.

He appreciated steps for carrying out mock exercises near rivers to check
emergency response of the concerned departments.

Secretary Irrigation Saifullah Anjum informed the meeting about threat of flood
in rivers Jhelum and Chenab and said that necessary arrangements of Irrigation
Department for flood fighting had been checked besides carrying out on-spot
inspection near Head Tareemu and other vulnerable areas.

Chief Engineer Irrigation Mohammad Nawaz gave briefing about previous history of
the flood and flood fighting arrangements of the department.

He informed that Chiniot Flood Bund, Jhang Flood Bund and Thatha Malah Flood
Bund were important for protection of Jhang and Chiniot City which had been made
more strengthened.

Divisional Commissioner Momin Agha informed the Minister that he had visited the
possible flood hit areas in district Jhang and Chiniot.

He said that flood fighting arrangements had been reviewed in the four districts
of the division besides put on high alert of concerned departments.

He said that District Flood Control Rooms had also been set up in the four
districts equipped with all necessary arrangements and staff duties for ensuring
coordinated efforts in rescue and relief operations in case of any emergency.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 The Frontier Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 332 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                     News-Journal (Daytona Beach, Florida)

                            November 21, 2008 Friday
                            N-j West Volusia Edition

Deltona residents seek flooding answers

BYLINE: RON WHITE - CORRESPONDENT

SECTION: SECTION C; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 529  words

DATELINE: DELTONA


DELTONA -- How do you know if you live in a flood zone?

Many Deltona residents sought an answer to that question in the weeks and months
after Tropical Storm Fay dumped record rains in August, damaging homes and other
property in the city.

To help residents better protect their homes and businesses, city officials are
on a mission to educate them about the city's relatively new flood-zone map,
which extends beyond a similar map produced by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.

City officials plan a public workshop for 2 p.m. Saturday in council chambers to
discuss the differences in the two flood-zone maps and answer residents'
questions.

It's an important topic because it impacts the well-being of our citizens," said
Tom Burbank, acting director for Planning and Development Services. "Nothing has
changed. This is just an informational session. Part of our goal is to make sure
our residents are prepared with the information they need in case of another
major storm."

Essentially, Deltona has two different flood-zone maps. FEMA produced an
official flood-zone map, and living within the FEMA- defined flood zones
requires certain construction precautions and mandatory flood insurance. In
2005, however, the city produced its own expanded flood-zone map. Residents who
live in the expanded area are not required to carry flood insurance.

The FEMA maps aren't based on the best science. They're antiquated. We knew
that. That's why we spent a lot of money to produce a better product," said
Burbank. "The city's maps are based on much better science. The flood-zone areas
on Deltona's maps are, in most instances, considerably larger than what's shown
in the FEMA maps."

While FEMA officials have approved Deltona's map, the federal agency hasn't
reprinted the maps, citing budgetary constraints, according to Burbank.

So, city officials want to spread the word about the more accurate, newer map in
hopes that residents in the expanded areas will be more aware of the flood
risks.

According to Cy Butts, the city's director of building and zoning services, 31
homes in Deltona were affected by flooding during and after Tropical Storm Fay.
None of those homes was within the FEMA flood zones, but 18 homes were in the
expanded flood zone covered by the city's map.

Additionally, 13 homes located outside of any designated flood areas also
received some water damage," Butts said.

Some affected property owners had flood insurance, but others were unaware their
homes were within the city's flood zone and, therefore, they had never checked
into flood insurance.

Homes built in the city's expanded flood zone prior to the creation of the new
maps are not required to meet heightened construction standards unless the owner
opts to expand the home, Burbank said.

According to Burbank, about 6,000 parcels in Deltona are within the expanded
flood zone. Many of those properties escaped flood damage from Tropical Storm
Fay, but Burbank wants residents to know that luck played a part for some.

A lot of people were actually quite lucky. Fay came when we were on the tailof a
drought. Had Fay come after a heavy rainy season, we would have lost hundreds of
homes," Burbank said.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



CORRECTION:

JOURNAL-CODE: DBNJ

                Copyright 2008 ProQuest Information and Learning
                              All Rights Reserved
                               ProQuest SuperText
                    Copyright 2008 News-Journal Corporation


                          FOCUS - 333 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 11, 2015 Saturday

SCHUMER URGES FEDS TO EXAMINE OUTDATED FLOOD MAPS IN JOHNSTOWN; CURRENT MAPS,
WHICH DATE BACK TO 1983, FORCE MANY FAMILIES & BUSINESS OWNERS TO PAY TOP DOLLAR
FOR UNNECESSARY FLOOD INSURANCE PREMIUMS

LENGTH: 1638  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator Charles E.Schumer, U.S Government has issued the following
news release:

Today, at the Johnstown Shopping Center, U.S. Senator Charles E. Schumer urged
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to examine the outdated flood
maps that have incorrectly placed the Johnstown Shopping Center, as well as up
to 50 other properties in the surrounding area, in the Cayudutta Creek's flood
zone. Now that more comprehensive and accurate analyses are available, Schumer
will urge FEMA to rectify the situation by correcting the maps and working with
local leaders to ensure that thorough engineering analysis is completed to
provide the data necessary to make these important adjustments. Schumer said
that incorrectly being included in a flood zone means homeowners and businesses
must pay high costs for flood insurance each month for no reason. Schumer said
that the Johnstown flood maps were last drawn in 1983 and FEMA currently does
not have plans to redraw them. However, Schumer said, because these maps are
over 30 years old and new studies show that they overestimate the ability of the
creek to flood by 4 to 6 feet, FEMA should consider updating the maps. Schumer
noted that there is now better technology that allows Johnstown to get a more
accurate depiction of who should be included in these flood maps and who should
not be included, technology that was simply not available in 1983.


"Right now, FEMA potentially has up to 50 homes and properties, including the
Johnstown Shopping Center, incorporated into a flood zone that should not be.
When being included into these flood maps means residents and businesses are
paying hundreds, even thousands, extra in flood insurance premiums, it is
unacceptable to use anything other than the most accurate, up-to-date
information. These onerous costs could be driving residents, and even business
at shopping centers like this one, out of the area over the long-term," said
Schumer. "No family or businesses should be forced to buy sky-high flood
insurance unless they truly need it. That is why I am calling on FEMA to work
with the City of Johnstown to coordinate efforts and ensure that the flood maps
throughout the city are accurate; so that we are not requiring homeowners and
businesses that do not face flood risk to purchase flood insurance and pay
elevated premiums."

Schumer explained that FEMA originally drew its flood maps for the City of
Johnstown area in 1983. At the time, however, better technology that would have
allowed for a more accurate analysis of who should be included in the flood zone
and who should not, was unavailable. As a result, FEMA maps were conservative in
their measurements and included more properties in these maps than there should
have been. Now, 30 years later, Schumer says businesses and homeowners who have
had to pay excessive flood insurance premiums are requesting that additional
analysis be done to survey the areas and, ultimately, appropriately adjust the
maps to only include those homes and businesses that are most at risk for
flooding. Schumer said that new studies show that these outdated flood maps
incorrectly placed the Johnstown Shopping Center in the Cayudutta Creek's flood
zone. Under FEMA's 1983 analysis, the Cayudutta Creek was estimated to have the
potential to flood by 4 to 6 feet more than it actually would. Schumer said that
city officials believe that FEMA's overestimation of the flooding potential of
this creek has likely led to more properties being improperly included in the
flood zone than there should have been.

Therefore, Schumer is urging FEMA to work with the City of Johnstown to
coordinate efforts and ensure that the flood maps throughout the city are
accurate; so that only those homeowners and businesses that actually face flood
risk are required to purchase flood insurance and pay elevated premiums. Schumer
said that FEMA should work with the community and its local elected officials to
ensure that the appropriate, most advanced engineering analysis is done to
survey these areas and ultimately make any appropriate adjustments to ensure
that the maps are accurate and up-to-date. Schumer said onerous and
unnecessarily high premium costs for businesses, like those at the Johnstown
Shopping Center, could take away from business opportunities or result in
relocations if the costs are too high for some owners to keep up.

According to the city, an engineering analysis conducted by C.T. Male and
Associates, the well-respected engineering firm, has already been completed on
behalf of private business owners, including the Johnstown Shopping Center, and
shared with the city for a portion of this area. Currently, the property owner
and the engineering firm that conducted the analysis has submitted a Letter of
Map Revision (LOMR) request to FEMA to incorporate the conclusions of this
analysis into their floodplain maps. FEMA has requested additional information
to process that request, and the city is also currently conducting engineering
studies and analysis to submit to FEMA. Therefore, Schumer is urging FEMA to
work with the community to thoroughly evaluate the area and incorporate these
conclusions from the engineering analysis into the flood maps in Johnstown where
it is appropriate. Together, Schumer said, both the City and FEMA should be able
to conduct the analysis and reviews necessary to update the flood maps, so that
any outdated or inaccurate sections of the flood map can be corrected as soon as
possible. Schumer explained that businesses like the Johnstown Shopping Center
and the owners of potentially 50 other properties could benefit by being removed
from the mapped zone.

Schumer said that while it is inevitable that some homes will stay in the FEMA
flood zone, it is important that the homes and businesses that do not need to be
in the zone, or are only in there as a result of this inaccurate and outdated
data, be removed in a new map. Without accounting for new data and more recent
measurements, the current map has led to onerous flood insurance premiums being
placed unnecessarily on local homeowners and businesses for more than 30 years,
and Schumer said it is time these revisions be made in an up-to-date map.
Schumer said that advancements in technology have allowed weather models to be
more accurate in their predictions and therefore urged Administrator Fugate to
have his department work with city officials to redraw the flood maps based on
the LOMR conclusions. Schumer said this would provide residents and local
businesses with more accurate estimates of regional flood zones and prevent from
people being unnecessarily included when they need not be incorporated into the
maps.

Schumer was joined by Johnstown Mayor Michael Julius; Fire Chief Bruce Heberer,
who oversees code enforcement; City Engineer Chris Vose; David Goldstein, owner
of the Johnstown Shopping Center; Alton Knapp of A.E. Knapp Associates; and Ron
Peter, regional community planner.

"This is a major concern for Johnstown, for homeowners, and for business owners.
It creates an unnecessary cost and it needs to be rectified," said Mayor Michael
Julius.

A copy of Senator Schumer's letter to FEMA appears below:

Dear Administrator Fugate:

I write to request that FEMA work with the City of Johnstown to coordinate
efforts and ensure that the flood maps throughout the city are accurate; so that
only those homeowners and businesses that actually face flood risk are required
to purchase flood insurance and pay elevated premiums. It is my understanding
that the flood maps for Johnstown and the surrounding areas were drawn in 1983;
FEMA should work with the community to ensure that the appropriate engineering
analysis is done to survey these areas and ultimately make any appropriate
adjustments to conclude that the maps are accurate and up-to-date.

The City of Johnstown is concerned that residences and businesses in town,
specifically areas located near the Cayudutta Creek, may currently be subject to
flood elevation estimates that significantly overstate the flood risk in those
areas. We must ensure that these areas are not needlessly located in the
federally designated floodplain or considered at a greater flood risk than is
appropriate. While those businesses and homes that are at risk of flood should
be adequately protected and prepared, I know you share my desire to see that the
flood maps reflect the most accurate data and do not subject property owners to
flood risk estimates that may require them to purchase policies that are not
necessary.

I urge FEMA to work with the community leaders in Johnstown to identify the best
way to move forward to ensure that the city's flood maps are accurate and
reflect the most up to date topographic information from that area. I am aware
of engineer analysis from a respected firm that has already been conducted on
behalf of private business owners for a portion of this area, and I know that
they have initiated a Letter of Map Revision request to FEMA to incorporate the
conclusions of this analysis. The City of Johnstown is committed to ensuring
that studies and analysis of local properties and waterways are completed to
ensure that the federal flood maps are accurate and up to date. Therefore, I
urge you to work with the community to ensure that FEMA is able to thoroughly
evaluate the area and incorporate the conclusions of the engineering analysis
into the flood maps in Johnstown where it is appropriate. Together both the City
and FEMA should be able to conduct the analysis and reviews necessary to update
the flood maps where necessary, so that any outdated or inaccurate sections of
the flood map will be corrected as soon as possible.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 334 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   January 8, 1997, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Stop, Uncle Sugar; pull plug on silly dam projects

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 405 words


The final estimates are weeks away, but the deadly flooding of
California's rich Central Valley (so far, at least six lives lost)
will cost taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars in federal
relief. Preliminary estimates from just nine of 42 inundated counties
stand at $ 775 million.

That's worse than California's 1986 floods, which were worse than
any before. But how is that possible? For decades Washington has
been Uncle Sugar to flood-zone communities nationwide, spending
an estimated $ 30 billion on dams and levees to contain the nation's
waterways. Shouldn't flood-plain residents be safer?


As it turns out, those "flood-control systems" can be catastrophically
self-defeating. Levees encourage development of flood-prone areas,
which creates more run-off as land is paved over or reshaped to
shed water rather than absorb it.

Result: Less precipitation causes more intense floods of land
containing more valuable property. The Midwest has seen six 100-year
floods in the past 50 years, which makes them 8 1/3-year floods.
California has suffered two in 11 years (51/2-year floods), not
counting 1995, which saw 100-year-scale disasters in more limited
areas.

The folly of building flood-control systems that worsen the intensity
and frequency of floods has not been lost on Washington. Last
year, lawmakers killed at least one flood-control anachronism
-- California's benighted Auburn Dam above Sacramento. Then in
October, they increased the share paid by local communities for
new flood projects, encouraging them to think twice before fooling
with Mother Nature.

Both the Army Corps of Engineers and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency are helping communities develop alternative strategies.
Among them: restoring riverside wetlands to their natural, absorbent
state; relocating homes and businesses; and establishing recreation
areas that double as flood buffers. In some states, including
bedraggled Oregon and Washington, damage also can be mitigated
by limiting timber clear-cutting, which causes killer landslides
and flash floods.

Plainly, Washington cannot abandon people at risk of devastating
floods. But the notion that the best way to do that is to build
more old-fashioned, high-cost, all-pork dams and levees -- as
some continue to insist -- is both shortsighted and destructive.
California's tragic floods are proof enough of that.

LOAD-DATE: January 08, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, John Burgess, AP

TYPE: DEBATE

                      Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 335 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                    The Land

                                 August 5, 2016

Four flood warnings in place across NSW

SECTION: WEATHER

LENGTH: 351 words


Four flood warnings remain in place across the state for the Orara River,
Macquarie River, Bogan River and the Lachlan River.

A flood warning is in place for the Macquarie River at Warren Town, with minor
flooding expected today.

The river was expected to hit 7.5 metres (minor flood level) at noon today with
a peak at 8m on Saturday morning.

A minor to moderate flood warning is in place for the Bogan River with minor
flooding expected at Dandaloo from Saturday onwards.

The flood peak from the mid July flood is currently approaching Mulgawarrina
where a moderate flood peak is expected this weekend.

Minor flooding is occurring at Gongolgon where moderate flooding is expected in
mid August.

Predicted River Heights/Flows:

A minor flood warning is in place for the Lachlan River.

The Lachlan River at Cottons Weir is expected to peak slightly below the minor
flood level.

River levels at Nanami peaked at a lower level than previously expected and
river height predictions for Cottons Weir have been lowered to reflect this.

The flood peak from the mid July flood has just passed Condoblin where the river
peaked around 5.48 metres Thursday morning. River levels are now easing with
minor flooding continuing.

Minor flooding continues to rise at Euabalong where a minor flood peak is
expected on Monday, August 8.

The flood peak from the early July flood has passed Hillston Weir where the
river peaked around 1.87 metres with below minor flooding on Sunday last week.

Minor flooding is expected progressively at Hillston Weir and Booligal caused by
the early July flood and the mid July flood respectively.

Predicted River Heights/Flows:

A minor flood warning is still in place for the Orara River.

The Bureau of Meterology issued its latest warning at 10am today. The Orara
River at Glenreagh peaked at about 5.91 metres at 3:15pm on Thursday afternoon
with minor flooding. River levels have now fallen below the minor flood level.

Minor flooding is occurring at Coutts Crossing where the river peaked about 5.3
metres around 9am (estimated) Friday morning.

River levels are now easing with minor flooding continuing.

LOAD-DATE: August 06, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2016 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 336 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                  Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 13, 2011 Sunday

EDITORIAL: New FEMA rules, Local flood control structures will now be evaluated
for maps

BYLINE: Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo

SECTION: COMMENTARY

LENGTH: 635 words


March 13--Mississippi U.S. senators Thad Cochran and Roger Wicker received
encouraging news last week from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which
has agreed to stop using a "without levee" evaluation on flood plain maps when
some type of uncertified flood control structure actually offers a measure of
protection to homeowners and businesses.

The revised evaluation could lead to savings for individuals who otherwise would
be required to purchase federal flood insurance.

If FEMA determines any area has a 1 percent annual chance of flood, property
owners in that area are required to purchase National Flood Insurance Program
coverage if their mortgage is backed by the federal government. Community
leaders across the country have complained that FEMA and the Army Corps of
Engineers have disregarded locally funded flood control projects and repairs
that may provide some level of actual protection.

Cochran and Wicker joined more than 70 of their colleagues in both parties in
the House and Senate in making the request of FEMA, which certifies flood plain
maps nationwide.

Tupelo, Saltillo and many other Northeast Mississippi communities are sited in
flood plains, and the revision could be helpful to residents of those and other
municipalities and unincorporated areas.

Wicker and Cochran both praised FEMA's decision.

The new regulation would impact the designations on official Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRMs), with which city and county officials in our region are
thoroughly familiar.

FEMA Administrator Craig Fugate told the senators that he has directed his
agency to discontinue the practice of using "without levee" modeling in the FIRM
modernization process, a joint press release said.

"I appreciate Administrator Fugate's common sense decision to use modeling
methods that more accurately reflect existing flood protection around the
country. Recent heavy rains in Mississippi remind us that flood risks are real
and that the flood map modernization process is a necessary part of protecting
ourselves. Those at risk should purchase flood insurance," Cochran said.

Wicker agreed.

"I am glad that FEMA was willing to work with us and take another look at the
methodology so all communities receive fair treatment in determining their flood
zone status," he said. "It makes sense to take existing flood control structures
into account. This should be a significant help to residents in areas that faced
higher insurance rates."

"In order to increase the credibility of our Flood Insurance Rate Maps in areas
where levees are not accredited, I have directed my staff to replace the
'without levee' modeling approach with a suite of methodologies that are
technically sound, credible and cost-effective," Fugate wrote.

Discontent about the FEMA practice was widespread. For example, Montana's lone
congressman, Denny Rehberg, was among those joining the protest.

"It doesn't make sense that levees you can see and touch will be treated as if
they don't exist on the new maps," said Rehberg, a member of the Congressional
Levee Caucus.

The collegial, bipartisan approach used to persuade FEMA is almost always better
than individual protests or requests about widespread issues.

Flood protection and flood policy affect millions of Americans, but the policy
application is felt most in communities and by individual property owners.

The new FEMA policy should lead to more reasonable evaluations and, it is hoped,
less expense.

To see more of the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.djournal.com. Copyright (c) 2011, Northeast
Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services. For more information about the content services offered by
McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20110313-TP-EDITORIAL-New-FEMA-rules-Local-flood-control-structures-will-now-be-
evaluated-for-maps-0313-20110313

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TP


               Copyright 2011 Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal


                          FOCUS - 337 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                            August 3, 1993, Tuesday

A CAREFUL LOOK AT FLOOD AID

BYLINE: RICHARD B. MCKENZIE

SECTION: EDITORIAL PAGES, Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 1043 words


Should we feel sorry for our fellow Americans in the Midwest who have been
flooded out of their homes by nearly 40 days and nights of continuous rains?

Of course we should. The reports of mounting property losses pull heavily on
just about everyone's emotions. No one wants to see others suffer, and the
outpouring of aid for flood victims is understandable. We all are, or should e,
our brothers' and sisters' keepers - to some extent.

Yet, we should not dismiss the question quickly because it leads, inexorably, to
the tougher question of how much help should be rendered. The answer must be
grounded in an assessment of the damage incurred by flood victims.

Such an assessment may lead us to the paradoxical conclusion that many flood
victims, despite their sizable property losses, may not be victims at all, at
least as measured by net losses. The paradox can be unraveled with a little
reflection on the economics of floods.

People know flood plains are prone to floods of varying frequency and duration.
They may not know when the floods will come or how severe they will be, but that
shouldn't stop them from considering the prospect of floods and the damage they
cause. The potential for flooding, without much question, tempers the market's
demand for property in flood plains, causing its value to be lower than for
similar land without the chance of flooding.

This being the case, prospective buyers should not be willing to pay as much for
flood-plain property as for land deemed safer. Indeed, prospective buyers should
lower the price they are willing to pay for the flood-plain property by an
amount at least equal to the expected losses during floods. The greater the
frequency and duration of floods, the greater the expected damage, thus the
lower the property price.

If a "safe" piece of land costs $ 100,000 and if the expected loss from floods
on a similar piece of property inside the flood plain is $ 20,000 over the
foreseeable future, the flood-plain property should sell for $ 80,000, more or
less. This means the owners of the flood-plain land can endure $ 20,000 of
losses without being any worse off than if they had bought outside the flood
plain.

Clearly, some flood-plain property owners will suffer heavier losses than
expected, mainly because floods cannot be predicted precisely, or may occur more
frequently or be more severe than anticipated. By the same token, some property
owners, in spite of their losses during floods, may be net gainers because their
losses turn out to be less than expected - that is, lower than the discount they
received on the property for buying in a flood plain.

For example, suppose the owners in the above example who bought the flood- plain
property for $ 80,000 suffer only $ 12,000 in flood-related losses. They gain,
on balance, because their losses are $ 8,000 less than the $ 20,000 premium they
would have had to pay for property outside the flood plain.

The problem with so many government aid programs is that they force Americans
who paid premiums for their property outside flood plains to cover the losses of
people who bought discounted flood-prone property. One must wonder, then, who
actually are the victims.

The point of making this analysis is not to say that no aid should be provided.
Rather, it should be given very judiciously and with great caution and
restraint. If the losses of flood-plain property owners are fully covered by aid
from, say, federal and state treasuries, the real benefits of the relief effort
are likely to be short-lived - not because the aid will dry up (pardon the pun)
but because property values will adjust to account for the expected aid.

Prospective buyers will then take into account the aid for flood victims when
they purchase property. The demand for flood-plain property will rise, as will
its market value, in line with the amount of aid. Future prospective owners of
flood-plain property will no longer get discounts for expected losses. The
anticipated value of the aid will be captured in the prices of flood-plain
property. The gainers from the aid will not necessarily be the owners who incur
the losses when the floods occur, but rather the former property owners who
receive an inflated (or undiscounted) price for their property.

In fact, when it is routinely offered to victims of floods, aid can actually
raise the number of victims and the amount of their losses during floods.
Knowing that all or a significant portion of their losses will be covered, more
people will be willing to move to flood plains, to build bigger and more
expensive houses there and to stock them with more expensive furniture. They may
even be less inclined to try to save their property in times of floods. Why?
Their losses will be covered. Only by being extremely cautious in the allocation
of aid can we reduce the perverse incentives inadvertently fostered by aid
programs.

Victims of major natural disaster - whether floods, earthquakes or hurricanes -
receive a great deal of attention in the media and from government agencies
because they are easy to identify and their numbers are large. They are natural
candidates for aid.

Yet, many other people in this country are constant victims of a series of minor
natural and man-made disasters, the total losses from which may exceed the
losses of flood victims. Nevertheless, they are often ignored by government and
the media, though their numbers are large, precisely because they are not easily
identified and their relatively small losses don't make headlines. Those who
suffer unacknowledged smaller disasters may actually be double victims; not only
do they lose when they endure their own losses but they are also asked to aid
the victims of major disasters.

Floods have a way of destroying property. Clearheaded thinking has a way of
throwing cold water on emotional responses to losses that are suffered and
widely reported. There is no clear argument against aid, but there are darn good
reasons for exercising considerable restraint, especially when many flood
victims were fully capable of buying flood insurance but chose not to. Unless
carefully crafted, aid programs can create policy disasters that are no less
damaging than floods.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

EDITOR-NOTE: Richard B. McKenzie is a professor in the Graduate School of
Management

                  Copyright 1993 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 338 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                            March 23, 1995, Thursday

MORE CALIFORNIANS BUY FLOOD COVER IN WAKE OF FEDERAL REFORM, STORMS

BYLINE: BRIAN JOHNS; Journal of Commerce Staff

SECTION: INSURANCE, Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 576 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


Federal insurance reform is spurring more Californians to buy much needed flood
insurance, according to a leading industry group.

Between September and January, the rate for flood insurance purchases jumped
25-fold - to 5,000 purchases from a rate of roughly 200 new purchases - as
homeowners anticipated implementation of the Community Development and egulatory
Improvement Act.

"Everybody is getting ready for this new law that went into effect on March 1,
although it mostly affects banks," said Peter van Aartrijk, spokesman for the
Independent Insurance Agents of America of Alexandria, Va.

After being battered by several weeks' worth of winter storms, the subject of
flood protection has been of great interest to Californians lately.

As of January, the cost of flood-related damages was an estimated $ 360 million
and almost certain to climb higher as new spring storms plowe d into the coast.
Simultaneously, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has received some
84,000 homeowner requests for financial assistance and expects more.

Still, the price for insurance companies is expected to be relatively low
because fewer people have flood insurance than are supposed to. Nationally, just
22 percent of all homes in flood-prone areas are covered, while in California
just 3 million of 9 million homes are covered.

Federal law requires coverage in certain flood prone areas. However, insurance
experts say compliance is spotty, because no one monitors its sale when property
is transferred. They don't follow whether coverage lapses after initial purchase
either.

Nobody's leaning on lenders to do their part. Banks are supposed to require
homeowners to purchase flood insurance if structures are in designated
floodplains.

The California legislature is considering a bill that would require insurance
agents and brokers to notify banks or firms holding mortgages whenever a flood
policy has lapsed on a particular home.

Flood insurance is sold privately and backed by the federal government. Coverage
averages about $ 330 a year for homes worth roughly $ 80,000. In California,
property owners typically pay about $ 620 annually for $ 175,000 worth of
protection.

Implementation of the Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act -
which is essentially a reform of the National Flood Insurance Program - is
expected to help increase the amount of coverage.

Specifically, the new rules will result in tighter mortgage lender compliance
rules, the addition of mitigation insurance to flood insurance policies and more
grants to support state and local flood hazard mitigation efforts.

Other changes that begin this month include placing limits on flood insurance
and extending a flood insurance waiting period from five to 30 days.

''There were instances, such as in the 1993 Midwest flood, where people knew the
flood was coming and bought flood insurance in enough time to be eligible for a
claims payment for the flood damage they suffered," FEMA said. ''This new,
longer waiting period will eliminate claims payments for last- minute flood
insurance purchases."

Between the months of October 1994 and January 1995 - the latest figures
available - the number of flood insurance policies in California increased 3.3
percent, to 214,778 from 207,524. Similarly, between Oct. 31 and Dec. 31, the
number of nationwide policies increased 1.7 percent, to 2,860,250 from
2,810,211, FEMA said.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1995 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 339 of 380 DOCUMENTS



              The Brooke County Review (Wellsburg, West Virginia)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                 March 16, 2012

FEMA Encourages Flood Safety Awareness

BYLINE: The Brooke County Review staff

LENGTH: 399  words


PHILADELPHIA - Floods are the most frequent and costly natural disaster in the
United States. Flood effects can be local, impacting a neighborhood or
community, or very large, affecting entire river basins and multiple states.

FEMA Region III encourages citizens in Virginia, West Virginia, Pennsylvania,
Delaware, Maryland and the District of Columbia-to know their flood hazards.
National Flood Safety Awareness Week (March 14-18) is intended to highlight some
of the many ways floods can occur, the hazards associated with floods, and what
you can do to save lives and preserve property.

To help individuals better understand flood risks nationwide as well as empower
them to take steps that mitigate damaging floods, FEMA has created a one-stop
flood awareness information too' svailable at
http://www.ready.gov/floodawareness. This flood fact-focused s'.fe contains
valuable tips on what to do before, during and after a flood, at courages flood
insurance protection among other measures.

"In 2011, we saw firsthand the devastating floods caused by Hurricane Irene and
Tropical Storm Lee. It's incumbent upon families and businesses to act now. plan
ahead and prepare for flooding events that can potentially affect their
communities," said FEMA Region Hi Administrator Mary Ann Tiemey.

Floods do more than damage properties; they can also threaten lives if careful
safety precautions are not followed. Therefore, know your community's flood
risk, flood history and overall community action plan to address flooding events
before, during and after they occur.

"Develop a strong family emergency plan and reach out to your community's best
flood planning resource the local emergency management office. This approach is
a great way to protect your family and property while learning, lending input,
and assisting your first responders," said Tierney.

FEMA's mission is to support our citizens and first responders to ensure that as
a nation we work together to build, sustain, and improve our capability to
prepare for. protect against, respond to, recover from, and mitigate all
hazards. FEMA Region Ill's jurisdiction includes Delaware, District of Columbia,
Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia. Stay informed of FEMA's
activities online: videos and podcasts available at hup:
7www.fema.gov/medialibrary and www.youtube.com/fema. Follow us on Twitter at
www.twitter.com/femaregion3.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Disaster and Accident

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BCR

                      Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                    Copyright 2012 The Brooke County Review


                          FOCUS - 340 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                          China Daily European Edition

                              July 18, 2016 Monday

Counting the costs of floods in China

BYLINE: Asit K. Biswas and Cecilia Tortajada

SECTION: OP-ED CONTRIBUTORS

LENGTH: 699 words


It is a little-known fact among general public and politicians that floods cause
more damages each year globally than any other form of natural disasters.
According to the United Nations, over the 20-year period between 1995 and 2015,
157,000 people died due to floods and another 2.3 billion were affected.

Currently, global average annual flood losses are estimated at $104 billion. The
country incurring the highest losses is China, followed by US and India. These
losses do not include disruptions to global supply chains when industries
located in flood plains are often affected by floods. The 2011 flood in Thailand
first brought this problem to global attention. However, the country which has
the potential to disrupt the global supply chains the most because of floods is
China, followed by Brazil, Russia and India.

Because of topography, high population, urbanization and tremendous economic
growth during the past decades, China has had three of the 10 most costly global
floods since 1950. Equally, because of population density, all the three Chinese
floods resulted in high fatalities compared to the other seven floods elsewhere
where deaths were in hundreds.

At global number two is the July-August flood of 1998, which resulted in 3,656
deaths and an economic loss of $43.7 billion in 2014. The sixth costly global
flood was also in China, during July-August 2010. It caused 829 deaths and
losses of 31.1 billion in 2014. In the 10th place is the flood of June-July 1996
which caused 2,775 deaths and an economic damage of $19 billion in 2014.

Flooding has been a perennial problem in China. Earlier one of the important
tests of good rulers was their ability to protect the citizens from the ravages
of floods. This requirement continues even today.

The good news is that death toll from floods in China has steadily declined due
to government actions such as construction of dams, dikes and levees, early
warning systems and prompt evacuation measures. The bad news is, economic costs
of floods are steadily increasing and are likely to rise in foreseeable future.

It appears that the 2016 floods are likely to enter in Chinese record books as
one of the most severe ones. The floods season is not yet over. Damages incurred
are already significant. This is primarily because rainfall in China this year
has been 21 percent higher than average. In Yangtze Basin, it has been 27
percent higher than average.

Yangtze is the longest river of China and the third-longest in the world. It is
also the most important water artery in terms of economy and development. Thus,
a serious Yangtze flood has major implications not only for China but also for
the world by disrupting manufacturing and transportation links as well as the
global supply chain.

According to the Office of State Flood Control and Drought Relief Headquarters,
as of July 3, 32 million people in 26 provinces have been affected, 186 have
died, 26 are missing, and 1.4 million people have been relocated. Some 73,000
homes have collapsed and crops have been lost in 700,000 ha. Direct economic
losses already exceed $10 billion. Flood season does not end until August.

The severe flood this year was not unexpected. Vice-Premier Wang Yang had warned
in June that El Niño this year was likely to increase flooding risks
significantly in Yangtze and Huai basins. In 1998, another El Niño year, the
death toll reached 3,556. With better preparedness, human losses this year are
likely to be significantly less.

In terms of national policies, flooding was recognized to be a major problem
during the post-1995 period when each of the two floods in 1996 and 1998 caused
several thousand deaths and billions of dollars on economic damages. While
floods became a serious concern, the solutions then proposed went only part way
to solve the problem. This main policy was to construct large dams which could
effectively store flood waters. After the flood seasons, stored excess water
could be used during months of no, or limited, rainfall to generate
hydroelectricity and then used for agriculture, industrial and domestic
purposes. Major dams like Three Gorges were constructed, having flood control as
an important objective.


LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 China Daily Information Co
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 341 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                  September 03, 1998, Thursday, Final Edition

Subsidizing Losers

James L. Witt

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 787 words


While some have said that Hurricane Bonnie "wasn't that bad," it clearly was a
terrible disaster for anyone who suffered a loss. People lost their homes and
businesses, and at least two people lost what we hold most dear, their lives. I
know from experience that Americans' desire to help neighbors and disaster
victims will never diminish. But the real tragedy is that, in most cases, these
losses could have been avoided.

The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) was created to help avoid flood
losses through mitigation -- elevating or flood-proofing homes, or removing them
from harm's way -- and to help pay for them through insurance. The NFIP is a
partnership of federal, state and local government working together to reduce
flood risks. The NFIP lets individuals and communities be responsible for the
flood risks they knowingly accept.

Homes and businesses that are sited on beaches and riverfronts have beautiful
views but dangerous consequences. When it comes to floods and hurricanes, we
should use the NFIP standards in order to build more safely and plan for these
inevitable natural events.

This year, the NFIP will help American taxpayers avoid nearly $ 1 billion in
flood losses. That's the amount of flood losses that statistically would have
happened if the more than 18,000 communities in the NFIP had not been enforcing
flood-mitigation requirements. This year, the NFIP will spend $ 20 million to
help mitigate additional flood losses in the flood-prone areas of the nation.
And this year, one estimate indicates that the NFIP will pay $ 258 million in
flood claims, instead of the American taxpayer.

We have two critical goals: (1) to reduce the disaster-relief expenditures to
communities that are mired in a damage-repair, damage-repair cycle, and (2) to
reduce the flood insurance subsidy to the owners of structures that have
experienced repetitive flood losses.

When Congress originally enacted the NFIP in the early 1970s, we inherited an
enormous problem -- all of the homes and buildings already constructed without
resistance to flood losses. The flood program was expected to reduce the burden
of flood disasters on the American taxpayer and reduce the number of homes and
businesses residing in the flood plain. These at-risk structures, which receive
a subsidy for their risk from the NFIP, were expected to be replaced gradually
over the years. By 1990, it was projected, only 10 percent of the homes would be
subsidized.

Clearly, the projection was overstated. Today, 40 percent of the structures in
the NFIP policy base are still subsidized. These at-risk buildings are flooded
again and again. Flood insurance policy-holders in the NFIP pay claims from
these floods, again and again. Of the estimated $ 200 million in repetitive
losses in the NFIP during an average year, about 96 percent are from these
subsidized structures.

Communities also are victims of this repetitive loss cycle. Schools, roads and
power systems need repairs, and infrastructure is rebuilt after each declared
flood disaster. Again, this is not a small problem. Floods account for about 70
percent of the disasters that are declared by the president each year.

By the first of next year, we will present recommendations for accelerating the
NFIP toward the two critical goals I cited -- reducing both the flood insurance
subsidy for repetitively flooded homes and disaster relief expenditures for
repetitively flooded communities. Building on the initiatives we have already
put into place -- such as Project Impact -- we can empower communities and
individuals to take a more appropriate share of the responsibility for their
natural hazard risks. Neither flood policy-holders nor the taxpayer should
subsidize repetitive losses.

After the 1993 floods in the Midwest, we determined that our flood mitigation
actions saved $ 2 in taxpayers funding of disaster relief for every dollar
spent. We can formulate and implement incentives for individuals and communities
to undertake these mitigation actions. We recently have announced, as an
example, a partnership with Fannie Mae to offer low-interest loans for
residential mitigation. This is the smart and responsible thing to do.

We will work with our government partners -- states and communities -- to
propose ways that accelerate the pace at which our homes and our cities become
resistant to floods. There is no reason to stay in harm's way when we can break
the damage-repair cycle. There is no reason to put people in harm's way when
enforcement of sound flood-plain management makes a stronger and safer legacy
for America's next generations.

The writer is director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.


LOAD-DATE: September 03, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ILL,,MARGARET SCOTT

                       Copyright 1998 The Washington Post


                          FOCUS - 342 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                    July 9, 1993, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

FLOOD INSURANCE WILL EASE LOSSES FOR PROPERTY OWNERS

BYLINE: Linda Eardley Of the Post-Dispatch Staff Stephen Casmier and Terry Ganey
of the Post-Dispatch staff contributed information for this story.

SECTION: WAR PAGE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 877 words


WHEN THE DIRTY RIVER water finally retreats and exposes the damage done by the
Flood of '93, the picture won't be pretty. But the loss won't be so ugly for
property owners with federal flood insurance.  Flood insurance is available only
through the federal government and is purchased from private insurance agents.
About 14,910 policies have been written in the areas affected by the flood, said
James L. Taylor of the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Insurance
Administration in Washington. About half of these policies are in Missouri
because the state has a high concentration of urban communities near the flood
plain, he said.  Nationally, fewer than than 20 percent of the people eligible
for flood insurance buy it, Taylor said. About 2.5 million policies are in force
with a total coverage of $203 billion.  In Missouri, only about 10 percent of
the people who live in flood-prone areas have federal flood insurance, estimated
Eric Jenkins of the regional FEMA office in Kansas City. The percentage is
likely to be higher for some areas hit by the flood.  For example,
unincorporated St. Charles County has 1,379 policies. Since 1978, the county has
had 5,527 claims for more than $29 million.  "St. Charles is one of the top five
counties in the U.S. in repetitive loss," Jenkins said. "I'm pretty sure most
people have flood insurance there." Illinois has no estimate for the percentage
of statewide participation in the flood insurance program, said Norbert Schwartz
of the FEMA office in Chicago. "The rule of thumb is 10 to 20 percent. The
bottom line is that we're still grossly underinsured," he said.  Grafton
residents, however, apparently have learned from repeated floods.  About 62
percent of the structures in the town's flood plain are insured against
flooding, Schwartz said.  Those who have flood insurance pay an average annual
premium of $275. And they need not worry about their rates automatically going
up because of this flood. Only an act of Congress can increase the rates.  "You
could be flooded 100 times and still be drawing the same rate," Jenkins said.
FEMA officials do not yet have an estimate of losses in this flood. They stress
that claims will be covered, although the insurance fund is in the red by $18
million. The fund, which comes from insurance premiums, has been depleted by
various hurricanes and tropical storms.  Officials said the fund brings in $2
million a day in premiums and can borrow up to $1 billion. In the past, claims
have averaged $11,000 each.  The flood insurance program has come under fire
from some members of Congress. Last month, Rep. Joe Kennedy, D-Mass., and Rep.
Doug Bereuter, R-Neb, criticized the program's dwindling funds and called for
major reform.  In a hearing in June, Kennedy compared the program to "a poorly
built ship . . . riddled with leaks that threaten to sink the program and soak
the taxpayer." One problem is the "bargain basement" cost of the insurance, he
said.  Also, Kennedy said, the eagerness of the government to rebuild homes in
flood-prone areas has caused the number of such dwellings to increase by 40
percent since 1968.  "The flood program has fostered the very development it was
intended to discourage," he said.  Congress created the National Flood Insurance
Program in 1968 to reduce losses and discourage rebuilding away from
flood-hazard areas.  Communities can get in the program only by working with
FEMA and adopting local ordinances regulating the flood plain.  Once a community
is in the program, anyone living there may apply for flood insurance. The
insurance is required with any new federally-assisted mortgage in a flood plain.
Most of the flood-prone communities here got in the federal flood insurance
program in 1974 and 1975, Jenkins said. Rates differ based on when homes were
built, their elevation and other factors.  The annual premium on a $60,000 house
without a basement built before the community entered the program would be $307.
The premium on the same house built later to flood-protection regulations would
be $177. A house built later without flood protection would be subject to
actuarial rates that could run between $1,000 to $2,000 a year.  Older insured
homes that have flood damage over 50 percent would rebuild according to flood
regulations.  Jenkins said he is unsure why participation in the flood insurance
program is so low. He said it could be because people think it won't happen to
them, because they think it's too expensive and because mortgage lenders don't
require it as they should.  Richard M. Gaffney, chief of Flood Plain Management
Section of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources' water management
program, said state and federal emergency management officials were looking for
ways to encourage people to move to higher ground.  "If you are not in the way,
nobody has to be warned, nobody has to be rescued, nobody has to be given
disaster payments. We don't have to go out there with the National Guard to
prevent looting," he said.  "What we are hoping for," Gaffney said, "is to
provide some assistance in loans or grants that will help people to move to
higher ground and get them away from this hazard so they don't have to go back
and face this all the time."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Photo By Sam Leone/Post-Dispatch - Ray Blaskow of Southwestern
Bell Telephone Co. hitching a ride Thursday on Rich Waser's tractor to get to
his next assignment in Fenton. Blaskow was disconnecting telephones that might
be damaged by the flooding Meramec River.

                  Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 343 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                          November 27, 2013 Wednesday

Real-time flood warning system

BYLINE: Azlan Abu Bakar

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 392 words


KUALA LUMPUR: MALAYSIA is bracing for the onset of the annual year-end floods
and storms.

The first episode of heavy rains has been forecast for any time now.

Though the monsoon this time is expected to be normal, each occurrence of heavy
rainfall can cause flooding.

Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka (UTEM) researcher Prof Datuk Dr Mohamad
Kadim Suaidi said flood warning is linked to the task of flood forecasting.

He said UTEM has developed a flood warning system comprising a sensing unit
configured to detect flood water levels and to report on the flood situation.

Dr Mohamad Kadim said the present invention provides real-time status report on
flood-prone areas so that steps can be taken to minimise damage or casualties.

"The flood warning system comprises a sensing unit configured to detect flood
water levels and to report flood situation.

"A control unit configured to receive reports from the sensing unit, to monitor
status of the sensing unit, to provide real time action upon detection, to
analyse data from the sensing unit and to notify on the flood situation," he
said.

The alert station can be configured to receive the notification and other
information from the control unit and to execute steps to warn on the flood
situation.

Dr Mohamad Kadim said UTEM's flood warning system is a novel solution for real
time flood warning system developed for flood prone locations to reduce
overheads for the government, private sector and the flood victims.

"The Flood Observatory System is capable of sending real-time water level
information at all time to the monitoring stations and alerts users via display
equipment and the traffic light system," he said.

He said instant detection makes the Flood Observatory System an efficient and
reliable device for easy monitoring, especially where remote monitoring is
required.

The system also features self-monitoring, which enables the monitoring personnel
to be informed if the sensor unit or power supply unit fails.

The installation cost is low compared to the efficiency and usefulness of the
system.

"The system is equipped with GSM communication device, which can be connected to
any personnel in the monitoring stations via SMS for instant water level
information," he said.

For more information on the product, the researcher can be reached at 06-555
2003 or via email to kadim@utem.edu.my

( END )

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2013 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 344 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                            January 14, 2011 Friday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

No policy, no payout, households told INSURANCE --- 2011 FLOOD DISASTER

BYLINE: TERESA OOI

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 477  words


QUEENSLAND flood victims should not expect any special favours from insurance
companies if their homes are not insured against floods, the Insurance Council
of Australia has warned.

Insurance companies would pay out on claims according to the terms and
conditions of policies, an ICA spokesman said yesterday.

``If people do not purchase flood cover insurance, they will not be covered,''
he said.

It is estimated more than half of all insured homes in Queensland are not
covered for flood damage.

The Australian Securities and Investments Commission estimated that 70 per cent
of all Australian homes were under-insured in 2005.

``More than 50 per cent of all available insurance policies in Queensland
provide flood cover,'' the ICA spokesman said.

``People should assess their needs and get the proper insurance coverage for
their homes and not be guided by price only.''

Suncorp, the biggest insurer in Queensland, is the only company to automatically
protect against flooding for home and contents insurance policyholders.

There are three types of flood insurance coverage: flash flood-

ing, storm damage and riverine flooding.

IAG, Allianz and QBE do not offer flood protection. RACQ provides flood and
riverine cover as an optional extra.

An industry source said some companies were not prepared to offer flood
protection in areas that had been subject to floods in the past.

``I would be surprised if insurance companies would make ex-gratia payments to
customers who do not have flood insurance,'' a spokesman for Allianz said.

``The scale of the Queensland disaster is so large that it would be financially
prohibitive.''

However, flood victims whose homes have been wrecked by the floods and who have
no insurance can turn to the state government for assistance.

``We will be helping people without flood or home insurance, but it is far too
early to know the details, and the priority right now is dealing with the
ongoing emergency situation,'' a government spokesman from the Queensland
Premier's office said.

Premier Anna Bligh has set up a flood assistance program, and announced
concessional loans for primary producers and small businesses to help in the
flood recovery and clean-up.

In addition, the Premier's Flood Relief has raised $35.8m to help families in
need.

Suncorp received an additional 1000 claims from flood victims in Toowoomba,
Ipswich and Brisbane yesterday, taking the total claims lodged so far to 5000.

IAG has received 2400 claims from the same area but said it was too early to
calculate the total claim cost to the insurer. This is in addition to the 1200
claims it received from earlier floods caused by Cyclone Tasha, which is
expected to cost IAG between $10m and $30m. IAG operates under the NRMA and CGU
insurance brands in Queensland.

RACQ received 400 fresh claims yesterday, taking its total to 2000. QBE declined
to comment.

BUSINESS P19

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2011 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 345 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  July 27, 2003 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition

UNPRECEDENTED GROWTH IN THE FLOOD PLAIN BRINGS RICHES AND RISKS;
BUSINESS GROWS ON LAND UNDER WATER 10 YEARS AGO

BYLINE: Sara Shipley Of The Post-Dispatch Copyright 2003, St. Louis
Post-Dispatch Christopher Carey And Eric Heisler Of The Post-Dispatch
Contributed To This Report.

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 3706 words


* Ten years ago this summer, the Flood of 1993 inundated the Midwest. More than
1,000 levees failed, 70,000 buildings were damaged, and 50 people died. Damages
totaled at least $12 billion. The Mississippi River spread miles wide in places.
The rush of water passing by the Gateway Arch would have filled Busch Stadium
almost once every minute. But soon after the water receded, some saw a way to
turn the muddy river bottoms into gold mines. New development, much of it
publicly subsidized, has filled the Mississippi and Missouri river valleys. As a
result, cash is flowing like water. But what will happen when the next big flood
comes?

THE GAINS

Communities benefit as shopping centers, restaurants, offices and other projects
bring in new tax revenue and jobs.

THE COSTS

Higher levees can mean heavier flooding elsewhere. Development destroys
wetlands. A future flood could be more costly.

More than $2.2 billion worth of new development in the St. Louis area stands on
land that was under water in the 1993 flood.

The building boom has brought jobs, services and tax revenue to the region. But
it could lead to a more costly disaster in the future.

Flood plain development is a gamble against the river, and Missouri has rolled
the dice on more land than any other state affected by the flood, according to a
study done for the Post-Dispatch. In the past decade, offices, shopping centers
and highways have covered at least 4,200 acres of Missouri flood plain, most of
which were under water. And there's more in the works.

Projects under way or on the drawing boards in St. Louis and St. Charles
counties would convert 14,000 acres of agricultural flood plain into commercial
and residential development.

Since the flood, development interests have pushed with renewed zeal to control
the flood plains, which represent the biggest tracts of open, private land left
in the St. Louis region. City officials and landowners have worked hand-in-hand
with developers to take advantage of liberal regulations and generous public
subsidies for flood plain development.

Supporters say the benefits justify what they consider to be a small chance of
flooding.

"Name me a place where you wouldn't have some risk," says J. Wayne Oldroyd,
community development director for Maryland Heights, which has designed the
single biggest new flood plain development in the region on 8,000-plus acres
near the Missouri River. The plan calls for 16.5 million square feet of hotels,
offices, restaurants and light industry behind a reinforced levee.

"Would there be, in geological time, a point in which the river would come over
that levee? Sure," Oldroyd said. "That's a business decision (to build in the
flood plain). The market will decide whether it's confident in putting
development there."

Critics say the trend puts short-term economic gains ahead of long-term safety
and environmental stability.

James Lee Witt, director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency under
President Bill Clinton, predicts that the costs of new flood plain development
will outweigh the benefits to society.

"If it's in the flood plain, it's not in a good area to develop," Witt said. "I
don't care how many levees you build, at some point, you will be impacted."

Witt said that construction in flood-prone areas also makes flooding worse
elsewhere. "We've actually caused a lot of these problems ourselves, by not
protecting our environment so it can protect us," he said.

Aggressive development contradicts task force

An examination by the Post-Dispatch has found that:

* Missouri's aggressive development contradicts the recommendations of a federal
flood task force headed by respected former Army Corps of Engineers Gen. Gerald
Galloway. The 1994 Galloway Report said that new flood plain development should
be avoided, levee construction should be limited, and people and buildings
should be moved out of the river's way, whenever practical.

* Missouri lawmakers have declined to enact statewide flood plain regulations,
allowing communities to develop flood plains without fully evaluating or
compensating for negative effects on their neighbors. Some Midwestern states --
including Illinois, Iowa and Wisconsin -- have stricter rules on flood plain
development.

* A growing body of scientific evidence has detected increased flood heights of
3 to 12 feet on the Missouri and Mississippi rivers, a trend that shows no signs
of stopping. The scientists blame levees and flood plain development in part for
the increase.

* Increased flooding caused by new development could affect a great number of
people and buildings already in the region's flood plains. Up to 1.1 million
people live in the historic flood plains of seven states in the Upper
Mississippi River basin, according to the Post-Dispatch's study. Much of this
commercial and residential development is in levee-protected areas, where flood
insurance is not required.

* Taxpayers subsidize flood plain development through levee construction, levee
repair, disaster aid, insurance costs and infrastructure such as roads, bridges
and drainage systems. In Missouri, more tax money has been funneled to flood
plain construction through the use of an economic development tool called
tax-increment financing.

"We should be ashamed of ourselves for what we've done with the taxpayers'
money," said Wayne Freeman, executive director of the Great Rivers Habitat
Alliance, a conservation group based in St. Louis. "We can't afford to subsidize
high-risk development."

St. Peters Mayor Tom Brown, who backs flood plain development, said the St.
Louis region has enough river bottoms to support both economic development and
open space.

"St. Louis city has a flood wall. Riverport is in a flood plain. Think of the
jobs created in Earth City. It's in a flood plain. So yes, very positive things
can be done," he said. "In St. Charles County, probably 40 percent of the land
will (remain) in flood plain. So we'll always have farmland and hunting ground."

Developments take over flood plains in Missouri

From a strip shopping center in Chesterfield Valley billed as the nation's
largest to the high-end outlet mall being built in Hazelwood, most of the
Missouri River flood plain in St. Louis County will have been set aside for
development by the end of this year.

Bridgeton has approved plans for a 417-acre commercial park. Levee districts in
Chesterfield and Maryland Heights are in the process of raising existing levees
to encourage development. The Missouri Bottoms Levee District, farther
downstream, is considering the same.

Across the river in St. Charles County, the city of St. Charles has 2.3 million
square feet of new commercial space in the Mississippi River flood plain. St.
Peters has one new levee around its Old Town district and plans to build a
1,670-acre business park in the flood plain nearby. O'Fallon has designs on
annexing flood plain to the north.

Nowhere in the Midwest is this growth pattern as dramatic, according to a
satellite image analysis of development in states affected by flooding in 1993.

The Post-Dispatch hired Saint Mary's University of Minnesota, a longtime leader
in the study of the Mississippi River, to conduct the analysis. No state or
federal agency keeps detailed records on flood plain development.

The study looked at development in areas that were under water in 1993 and
development within the river's historic boundaries, typically defined by river
bluffs.

The analysis included levee-protected areas and focused on land in and around
population centers.

The results showed that more than 3,870 acres of land in St. Louis and St.
Charles counties had been converted from fields and trees to highways, buildings
and parking lots. In Kansas City, 405 acres were developed, making a total of
about 4,275 acres in Missouri.

In Missouri, about 75 percent of the development happened on land that had been
under water in 1993.

In other states, development was limited mostly to land that didn't flood 10
years ago. In Illinois, for example, most of the development was in those parts
of the Metro East area protected by levees that held in '93.

It may be no surprise that Missouri developed the most flood plain land. The
state has the two biggest cities in the flood-affected area -- St. Louis and
Kansas City. Both are on major rivers and have rapidly growing suburban fringes.

Missouri also has the biggest flood plain -- about 6,400 square miles, compared
with 4,755 for Illinois and 4,330 for Iowa, the next two largest, according to
the study.

Michael F. Robinson, a senior policy adviser at FEMA in Washington, said St.
Louis has an unusual set of factors that makes it a natural spot for new flood
plain development.

"You have to have a big, wide flood plain next to an urban area to make that
economically viable," Robinson said. "It may be the only area where this kind of
development would happen."

Elsewhere in the nation, some attempts to create similar major developments have
been rebuffed. FEMA refused to permit the 4,600-acre Green Diamond development
in South Carolina because it was too close to the Congaree River.

Missouri has a reputation for huge new levees, said Tim Searchinger, a lawyer
for Environmental Defense, an advocacy group based in New York that tracks flood
plain issues.

"The area we hear the most complaints about stupid new big things in the flood
plain is basically in Missouri," he said. "We haven't heard of t hem elsewhere."

New stores rise on once submerged land

Missouri's building boom might have seemed unlikely a decade ago, when the
nation's most costly flood struck.

The five-month-long deluge covered 17,000 square miles of land in nine states
and forced the evacuation of about 54,000 people. Thousands of people helped
fill sandbags, only to lose the battle in places.

Whole towns were swallowed in a lake of brown floodwater. High water shut down
12 commercial airports, 388 sewage treatment plants and almost all bridges over
the Missouri and Mississippi rivers between St. Louis, Kansas City and
Davenport, Iowa.

Damage estimates ranged from $12 billion to $20 billion, not counting the toll
from lost productivity and disrupted lives.

By most counts, Missouri suffered the most direct damages, with at least $3
billion in losses. At the nexus of two of the most powerful rivers in the
nation, floodwater in Missouri reclaimed much of the rivers' ancient channels,
consuming farm fields, factories and homes.

Until then, many Americans believed that they could keep rivers safely in place
through engineering and sheer tenacity. The flood challenged that thinking.

Government figures compiled in the flood's wake showed that federal taxpayers
had spent about $140 billion on flood-control structures and disaster assistance
nationwide in the previous 25 years, an average of $5.6 billion per year.

Yet flood damages in the United States have more than doubled since 1900 in
inflation-adjusted dollars, rising to more than $5 billion per year on average,
according to a National Weather Service estimate.

"That flood was, to me, the ultimate repudiation of the basic American approach
to flooding for the past 70 years," said David Conrad of the National Wildlife
Federation, who wrote a critical report on the issue in 1998.

"It pointed out that to rely exclusively on a flood-control approach, rather
than managing our land use, means that we are ultimately putting more and more
people and property at risk."

Galloway, the retired Corps of Engineers civil engineer who headed the White
House task force on the flood, said it shifted the nation's collective
consciousness -- at least for a while. Instead of assuming that rivers should be
dominated, people began to think about giving them room to roam.

"The United States has made a fundamental change," he said. "Structural methods
(such as levees) don't solve the problem by themselves."

The federal government spent $1 billion to buy 25,000 flooded properties
nationwide to turn the land into open space.

Missouri embraced that offer more than any other state, moving more than 4,700
households permanently out of harm's way. Illinois bought out about 3,000
properties, including the town of Valmeyer.

But the buyout program was voluntary and, in Missouri, applied only to
residential property. Before long, people were thinking about moving back into
the flood plains.

"You go two to three years after a flood, and human optimism prevails over human
experience," said Scott Faber, water resources specialist with Environmental
Defense.

Most officials consider devastating flood unlikely

Today, most city officials and developers working in the river bottoms play down
the likelihood of another devastating flood.

All the new commercial flood plain developments in St. Louis and St. Charles
counties are protected by earthen levees or built on top of plateaus of dirt
designed to withstand what's called a 500-year flood.

A 500-year flood is one that has a 1-in-500 chance of happening in any given
year. Stated another way, that would be a 1-in-7 chance of happening over a
person's 80-year lifetime, according to FEMA.

"There is always a risk of flooding," said Mike Geisel, Chesterfield's public
works director, who also manages the city's flood plain development permits. "I
think the valley is reasonably safe. It could -- eons in the future -- flood
again."

Modern 500-year levees are considered the gold standard of protection for major
urban areas like Kansas City and St. Louis. None has ever had a catastrophic
failure.

But in recent years, bigger floods have called even the mighty 500-year levee
into question. During the '93 flood, most 500-year levees performed solidly. But
a 500-year levee at Riverport and a 500-year flood wall in downtown St. Louis
needed reinforcements.

And now the Corps of Engineers has proposed building a 1,000-year levee across
the Missouri River from Jefferson City. The added protection is needed because
spiraling flood levels mean the levee will offer only 500-year protection by
2031, according to the corps' Kansas City office.

Other studies since the early 1970s have documented increasing flood levels for
similar volumes of water on the Missouri and Mississippi rivers. Many
researchers believe that levees and other man-made constrictions squeeze water
higher in the channel.

That means a 500-year levee might not really offer 500-year flood protection.

"Even at 500 years, somewhere a levee is going to get overtopped someday," said
FEMA's Robinson. "When it does happen, it's going to be a big disaster."

The Corps says the 1993 flood was a 175-year flood at St. Louis, meaning that,
on average, a flood that size should happen only once every 175 years. But some
independent researchers say a flood that size could be expected every 50 to 100
years.

There's also a debate over whether these new levees will make flooding worse
elsewhere by pushing water onto other property.

"You're a fool if you don't say it does," said Dennis Stephens, chief of
hydrologic engineering for the corps' St. Louis District.

The question is, how much.

The corps says that levees generally increase flooding upstream and increase
water velocity downstream, because water backs up at the levee and then shoots
downstream through a narrower opening. The agency figures the additional
flooding caused by each of its levee projects and compensates other landowners
for it. That might mean building a ring levee around a vulnerable water plant,
for example.

But some dismiss problems caused by levees. The Upper Mississippi, Illinois and
Missouri Rivers Association, which represents businesses along the rivers,
believes that the impact of levees is localized and minimal. The association
wants the corps to build a uniform flood-protection system along the entire
upper Mississippi.

"Levees don't cause floods. Rain causes floods," executive director Heather
Hampton-Knodle said.

Others say they can engineer around the problem. St. Peters Mayor Brown said the
city has spent $1.25 million on studies for the planned commercial park. The
result is that the project "does not raise the level of the Mississippi River
one bit," Brown said.

Federal rules permit projects in flood plain

New flood plain development is allowed under federal rules -- and some say
federal policies even encourage it. Missouri lacks its own laws, leaving local
communities in charge.

Critics say FEMA's 30-year-old rules for new flood plain development are too
lax. For instance, the National Flood Insurance Program, the basis for flood
plain management in 19,000 communities nationwide, allows development to consume
most of the flood plain.

No insurance or other precautions are required so long as the buildings are
protected from a 100-year flood by levees, flood walls or elevation. FEMA will
even remove the protected areas from its official flood plain maps upon request.

"Right now, our national approach is, we're going to show you the high-risk area
and then show you how to build there," said Larry Larson, executive director of
the Association of State Floodplain Managers, based in Madison, Wis.

Witt, the former FEMA director, wanted to raise the 100-year-flood standard to
at least a 200- or 300-year-flood level.

"We've overbuilt and overdeveloped in high-risk areas," Witt said. "Water runs
off much faster than it ever did."

FEMA's Robinson agreed that the program isn't perfect, but he said it reflects a
necessary compromise between preventing flood damages and respecting private
property rights.

"We estimate our flood plain management regulations have saved well over $1
billion in damages annually," he said.

Development subsidies come under scrutiny

Since the '93 flood, subsidies for flood plain development have come under
scrutiny.

Congress took some steps to shut off disaster aid to repeatedly flooded property
and to make communities pay a little more for their own flood-protection
systems.

But some financial incentives still exist. For example, the Corps of Engineers
pays for up to 65 percent of new levee construction and 80 percent of levee
repair after a flood.

In the case of Chesterfield Valley, the corps' help could be worth up to $38
million of the estimated $58 million cost of raising the levee there to 500-year
protection. The agency already has spent more than $1.5 million on studies for
Chesterfield and plans to pay for big-ticket construction items later, or even
reimburse local costs outright.

"We don't make a value judgment on whether that property should be protected,"
said Alan Dooley, a spokesman for the corps' St. Louis district. "As long as
people can show they can meet the requirements, they'll get a permit, whether we
like building in the flood plain or not."

The federal government has also spent billions on flood insurance and disaster
aid. The '93 flood cost federal taxpayers $4.2 billion in direct payments, plus
$1.3 billion in insurance payments and $621 million in loans.

The flood insurance program has been largely self-sustaining since 1986, but
taxpayers have spent $1.2 billion to support it since its inception, and now
face another $1 billion bill to update old flood plain maps.

Insurance coverage tops $640 billion, making it the biggest liability to the
American treasury after Social Security.

Flood insurance premiums aren't raised no matter how often a property floods.
Steve Ellis, vice president of programs for Taxpayers for Common Sense, a
federal budget watchdog group, says this amounts to setting the same car
insurance premium for an 18-year-old in a Ferrari and a 50-year-old in a
Chevette.

"Here we are, building in these risky places, and at some point we're going to
turn around and have to pay through the nose for these new properties," Ellis
said.

Larry Zensinger, acting director of FEMA's recovery division, wants to dispel
notions of unlimited government largesse. Individual families and p ublic
entities qualify for disaster aid, but businesses are limited to low-interest
loans.

"Those people who own industrial or commercial property who tell you, don't
worry, FEMA will bail us out, are misinformed," Zensinger said.

Galloway says that government programs should avoid creating what he calls a
"moral hazard" -- an incentive for bad behavior.

"If people are well-educated and know better, they can make decisions that are
rational," Galloway said. "But if the government is creating programs that
induce people to take a risk, we are creating a moral hazard."

Sen. Jim Talent, a Republican who lives in Chesterfield, says the government
should support both flood control and economic development, which in turn
improve the region's quality of life.

"There's a risk to an area of not creating jobs and not developing," he said. "I
urge people who don't like these things to remember we're dependent on this
happening somewhere."

==========

Glossary

Flood plain: Low lands adjoining the channel of a river, stream, lake or ocean
that are periodically inundated by floodwater. On major rivers, the flood plain
is typically defined by geological features such as river bluffs.

Floodway: The central area of the river that carries the swiftest and deepest
water during a flood.

Flood plain manager: A local official appointed to carry out provisions of the
National Flood Insurance Program, such as building restrictions.

100-year-flood: A flood that has a 1 percent chance of occurring in any given
year.

500-year-flood: A flood that has a 0.2 percent chance of occurring in any given
year. Stated another way, a 1-in-500 chance of occurring in any given year.

Levee: An earthen embankment used to protect low-lying land from flooding.

Levee district: A political entity formed by landowners to pay for the
construction and maintenance of a levee protecting their land.

Tax-increment financing: An economic development tool used to divert t ax
revenue from new businesses to new roads, sewers and other services in the area.

Wing dike: A structure used to divert river flows toward a single main channel.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2003

LANGUAGE: English

SERIES: A FLOOD OF DEVELOPMENT;PART 1 OF A SERIES

NOTES: A FLOOD OF DEVELOPMENT; Reporter Sara Shipley:; E-mail:
sshipley@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 314-340-8215; ; WHAT'S NEXT; MONDAY:
Chesterfield Valley -- once under 10 feet of water -- is now a
multimillion-dollar retail market.; TUESDAY: The development boom spreads to
communities across the area.; WEDNESDAY: A debate grows over flood levels.;
THURSDAY: Others have found alternative ways to manage the flood plain.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC, MAP(7) Graphic / Map by JACOB PIERCY / POST-DISPATCH -
Widespread destruction from the Flood of 1993
Counties in nine states were declared disaster areas, Some of the $12 billion in
damages from farmland saturated by rainfall.
Sources: Federal Insurance Mitigation Administration ITS Mapping and Analysis
Center and FEMA Mitigation Information Services

WHAT'S INSIDE
(8) Color Graphic / Map - BUILDING BOOMS IN FLOOD PLAIN: Two-page pullout map
with satellite image showing growth on land that was under water. A10 ; (1)
Color Photo by TEAK PHILLIPS / POST-DISPATCH - A RIVER RAN THROUGH IT: The
Missouri River flood plain at Chesterfield Valley has become one of the region's
hottest retail markets. THF Realty's shopping center landed Wal-Mart, then
several other big-box retailers, including Lowe's, Target Greatland, Circuit
City and Sam's Club. Restaurants, offices and more have been built on land that
was under water 10 years ago. The Monarch Levee is being raised between the
development and the river, which are about a mile apart.; (2) Color Photo by
TEAK PHILLIPS / POST-DISPATCH - A NEW FLOOD ODF DEVELOPMENT (NOW): Highway 40 in
the Chesterfield Valley has become a busy commercial corridor that includes an
ice arena, a Bentley dealership and a pet store. A new highway exit, funded by
tax-increment financing, opened at Chesterfield Commons.; (3) Color Photo by
TEAK PHILLIPS / POST-DISPATCH - IF YOU BUILD IT: Retailers in Chesterfield
Valley sell more than $300 million in goods and pay more than $20 million in
sales tax per year. Much of that tax revenue funds levee and road improvements.;
(4) Photo by LARRY WILLIAMS / POST-DISPATCH FILE PHOTO - WATER OVER THE BRIDGE
(THEN): Highway 40 at the Daniel Boone Bridge is covered by Missouri River
floodwater in Chesterfield Valley after the failure of the Monarch Levee in
1993. Much of the area that flooded has been developed into commercial
property.; ; WHAT'S INSIDE; (5) Color Photo - THE FLOOD 0F 1993: Memories of a
summer of courage and loss. A7; (6) Color Photo - THE VALUE OF FLOOD PLAINS: A
home for wildlife and a filter for pollutants. A13

TYPE: ANALYSIS; 1993 FLOOD; REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS

                  Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 346 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              July 30, 2003 Wednesday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SOME FIRMS DON'T WORRY ABOUT FLOOD; OTHERS PLAN AHEAD

BYLINE: Eric Heisler Of The Post-Dispatch

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 1045 words


WEIGHING THE RISKS

The Missouri River doesn't scare John Wild. Or so he says.

Last year, Wild moved his agency, the Missouri Higher Education Loan Authority,
or MOHELA, into a $12 million new headquarters building in Chesterfield Valley
-- on land that was 10 feet under water a decade ago.

While Wild says he's confident a rebuilt Monarch Levee will protect his agency's
investment, he isn't taking any chances, either.

Not only does the agency have flood insurance, but Wild also has set up the
building to survive a flood, with the first floor full of mostly expendable
items, while the computers sit safely on upper floors.

"We put stuff we can do without on the first floor, so that if it floods, we can
hose it down," says Wild, the director of MOHELA, who's also mayor of
neighboring Wildwood.

Like MOHELA, many St. Louis businesses have moved into the region's vast flood
plains since the Flood of '93.

And although they insist that levees and other flood control mechanisms will
protect them, most are taking extra precautions that businesses didn't even
consider before 1993.

"It has the potential to be catastrophic"

Still, if the Missouri River were to flood again today, the damage would be much
worse than in 1993, critics of flood plain development say. That's because
recent levee improvements in St. Louis County have fueled a building frenzy.

"Just look at what's happened in Chesterfield and St. Charles since '93," says
Wayne Freeman, executive director of the Great Rivers Habitat Alliance. "It has
the potential to be catastrophic."

Many developers, however, say they've learned from the Flood of '93 and would be
much more prepared should the water rise like it did a decade ago.

Evidence of their increased preparedness can be found in Chesterfield Valley,
where most businesses now have both public and private insurance. Ten years ago,
it was common to have neither.

In many cases, obtaining insurance has caused companies to take other
precautions. That includes crafting more flood-resistant designs, elevating the
ground where they've built their projects and creating contingency plans.

Developer THF Realty built the $250 million Chesterfield Commons, a massive
Chesterfield Valley shopping center that is home to a Wal-Mart, Sam's Club,
Lowe's, Circuit City, Target Greatland and more.

Michael Staenberg, THF's president, says he's "absolutely convinced it will
never flood again."

But that doesn't mean Staenberg has shunned insurance. In addition to federal
flood insurance, THF also has flood insurance through its regular private
insurance carrier.

"It's built into our whole insurance package" that THF has for all of its
shopping centers, said Marian Nunn, the chief operating officer for THF Realty.

"We insure the building and our tenants insure the contents," Nunn said.

Nunn said the insurance provider doesn't break out the additional premium THF
pays to cover against a flood, but she stressed that it's not a significant
amount.

The FEMA program insures up to $500,000 of damage for each building and $500,000
for contents of each building for commercial property. To cover the rest,
property owners must buy private insurance.

MOHELA is a quasi-governmental group with $3.5 billion in assets that lends
money for tuition and related expenses to college students. The agency moved to
Chesterfield Valley from the bluffs of eastern Chesterfield in August 2002.

Wild says that between 1 and 2 percent of MOHELA's $400,000 annual insurance
bill is related to protection from potential flooding.

"Nobody thought about floods then"

Things were very different in 1993, when few Chesterfield Valley property owners
had flood insurance.

"Nobody thought about floods then," said Earl Hoffman, the owner of Valley-based
Surdex Corp. and the chairman of the Monarch-Chesterfield Levee District board.
"We were financed through a bank, and nobody there said anything about flood
insurance."

As the waters of the Missouri River were rising in mid-July 1993, property
owners in the Valley began to buy federal flood insurance policies, hoping
they'd beat out a five-day waiting period.

But the Missouri struck too quickly for some. Hoffman took out his policy in
time, but others, such as Smoke House market owner Thom Sehnert, were left
without any insurance.

"I can't even describe to you what it looked like," Sehnert says. "There was
mold and mildew everywhere. The floors were all cracked, and the windows were
broken."

After borrowing more than $2 million to completely rebuild, Sehnert isn't taking
any chances. He's now insured through both public and private sources.

With those memories of the disaster still close at hand, Wild says, "everyone in
the Valley has insurance today."

As they've moved into flood-prone areas, businesses have taken some flood
prevention measures before they even began construction.

Before Gundaker Commercial Group began building its $20 million Towne Centre
retail strip, the company drove 15,000 truckloads of dirt to the site, at Long
and Edison Roads in the Valley.

That lifted the land high enough so that the shopping center minimized its risk
of flooding from rainwater. It also dramatically reduced the insurance the
company pays.

Mike Hejna, president of Gundaker Commercial, says he's even more worried about
internal flooding than he is about the Missouri River.

"I think there's more of a likelihood that we'll get 4 inches of rain in four
hours (than a flood of the Missouri River) and that's all we need for it to
flood internally," Hejna says.

Sysco Corp., which opened a warehouse in St. Charles County's Elm Point business
park in 1993, also has taken measures to prevent flooding.

To protect itself from nearby Boschert Creek, the company has built a berm
around its property. As flooding from the creek has gotten worse, Sysco is now
raising that berm and installing a pump system.

Since the Flood of 1993, Spirit of St. Louis Airport, at the western end of the
Chesterfield Valley, also has expanded. But Richard Hrabko, the airport's
executive director, says the airport is insured.

What will happen to the county-owned property if it floods again?

Says Hrabko: "We'll just build again."

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2003

LANGUAGE: English

SERIES: A FLOOD OF DEVELOPMENT;PART 4 OF A 5 PART SERIES

NOTES: A FLOOD OF DEVELOPMENT; Reporter Eric Heisler:; E-mail:
eheisler@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 314-340-8183; ; More online:; * An
interactive timeline * Archival video highlights; * Photo galleries from readers
and P-D staff at STLtoday.com/flood.; ; THE SERIES; Sunday: Land that was
flooded in 1993 now holds billions of dollars in development, bringing
prosperity and risk.; Monday: Chesterfield Valley -- once under 10 feet of water
-- is now a multimillion-dollar retail market.; Tuesday: The development boom
spreads to communities across the area.; Today: A debate grows over flood
levels.; Thursday: Others have found alternative ways to manage the flood plain.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHICGraphic / Chart by the POST-DISPATCH - Flood damages continue to
rise nationwide
Figures are annual estimates in billions, adjusted to 1997 dollars
Source: National Weather Service

TYPE: ANALYSIS; 1993 FLOOD; REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS

                  Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 347 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                  September 10, 1992, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Storm swells over flood plan // Insurance a lifeline to many

BYLINE: Janet L. Fix

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1216 words


Arnold Brown watched on TV the misery wreaked by Hurricane Andrew and thought,
''There but by the grace of God.''

He and many others. But Brown's been there. A January storm tried to topple his
restaurant in Bethany Beach, Del. After $ 100,000 in repairs, he's serving
seafood to sunseekers thanks to National Flood Insurance. ''I can't say enough
good about it,'' Brown says.

That federal program was Brown's lifeline and is now one for many Andrew
victims. It has rebuilt lives after floods since the '60s, when hurricanes named
Betsy, Carla and Donna leveled towns without flood insurance and cost the
federal government $ 2.2 billion in emergency funds.

Since 1968, nearly all of the nation's flood insurance has been underwritten by
the government and sold through independent agents. It works like any insurance
except it covers risks that private insurers won't - coastal and low-lying river
and lake areas prone to floods. Homeowners in those areas are required by
lenders to buy flood insurance in addition to regular homeowner's insurance.
Without flood insurance, they couldn't get a mortgage. Policyholders pay an
average $ 300 a year for $ 100,000 coverage. That's incredibly cheap,
considering that the program thinks many policyholders would have to spend more
than $ 1,000 if government rates reflected those homes' actual risk. If private
insurance were available, it might cost thousands more.

Those low flood-insurance rates are at the heart of controversy that surrounds
the program. Cheap flood insurance encourages building in high-risk flood areas,
say the flood program's many critics. Often, it helps people rebuild in the same
spot after floods wipe them out. Because seaside homes often are expensive,
critics bash the federal program as a safety net for the rich and not the poor.

''The wealthy build homes where common sense says they shouldn't knowing they'll
be bailed out by flood insurance,'' says George Bunting, a Delaware state
representative.

At least insurance is not as cheap as it once was. A policyholder paying $ 600 a
year today paid $ 35 a year in the early '70s, when rates didn't reflect risk
and were kept low to encourage participation. The fund often lost money then,
and taxpayers paid the tab - $ 1.2 billion from 1968 through 1984. An additional
$ 732 million in taxes were paid for finding and mapping flood areas. Since
1985, after President Reagan ordered the program to pay its own way, it hasn't
lost money. But it still can borrow $ 1 billion from the Treasury if cash runs
short, as it appeared it might after Andrew.

Andrew won't break the fund - thanks mostly to luck. Wind, not water, caused
most of Andrew's $ 22 billion damage in south Florida and Louisiana. Flood
insurance doesn't cover wind damage. Homeowners' policies usually will cover
that. Fears that flood damage might empty the fund are gone. Only $ 100 million
in flood damage now is expected. ''We were lucky,'' says fund administrator C.M.
Schauerte.

That luck could run out with the season's next hurricane or storm. Or next
season's. The National Hurricane Center recently warned that the USA faces more
frequent and ferocious hurricanes the next 25 years.

The close call with Andrew is now a weapon in a battle over beach preservation
raging in coastal communities and Congress. Congress wanted flood insurance to,
among other things, discourage unsafe development in flood areas.
Environmentalists have branded the flood program ''S&L of the Sea'' and argue
that it has encouraged beach development. ''The taxpayer shouldn't back up
second homes on the beach ... where losses are catastrophic,'' says Katharine
Dixon, spokeswoman for the National Wildlife Federation.

But only 3% of all flood claims are for high-risk coastal areas. The majority
are for inland river communities. Beachfront-home owners want to stop Congress
from taking away their flood insurance, raising their rates and forcing them off
beaches. ''You can't roll back 300 years of property rights because you've
decided beach houses are bad,'' says Gerard Stoddard, chairman of the Long
Island Coastal Alliance. Last year, the House passed a bill that would cut flood
insurance in high-risk areas. Homeowners have blocked the bill in the Senate.

Flood insurance, he says, has been a good deal for taxpayers. Just how good is
hard to quantify, but the bill for federal disaster aid since 1968 might have
been increased $ 1 billion if it weren't for flood insurance.

Behind the numbers and rhetoric are 18,000 communities like Bethany Beach where,
for better and worse, flood insurance has transformed towns easily washed away
into ritzy beachfront fortresses on wooden pilings high above the ground. In
exchange for insuring residents, the flood program has extracted from
communities strict building and zoning codes aimed at curbing flood damage. The
standards have changed life on Bethany Beach. Gone is the sleepy seaside hamlet
of Mary Pat Kyle's childhood. Gone are inexpensive cottages built low on
cinderblocks. Gone, too, is the idea that floods are a risk one must accept with
life near the shore.

Today, even houses blocks back from the beach stand on pilings sunk deep in the
ground that put the first floor about 12 feet above sea level. A house 100 yards
from the ocean and built to flood standards may be insured for as little as $
230 a year. If it is on the beach on pilings, it may cost $ 930 a year. But a
new beachfront house built in violation of flood standards might cost more than
$ 20,000 a year to insure.

Kyle's parents never expected help after floods. And they didn't get any in
1962, when a storm wiped out a third of Bethany. Kyle's parents, neighbors and
Bethany's businesses, like the Holiday House now owned by Brown, were rebuilt
with savings. Or owners moved out of floods' way.

But when Kyle's beachfront home south of Bethany was battered by
January's storm, the flood insurance that costs her   $ 450 a year

paid the $ 3,800 repair bill.

That irks Til Purnell, who calls flood insurance ''stupid and selfish.'' In her
perfect world, there'd be no flood insurance. As an environmentalist, she
figures that without flood insurance, banks wouldn't write mortgages in flood
areas. No mortgages, no beach houses. No beach houses, no beach damage.

Purnell thinks people like herself, who live on an estuary or near the shore,
should face flood risk alone. ''When the barrier island goes, we're gone,'' she
says. ''I don't expect anybody to bail me out. And I resent people who expect
taxpayers to do it.''

But David and Marianne Webster were happy to repair $ 4,600 in damage from
January's storm with the flood insurance that costs them $ 631 a year.  They
argue that flood insurance is not a hassle-free safety net for the rich.

That safety net may become more costly for homeowners, but it's not about to
disappear. Until all homes meet today's strict flood standards, there will be
some risk that the fund will have to borrow from taxpayers and charge
policyholders more to repay the loan. ''Once you start down the road, it's hard
to say (the government) won't insure you anymore,'' says Francis Reilly, the
flood program's deputy administrator. ''We have to convert our bad risks to good
risks.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC; color, Marty Baumann, USA TODAY, Source: Federal Emergency
Management Agency (Line graph); PHOTO; color, Timothy A. Murphy

CUTLINE: HAD SAFETY NET: Arnold Brown, owner of Holiday House restaurant in
Bethany Beach, Del., says flood program helped him make repairs after storm
earlier this year.

TYPE: Cover Story

                      Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.


                          FOCUS - 348 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        Ararat Advertiser & Stawell Time

                             April 30, 2013 Tuesday

Wickliffe - Glenelg Hopkins CMA has completed the Wickliffe

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 464 words


Wickliffe - Glenelg Hopkins CMA has completed the Wickliffe Flood Investigation,
which has improved flood planning and preparation following the devastating
flood of January 2011 when flood waters inundated the town.

The Hopkins River broke its banks when the region recorded more than 169
millimetres of rain over a six day period, including more than 78 millimetres on
the night the town was flooded.

A number of homes suffered damage while the Wickliffe Hotel also suffered an
influx of flood water and the town's residents were evacuated.

The CMA received funds to undertake the Wickliffe Flood Investigations Project
in May 2011 with support from Ararat Rural City Council and the SES, following
the floods which had a major impact on the town.

Funding for the investigation was made available through the Victorian Coalition
Government's Flood Warning Network - Repair and Improvement initiative and the
Australian Government's Natural Disaster Resilience Grants Scheme.

Flood modelling processes, informed by data collected from the Wickliffe
community, were used to complete the work. The project has prepared maps of
flood extents and levels for a range of different floods.

Glenelg Hopkins CMA CEO Kevin Wood said that the likely behaviour and
consequences of future floods has been modelled and documented.

"The project also looked at the recent event and found that the January 2011
flood at Wickliffe was very rare and only likely to occur on average once in 300
years, based on historical rainfall records," he said.

"In addition we modelled the Wickliffe community's ideas for reducing the
impacts of floods and the associated benefits and costs of these were also
estimated."

The information from the investigation will be used to produce local flood
information for the community and emergency response agencies. The information
will also inform planning decisions.

"There is still work to be done to understand the best options for improved
flood warning at Wickliffe," Mr Wood said.

"We will now work with the Victorian Government and the Bureau of Meteorology to
see how we can develop better flood warning for this region.

"However this investigation has provided great information to improve our
understanding of flooding at Wickliffe and has already improved our preparedness
for future flood events."

Glenelg Hopkins CMA thanked all those who participated in the investigation
which has produced high quality information and a great understanding of floods
and their effects at Wickliffe.

Flood investigations rely heavily on information provided by the community to
ensure the results they produce are correct. If anyone has any flood information
they would like to share or would like more information on the project they can
contact the CMAs Hamilton office on 03 5571 2526.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2013 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 349 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        Ararat Advertiser & Stawell Time

                             April 30, 2013 Tuesday

Wickliffe - Glenelg Hopkins CMA has completed the Wickliffe

SECTION: PAGE TWO; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 464 words


Wickliffe - Glenelg Hopkins CMA has completed the Wickliffe Flood Investigation,
which has improved flood planning and preparation following the devastating
flood of January 2011 when flood waters inundated the town.

The Hopkins River broke its banks when the region recorded more than 169
millimetres of rain over a six day period, including more than 78 millimetres on
the night the town was flooded.

A number of homes suffered damage while the Wickliffe Hotel also suffered an
influx of flood water and the town's residents were evacuated.

The CMA received funds to undertake the Wickliffe Flood Investigations Project
in May 2011 with support from Ararat Rural City Council and the SES, following
the floods which had a major impact on the town.

Funding for the investigation was made available through the Victorian Coalition
Government's Flood Warning Network - Repair and Improvement initiative and the
Australian Government's Natural Disaster Resilience Grants Scheme.

Flood modelling processes, informed by data collected from the Wickliffe
community, were used to complete the work. The project has prepared maps of
flood extents and levels for a range of different floods.

Glenelg Hopkins CMA CEO Kevin Wood said that the likely behaviour and
consequences of future floods has been modelled and documented.

"The project also looked at the recent event and found that the January 2011
flood at Wickliffe was very rare and only likely to occur on average once in 300
years, based on historical rainfall records," he said.

"In addition we modelled the Wickliffe community's ideas for reducing the
impacts of floods and the associated benefits and costs of these were also
estimated."

The information from the investigation will be used to produce local flood
information for the community and emergency response agencies. The information
will also inform planning decisions.

"There is still work to be done to understand the best options for improved
flood warning at Wickliffe," Mr Wood said.

"We will now work with the Victorian Government and the Bureau of Meteorology to
see how we can develop better flood warning for this region.

"However this investigation has provided great information to improve our
understanding of flooding at Wickliffe and has already improved our preparedness
for future flood events."

Glenelg Hopkins CMA thanked all those who participated in the investigation
which has produced high quality information and a great understanding of floods
and their effects at Wickliffe.

Flood investigations rely heavily on information provided by the community to
ensure the results they produce are correct. If anyone has any flood information
they would like to share or would like more information on the project they can
contact the CMAs Hamilton office on 03 5571 2526.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2013 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 350 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        Ararat Advertiser & Stawell Time

                             April 30, 2013 Tuesday

Wickliffe flood investigation

SECTION: PAGE TWO; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 342 words


WICKLIFFE - Glenelg Hopkins CMA has completed the Wickliffe flood investigation,
which has improved flood planning and preparation following the devastating
flood of January 2011 when flood waters inundated the town.

The Hopkins River broke its banks when the region recorded more than 169
millimetres of rain over a six day period, including more than 78 millimetres on
the night the town was flooded.

A number of homes suffered damage, while the Wickliffe Hotel also suffered an
influx of flood water and the town's residents were evacuated.

The CMA received funds to undertake the Wickliffe Flood Investigations Project
in May 2011 with support from Ararat Rural City Council and the SES, following
the floods which had a major impact on the town.

Funding for the investigation was made available through the Victorian Coalition
Government's Flood Warning Network - Repair and Improvement initiative and the
Australian Government's Natural Disaster Resilience Grants Scheme.

Flood modelling processes, informed by data collected from the Wickliffe
community, were used to complete the work. The project has prepared maps of
flood extents and levels for a range of different floods.

Glenelg Hopkins CMA CEO Kevin Wood said that the likely behaviour and
consequences of future floods has been modelled and documented.

"The project also looked at the recent event and found that the January 2011
flood at Wickliffe was very rare and only likely to occur on average once in 300
years, based on historical rainfall records," he said.

"In addition we modelled the Wickliffe community's ideas for reducing the
impacts of floods and the associated benefits and costs of these were also
estimated."

The information from the investigation will be used to produce local flood
information for the community and emergency response agencies. The information
will also inform planning decisions.

"There is still work to be done to understand the best options for improved
flood warning at Wickliffe," Mr Wood said.

"We will now work to see how we can develop better flood warning.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2013 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 351 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        Ararat Advertiser & Stawell Time

                             April 30, 2013 Tuesday

Wickliffe - Glenelg Hopkins CMA has completed the Wickliffe

SECTION: PAGE TWO; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 464 words


Wickliffe - Glenelg Hopkins CMA has completed the Wickliffe Flood Investigation,
which has improved flood planning and preparation following the devastating
flood of January 2011 when flood waters inundated the town.

The Hopkins River broke its banks when the region recorded more than 169
millimetres of rain over a six day period, including more than 78 millimetres on
the night the town was flooded.

A number of homes suffered damage while the Wickliffe Hotel also suffered an
influx of flood water and the town's residents were evacuated.

The CMA received funds to undertake the Wickliffe Flood Investigations Project
in May 2011 with support from Ararat Rural City Council and the SES, following
the floods which had a major impact on the town.

Funding for the investigation was made available through the Victorian Coalition
Government's Flood Warning Network - Repair and Improvement initiative and the
Australian Government's Natural Disaster Resilience Grants Scheme.

Flood modelling processes, informed by data collected from the Wickliffe
community, were used to complete the work. The project has prepared maps of
flood extents and levels for a range of different floods.

Glenelg Hopkins CMA CEO Kevin Wood said that the likely behaviour and
consequences of future floods has been modelled and documented.

"The project also looked at the recent event and found that the January 2011
flood at Wickliffe was very rare and only likely to occur on average once in 300
years, based on historical rainfall records," he said.

"In addition we modelled the Wickliffe community's ideas for reducing the
impacts of floods and the associated benefits and costs of these were also
estimated."

The information from the investigation will be used to produce local flood
information for the community and emergency response agencies. The information
will also inform planning decisions.

"There is still work to be done to understand the best options for improved
flood warning at Wickliffe," Mr Wood said.

"We will now work with the Victorian Government and the Bureau of Meteorology to
see how we can develop better flood warning for this region.

"However this investigation has provided great information to improve our
understanding of flooding at Wickliffe and has already improved our preparedness
for future flood events."

Glenelg Hopkins CMA thanked all those who participated in the investigation
which has produced high quality information and a great understanding of floods
and their effects at Wickliffe.

Flood investigations rely heavily on information provided by the community to
ensure the results they produce are correct. If anyone has any flood information
they would like to share or would like more information on the project they can
contact the CMAs Hamilton office on 03 5571 2526.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2013 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 352 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        Ararat Advertiser & Stawell Time

                             April 30, 2013 Tuesday

Wickliffe - Glenelg Hopkins CMA has completed the Wickliffe

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 464 words


Wickliffe - Glenelg Hopkins CMA has completed the Wickliffe Flood Investigation,
which has improved flood planning and preparation following the devastating
flood of January 2011 when flood waters inundated the town.

The Hopkins River broke its banks when the region recorded more than 169
millimetres of rain over a six day period, including more than 78 millimetres on
the night the town was flooded.

A number of homes suffered damage while the Wickliffe Hotel also suffered an
influx of flood water and the town's residents were evacuated.

The CMA received funds to undertake the Wickliffe Flood Investigations Project
in May 2011 with support from Ararat Rural City Council and the SES, following
the floods which had a major impact on the town.

Funding for the investigation was made available through the Victorian Coalition
Government's Flood Warning Network - Repair and Improvement initiative and the
Australian Government's Natural Disaster Resilience Grants Scheme.

Flood modelling processes, informed by data collected from the Wickliffe
community, were used to complete the work. The project has prepared maps of
flood extents and levels for a range of different floods.

Glenelg Hopkins CMA CEO Kevin Wood said that the likely behaviour and
consequences of future floods has been modelled and documented.

"The project also looked at the recent event and found that the January 2011
flood at Wickliffe was very rare and only likely to occur on average once in 300
years, based on historical rainfall records," he said.

"In addition we modelled the Wickliffe community's ideas for reducing the
impacts of floods and the associated benefits and costs of these were also
estimated."

The information from the investigation will be used to produce local flood
information for the community and emergency response agencies. The information
will also inform planning decisions.

"There is still work to be done to understand the best options for improved
flood warning at Wickliffe," Mr Wood said.

"We will now work with the Victorian Government and the Bureau of Meteorology to
see how we can develop better flood warning for this region.

"However this investigation has provided great information to improve our
understanding of flooding at Wickliffe and has already improved our preparedness
for future flood events."

Glenelg Hopkins CMA thanked all those who participated in the investigation
which has produced high quality information and a great understanding of floods
and their effects at Wickliffe.

Flood investigations rely heavily on information provided by the community to
ensure the results they produce are correct. If anyone has any flood information
they would like to share or would like more information on the project they can
contact the CMAs Hamilton office on 03 5571 2526.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2013 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 353 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        Ararat Advertiser & Stawell Time

                             April 30, 2013 Tuesday

Wickliffe flood investigation

SECTION: PAGE TWO; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 342 words


WICKLIFFE - Glenelg Hopkins CMA has completed the Wickliffe flood investigation,
which has improved flood planning and preparation following the devastating
flood of January 2011 when flood waters inundated the town.

The Hopkins River broke its banks when the region recorded more than 169
millimetres of rain over a six day period, including more than 78 millimetres on
the night the town was flooded.

A number of homes suffered damage, while the Wickliffe Hotel also suffered an
influx of flood water and the town's residents were evacuated.

The CMA received funds to undertake the Wickliffe Flood Investigations Project
in May 2011 with support from Ararat Rural City Council and the SES, following
the floods which had a major impact on the town.

Funding for the investigation was made available through the Victorian Coalition
Government's Flood Warning Network - Repair and Improvement initiative and the
Australian Government's Natural Disaster Resilience Grants Scheme.

Flood modelling processes, informed by data collected from the Wickliffe
community, were used to complete the work. The project has prepared maps of
flood extents and levels for a range of different floods.

Glenelg Hopkins CMA CEO Kevin Wood said that the likely behaviour and
consequences of future floods has been modelled and documented.

"The project also looked at the recent event and found that the January 2011
flood at Wickliffe was very rare and only likely to occur on average once in 300
years, based on historical rainfall records," he said.

"In addition we modelled the Wickliffe community's ideas for reducing the
impacts of floods and the associated benefits and costs of these were also
estimated."

The information from the investigation will be used to produce local flood
information for the community and emergency response agencies. The information
will also inform planning decisions.

"There is still work to be done to understand the best options for improved
flood warning at Wickliffe," Mr Wood said.

"We will now work to see how we can develop better flood warning.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2013 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 354 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                            The Independent (London)

                            July 25, 2007 Wednesday
                                 Fourth Edition

Next time it could happen to you;
The map of Britain's flood plains shows how much of the country is vulnerable

LENGTH: 310 words


North West

Houses at risk 162,000

Flood defences rated fair, poor or very poor 17.9%

Blackpool and Liverpool at high risk from coastal flooding while some rural
areas of Cumbria suffer river floods.

Midlands

Houses at risk 99,000

Flood defences rated fair, poor or very poor 47.5%

Major rivers such as the Avon and Severn regularly flood and, despite the risk,
their floodplains are densely populated.

Wales

Houses at risk 40,000

Flood defences rated fair, poor or very poor N/A

Welsh rivers are less at risk of flooding than in England but flash floods are a
high risk after unusually heavy rain.

South West

Houses at risk 43,000

Flood defences rated fair, poor or very poor 37.1%

Although one of the least prone areas of Britain to flooding, flash floods
caused by high rainfall have occurred.

Scotland

Houses at risk 160,000

Flood defences rated fair, poor or very poor N/A

A recent report by the Scottish Executive said major floods in Scotland will
occur twice as often compared to a century ago.

North East

Houses at risk 246,000

Flood defences rated fair, poor or very poor 17.9%

Much of Yorkshire, including York, Doncaster and Hull, vulnerable to fluvial
flooding. Tidal flooding through Humber Estuary also a risk.

Anglian

Houses at risk 330,000

Flood defences rated fair, poor or very poor 20.3%

With 20 per cent of the area below sea level and four major rivers flowing into
The Wash the region is at major risk.

Thames

Houses at risk 203,500

Flood defences rated fair, poor or very poor 34.9%

London and a string of towns in Oxfordshire and Berkshire lie on the Thames
making the river one of the most densely populated in Britain.

Southern

Houses at risk 198,000

Flood defences rated fair, poor or very poor 49.9%

Half of England's flood defences are in the Southern region but more than 10 per
cent of them are classified as in a poor or very poor state.

Source: Environment Agency

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2007 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 355 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 21, 2017 Thursday

Washington: Fact Sheet: Should I Buy Flood Insurance?

LENGTH: 776  words



Washington: Federal Emergency Management Agency has issued the following news
release:

Flooding from Hurricane Harvey resulted in more than 87,000 flood insurance
claims being filed so far by Texas homeowners, business owners and renters. But
some Texans who experienced losses did not have flood insurance
Why do I need flood insurance?


Standard homeowner's insurance policies do not cover flood. Flood is most often
called an excluded peril, meaning it's not covered. You should consider flood
insurance even if you're not required to purchase it or if you live outside a
high-risk flood zone, called a Special Flood Hazard Area.
Flood zones are areas where there is a higher statistical probability of a flood
occurring, but that doesn't mean floods don't occur elsewhere. In fact, in Texas
over the last five years, a number of floods exceeded the statistical
probability, putting more homes and properties in harm's way than were expected.

Flood insurance can protect you from the catastrophic financial impact of
flooding. Just a few inches of water can mean thousands of dollars of loss to
your home or business. As long as your community participates in the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), as a homeowner or business owner you can get
building and contents coverage included in your NFIP policy. Renters can get
coverage for contents only. Policies issued by the NFIP pay even if a federal
disaster is not declared.
In Texas and other states recently impacted by hurricanes, the NFIP streamlined
the claims process to make it easier for policyholders to receive advance
payments more quickly and in larger amounts so they could jump-start their
rebuilding. Policyholders were able to get advance payments up to $5,000 without
an adjuster visit or additional documentation. Some were able to get advance
payments up to $20,000 if they had photos/video of the damage and receipts or a
contractor's estimate. FEMA also increased the fees paid to adjusters by an
average 26 percent to be competitive with industry standards and to ensure that
customers received the best care possible.
NFIP policy holders can choose their amount of coverage. The maximum for 1-4
family residential structures is $250,000 in building coverage and $100,000 in
contents coverage. For residential structures of 5 or more units, the maximum is
$500,000 in building coverage and $100,000 in contents coverage. The maximum for
businesses is $500,000 in building coverage and $500,000 in contents coverage.

Where can I buy flood insurance?
    You can buy flood insurance by contacting your insurance company or agent.
     For an agent referral call 800-427-4661 or you may visit
www.fema.gov/national-flood-insurance-program.
When should I buy a policy?
As soon as possible. FEMA urges you to buy flood insurance before a flood event
occurs. NFIP cannot pay a claim if you don't have a policy in effect when damage
occurs. An insurance policy from NFIP becomes effective 30 days after you buy
it, unless the purchase is associated with the origination, renewal or extension
of a federally backed loan on property in a high-risk area.
I am not in a flood hazard area, but I'd like to purchase flood insurance. Is
this possible?
Yes, as long as your community participates in NFIP. You are eligible to
purchase a flood policy with the same coverage you would receive if you lived in
a high-risk area. A Preferred Risk Policy (a lower-cost flood insurance policy)
provides both building and contents coverage for properties in moderate-to-low
risk areas for one price.
Can I get flood insurance if I'm renting a property?
Yes. If you live in a community that participates in NFIP and you are a renter,
you can get flood insurance to cover the contents of your home, apartment or
business at a rented location.
How much does a policy cost?
Your insurance agent can talk with you about cost of coverage for your property.
There are ways to lower your cost and your insurance agent can discuss your
options.
How much will I get from NFIP after my building or contents are damaged by a
flood?
There are some misconceptions about the amount a policyholder will receive
following flood-caused damage. While a policy may state it covers losses up to a
certain amount:
    The amount paid to the policyholder on a homeowner's flood insurance policy
will cover only the cost of actual damage caused by the flood.
     The amount paid on contents will cover only actual losses caused by the
flood.
     The amount paid to businesses covered for structure and contents will be
only for actual losses by the flood.
Where can I get more information on flood insurance?

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 356 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                        The Balochistan Times (AsiaNet)

                              July 3, 2016 Sunday

Minister directs to re-examine Flood Fighting Plan to remove flaws

SECTION: Vol. 39 No. 185

LENGTH: 631  words


Punjab Minister for Zakat  and  Ushr/Incharge flood fighting arrangements of
Faisalabad Division Malik Nadeem Kamran on Saturday directed the concerned
departments to re-examine Flood Fighting Plan for removal of its all minor flaws
to cope with any emergency like situation due to flood in rivers.

He was presiding over a meeting to review the flood fighting arrangements in
Faisalabad division at Commissioner Office here. Secretary Irrigation Punjab
Saifullah Anjum, Director Punjab Disaster Management Authority Dr. Khurram
Shehzad also participated in the meeting.  Divisional Commissioner Momin Agha,
RPO Bilal Siddique Kamyana, Chief Engineer Irrigation Mohammad Nawaz and other
officers of Irrigation department were present.

The Minister stressed the need to complete preparedness of district
administration and other concerned departments to meet challenges of possible
heavy flood during monsoon and rainy season.

He said that full coordination among the departments should be ensured for
fulfilling responsibilities during rescue operation in case of heavy flood in
rivers Jhelum and Chenab.

He called for activating early warning system and to keep close liaison with
Meteorological department for having prediction of rains and discharge of water
in the rivers for timely evacuation of people from low-lying areas in case of
any threat of flood.

He advised that all machinery should be placed near vulnerable points and relief
centres should be equipped with all necessary arrangements.

He stressed the need to make foolproof arrangements by Health and Livestock
departments for availability of necessary medicines in sufficient quality,
vaccination and fodder for animals in flood affected areas.

The Minister said that Chief Minister Punjab Mohammad Shehbaz Sharif was himself
supervising flood fighting arrangements and no lethargy or carelessness would be
tolerated in this regard.

He said that Punjab government had devised a comprehensive strategy for
providing all-out relief to flood affectees.

He asked divisional and district administration to remain in touch with PDMA for
seeking support in resources and relief.

The Minister directed administration of districts Jhang and Chiniot to remain at
high alert for flood operation and flood protection bunds should be checked for
making proper arrangements by keeping in view previous history of flood.

He asked police authorities to extend full support to civil administration in
flood relief operation and patrolling of police should be enhanced in possible
flood affected areas.

He appreciated steps for carrying out mock exercises near rivers to check
emergency response of the concerned departments.

Secretary Irrigation Saifullah Anjum informed the meeting about threat of flood
in rivers Jhelum and Chenab and said that necessary arrangements of Irrigation
Department for flood fighting had been checked besides carrying out on-spot
inspection near Head Tareemu and other vulnerable areas.

Chief Engineer Irrigation Mohammad Nawaz gave briefing about previous history of
the flood and flood fighting arrangements of the department.

He informed that Chiniot Flood Bund, Jhang Flood Bund and Thatha Malah Flood
Bund were important for protection of Jhang and Chiniot City which had been made
more strengthened.

Divisional Commissioner Momin Agha informed the Minister that he had visited the
possible flood hit areas in district Jhang and Chiniot.

He said that flood fighting arrangements had been reviewed in the four districts
of the division besides put on high alert of concerned departments.

He said that District Flood Control Rooms had also been set up in the four
districts equipped with all necessary arrangements and staff duties for ensuring
coordinated efforts in rescue and relief operations in case of any emergency.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2016 The Balochistan Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 357 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                              The Nation (AsiaNet)

                              July 4, 2016 Monday

Depts directed to get ready before floods

SECTION: Vol. 30 No. 123

LENGTH: 632  words


Punjab Minister for Zakat and Ushr Malik Nadeem Kamran has directed the
departments concerned to re-examine the Flood Fighting Plan to cope with any
emergency situation feared to emerge due to flood in the current season.He was
presiding over a meeting to review the flood fighting arrangements in Faisalabad
division here at Commissioner Office.Secretary Irrigation Punjab Saifullah
Anjum, Director Punjab Disaster Management Authority Dr Khurram Sehzad,
Divisional Commissioner Momin Agha, RPO Bilal Siddique Kamyana, Chief Engineer
Irrigation Sh Muhammad Nawaz and other officers of irrigation department were
present.The minister, who is also In-charge of Flood Arrangements of Faisalabad
Division, emphasised completion of preparedness of the district administration
and other departments to meet the challenges of possible heavy flood during the
monsoon season. He said that full coordination among the departments be ensured
for fulfilling the responsibilities during rescue operation in case of heavy
flood in River Jhelum and Chenab. He called for activating early warning system
and to keep close liaison with the Metrological Department for having timely
forecast of rains and discharge of water in the Rivers for evacuation of the
people from the low lying areas in case of any threat of flood.

He advised that the all resources and required machinery be placed near the
vulnerable points and relief centres be equipped with necessary arrangements.He
stressed making foolproof arrangements by the health and livestock departments
for the availability of necessary medicines in sufficient quality, vaccination
and fodder for animals in flood affected areas. The minister said that Punjab
Chief Minister Shehbaz Sharif was himself supervising the flood fighting
arrangements and no lethargy or carelessness would be tolerated in this
regard.He said that Punjab government had devised comprehensive strategy for
providing relief for the flood affectees in case of the flood-hit population. He
asked the divisional and district administrations to remain in touch with PDMA
for seeking support in resources and relief. The minister directed the district
Jhang and Chiniot administration to remain high alert for the flood operation
and flood protection bunds be checked for making proper arrangements keeping in
view the previous history of flood.He asked the police authorities to extend
full support to the civil administration in the flood relief operation and
patrolling of police be enhanced in the possible flood affected areas. He
appreciated the step for carrying out mock exercises near the rivers to check
the emergency response. Secretary Irrigation Saifullah Anjum informed the
meeting about the threat of flood in Rivers Jehlum and Chenab. He said that
necessary arrangements of the irrigation department for flood fighting had been
checked besides carrying out on-spot inspection near Head Taremu and other
vulnerable areas.Chief Engineer Irrigation Sh Nawaz gave briefing about the
previous history of the flood and the flood fighting arrangements of the
department. He said that Chiniot Flood Bund, Jhang Flood Bund and Thatha Malah
Food Bund are important for the protection of the Jhang and Chiniot City which
had been made more strengthened.Divisional Commissioner Momin Agha informed the
minister that he had visited the possible flood hit areas in district Jhang and
Chiniot. He said that flood fighting arrangements had been reviewed in the four
districts of the division and the departments concerned have been put on high
alert. He said that district flood control rooms had also been set up in the
four districts equipped with all necessary arrangements and staff duties for
ensuring coordinated efforts in rescue and relief operations in case of any
emergency.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2016 Nawai Waqt Group of Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 358 of 380 DOCUMENTS


                      The Free Press (Mankato, Minnesota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 25, 2014 Tuesday

Flood insurance a rarity in Mankato area

BYLINE: Tim Krohn, The Free Press, Mankato, Minn.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 509 words


March 25--MANKATO -- As winter reluctantly gives way to spring, more homeowners
think of possible flood damage to their home. In the greater Mankato area that
concern is fairly limited as few homes remain in high-risk flood areas along
rivers and communities such as Mankato and North Mankato are protected by flood
control projects.

"Whenever there's a forecast for floods in the area we get a barrage of calls
from people who want insurance," said Randy Miller of Nesbit Agencies in
Mankato.

"But once the water receded and there's not as big a threat the next year, they
all let the policies lapse."

There are few calls inquiring about flood insurance this year as the spring
forecast is for moderate flood risk in southern Minnesota.

While residents in some parts of Minnesota and many coastal areas around the
United States have been hit by big increases in flood insurance premiums due to
changes in the federal program that subsidizes policies, few are affected
locally. Fewer than 60 residents in Blue Earth County have policies in place
while 14 Nicollet County residents have flood insurance policies in place
covered by the federal program, according to a database compiled by the
Associated Press.

In the two counties, 16 policy holders face some increase in premiums -- up to
25 percent annually -- because of changes in the federal insurance subsidy.

And the program has paid out relatively little in claims in recent years. Of the
33 claims filed in the two counties the program paid and average of $16,360 per
claim.

Miller said flood insurance in this area remains relatively inexpensive, at
about $400 per year. But he said that could eventually rise to the thousands of
dollars if the federal subsidy is ever completely removed.

The reason for decreasing subsidies and putting more responsibility on
homeowners, said Miller, was spurred by a belief the subsidy was often rewarding
reckless building.

"The federal government said we're sick and tired of the taxpayers substantially
subsidizing flood insurance for people in America who live in flood zones. It's
not the person who has one flood in a lifetime, it's the people who build the
big house on the coastline or keep building in places like the Red River where
it's going to flood," Miller said.

Miller said many people are confused about what insurance covers different types
of water damage in a home.

Homeowners can get a rider on their homeowner's insurance to cover sump pump or
sewer backup, but it only covers the failure of a sump pump or if the sewer
backs up. It does not cover water seeping into foundations and basements during
spring thawing or after heavy rains.

And while flood insurance will cover water damage from floods, it also doesn't
cover isolated seepage into homes. "Flood insurance doesn't cover water seeping
in from your back yard. Flood insurance kicks in if there's a bigger area that
floods, maybe a whole block."

___ (c)2014 The Free Press (Mankato, Minn.) Visit The Free Press (Mankato,
Minn.) at www.mankatofreepress.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140325-FP-Flood-insurance-a-rarity-in-Mankato-area-20140325

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FP


                         Copyright 2014 The Free Press


                          FOCUS - 359 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Shoreham Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPSH


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 360 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                             Littlehampton Gazette

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPLG


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 361 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                               Linlithgow Gazette

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SFLG


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 362 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                               Kirriemuir Herald

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAKH


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 363 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                               Guide and Gazette

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAAG


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 364 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                      The Glasgow South and Eastwood Extra

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SFGS


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 365 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Forfar Dispatch

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SAFD


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 366 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Cumbernauld News

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SFCN


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 367 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                              Chichester Observer

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPCI


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 368 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                Carluke Gazette

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

75% of Scots fail to check flood risk of their homes

LENGTH: 651  words


Around three-quarters of Scottish householders have never checked to see if
their home is at risk of flooding.

Despite increased incidents of flooding in recent years, new YouGov research
indicated a lack of awareness over flood planning and responsibility in the
event of floods, despite 1 in 6 homes throughout the UK being considered at
risk.

The YouGov survey, commissioned by the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, revealed
that overall in Britain, 67% of respondents had never checked the flood risk
level of their home, while only 20% of people check flood risks before moving
into a new home.

League table of flood risk regions where people have failed to check flood risk:

1. North East 88%

2. North West 77%

3. Scotland 75%

4. West Midlands 71%

5. London 70%

6. Yorks and Humber 69%

7. South West 61%

8. East of England 57%

9. East Midlands 57%

10. South East 55%

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just 6% of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are sure of
what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes.

Worryingly, a third of people (31%) reported that they do not have a plan and
would not know what to do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20% of respondents
currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and only 11%
check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, chief executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories, just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded.

"With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant flood
events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their homework
when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy.

"It is also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect
homes from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate
homeowners of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find
this information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources.

It is one of the UK's leading online sources for helping people find out the
flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood.

For more information, visit {http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk|
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the
campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SFCG


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 369 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                             Bognor Regis Observer

                            June 17, 2015 Wednesday

More than half of home owners haven't checked flood risk

LENGTH: 785  words


More than half the home owners in the south-east haven't checked on the flood
risk of their homes. according to new research.

The new YouGov research identifies a lack of awareness over flood planning and
responsibility, despite one in six homes being considered at risk.

As the anniversary of the June 2007 summer floods approaches, people in Britain
are still not checking the flood risk of their homes, in spite of increased
incidents of flooding in recent years.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents of the survey commissioned by the Know Your
Flood Risk campaign, report that they had never checked the flood risk level of
their home.

Only 20 per cent of people check flood risks before moving into a new home.

Even though 55 per cent of people in the south-east have failed to check flood
risk this is, in fact, the best region (the north-east is top with 88 per cent).

However, South-East has also bared the brunt of significant flooding events
including last year when January 2014 was reported as the wettest January on
record, which resulted in over 100 flood warnings being issued in the South-East
region alone.

The survey also shows that many do not take the threat of a flood seriously with
just six per cent of respondents confirming that they have a flood plan and are
sure of what they would do if a flood occurred in their homes. Worryingly, a
third of people reported that they do not have a plan and would not know what to
do in the event of a flood.

The survey identifies that the public are still not making flood checks part of
their research process when moving into a new home; just 20 per cent of
respondents currently check the flood risk of their home before moving in, and
only 11 per cent check after.

You can find the flood zones and risk level for your home on
{http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?x=357683.0&y=355134
.0&scale=1&layerGroups=default&ep=map&textonly=off&lang=_e&topic=floodmap| this
Environment Agency map online at environment-agency.gov.uk | go to
environment-agency.gov.uk}.

The research went on to identify that there is confusion over who is responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Respondents considered a range of organisations that they believe have a
responsibility to protect homes against flooding, including the Environment
Agency (57%), their local council (55%) and the Government (34%). Homeowners
(55%), landlords (39%) and tenants (23%) were also noted as being responsible
for protecting a home against flooding.

Mary Dhonau OBE, Chief Executive of the Know Your Flood Risk campaign, said:
"People have short memories just three years ago in 2014 we had the second
wettest summer on record and during the summer of 2007, 55,000 properties were
flooded. With such wide-scale media coverage of the devastation that significant
flood events cause, it's surprising that that the public are not doing their
homework when it comes to protecting their homes.

"With so many floods in recent times combined with flood insurance problems,
it's worrying that so few people check their flood risk before they buy. It is
also interesting to see the level of confusion over who should protect homes
from being flooded. It is clear that there is still a need to educate homeowners
of their responsibility and to ensure they know where to go to find this
information."

The Know Your Flood Risk Campaign's mission is to raise awareness of the risk of
flooding from all sources. It is one of the UK's leading online sources for
helping people find out the flood risk related to their current or future homes.

A Know Your Flood Risk Report can be purchased which assesses the potential risk
and confirms whether they will be able to obtain insurance at standard terms.

The Know Your Flood Risk campaign also provides comprehensive guidance via its
website and a free mobile app, which offers information about flood forecasts
and warnings, example flood plans, details of how to protect against floods or
how to recover if affected by a flood. For more information, visit
{http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk| www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk | go to
www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk}, or follow the campaign on Twitter or via Facebook.

Don't miss out on all the latest breaking news where you live.

Here are four ways you can be sure you'll be amongst the first to know what's
going on.

1) Make our website your homepage

2) Like our Facebook page

3) Follow us on Twitter

4) Register with us by clicking on sign in' (top right corner). You can then
receive our daily newsletter AND add your point of view to stories that you read
here.

And do share with your family and friends - so they don't miss out!

Always the first with your local news.

Be part of it.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JPBB


                       Copyright 2015 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 370 of 380 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 20, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The High Risks of Denying Rivers Their Flood Plains

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2101 words


FOR decades Americans have insisted on settling next to rivers and streams, like
moths drawn to a flame, just as people have throughout history. And to protect
their cities and farms, engineers have tried to ward off the inevitable flood
waters with levees, flood walls, dams, dikes and diversion channels. To some
extent this ambitious attempt to bend nature to human desires has worked.

But nature still wins often enough, as this month's destructive floods in the
upper Mississippi valley vividly testify. Even the gains have come at enormous
cost to the ecology of flood plains, some experts say, and in some cases control
measures have perversely resulted in worse flooding.

By cutting off the flood plain's waters, levees and diversion channels have
destroyed and degraded stream-side habitats that contain some of the country's
richest biological resources. They have also prevented the flood plain from
performing one of its most important natural functions: flood control. By
storing and slowing flood waters, the plain reduces their force and height.
Containing this water in a narrowly corseted channel, as is commonly done to
protect farms and urban settlements, has the opposite effect. It raises both the
velocity and the height of the flood and makes it all the more frightening and
destructive when it breaks through defenses, as it has repeatedly done in the
Midwest.

These realizations are leading flood- plain managers at all levels of government
toward a different approach: cooperating with nature rather than trying to
subdue it. The emphasis increasingly is on keeping new development away from the
flood plain, preserving or restoring its ecosystems and letting water flow as
freely as possible so that natural flood-control mechanisms can work.

Across the country, states and communities are exploring alternatives to dikes,
levees and flood walls. They are acquiring wetlands to serve as natural flood
basins. They are sculpturing the plain to create detention areas for flood
waters. They are preserving stretches of flood plain in urban areas which, in
between periods of high water, serve as parks, ball fields and greenways. Some
communities are discouraging new development on flood plains by requiring
expensive flood-proofing measures, such as putting buildings on piers and
constructing private detention ponds. One town, Soldiers Grove, Wis., has taken
the radical step of moving its entire business district to higher ground.

"For too long we've been trying to adjust rivers to human needs, and then we
wonder why our rivers are messed up and why we continue to get flooded; it's not
a mystery," said Larry Larson, director of the Association of State Floodplain
Managers, an organization of professionals engaged in flood-plain management and
flood control. "We need to adjust human behavior to river systems."

Sometimes, he said, this means that developed areas "need to be cleared out so
the river can flood, as we know it will, without damaging property." In other
instances less drastic measures can suffice.

One obvious limitation to the new strategy is that many communities have long
since committed themselves to living on the flood plain, and with traditional
structural methods of flood control. "We can't pick Des Moines up and put it on
a hill," said Harry Kitch, an Army Corps of Engineers official in Washington who
handles flood-control planning in the central United States. The more natural
approach to flood control might seek its greatest success where new development
is poised to move onto the flood plain. But particularly for areas already
developed, Mr. Kitch said, "you're going to end up with a balance" of structural
and natural methods.

Flood-control disputes of the future are likely to involve the tricky and
contentious issue of just what balance should be struck. A classic example is
the long-running controversy about floods along the Passaic River watershed in
northern New Jersey. Towns have existed in the watershed's lower reaches for
years, while other parts of the basin are only now becoming ripe for
development.

The basin is one of the most flood-prone in the country. Over the past decades,
various portions of it have been declared Federal disaster areas seven times.
Some flooding occurs almost every year, and the Corps of Engineers estimates
that a record flood, like that of 1903, would cause $2 billion in damages.

Under a joint Federal-state project authorized by Congress but not yet finally
approved by the state, the Corps of Engineers has proposed a hybrid solution.
The Passaic's flood waters would be shunted underneath developed areas through a
$2 billion, 20-mile-long tunnel terminating in Newark Bay. The idea of the
tunnel, corps officials say, is to avoid disturbing the land. The plan also
calls for the state to buy up more than 5,000 acres of wetlands on the flood
plain to serve as a catchment to reduce flood volume and speed. As a result, the
plan might also prevent some development.

Critics say the plan comes down too little on the side of nature. They favor
sharply restricting development in the entire central and upper basin, buying
out flood plain residents and acquiring far more natural flood storage acreage
than the plan now calls for. Critics also raise fears about the ecological
impact of a rush of fresh flood waters into the marine environment of Newark
Bay. Some oppose the construction of the tunnel under any conditions. The issue
has divided politicians and citizens and has become an issue in the New Jersey
Governor's race. Gov. Jim Florio, a democrat, has refrained from taking a
position for or against the tunnel, pending an environmental impact study to be
completed by the Corps of Engineers in 1995; his Republican opponent, Christine
Todd Whitman, is against the tunnel, arguing that that buying out flood plain
residents would be less expensive. The corps argues the opposite.

Flood plains, the subject of this and many other disputes across the country,
are among the most productive ecosystems in the world. When flooded in spring,
they become breeding grounds for fish. Most flood plain acreage is wetlands, and
about half the country's endangered species require wetland habitat. The
riparian zone along rivers is home to distinct assemblages of soils, microbes,
plants and animals that depend on high water tables and occasional flooding.

People originally settled along rivers because they provided water, transport
and power. That is no longer true, "but now the city is there," said Mr. Larson.
Later, people were drawn to flood plains because land there was cheaper. By
1991, according to an interagency Federal task force on flood plains that issued
a report last year, flood-plain land in 17,000 communities occupied more than
145,000 acres and included nearly 10 million households and $390 billion in
property.

This large-scale development, according to the task force, has come at "a high
price extracted annually in deaths, personal injury and suffering, economic loss
and damage to or destruction of natural and cultural resources." Despite
extensive and expensive efforts over the years to control floods through public
works (the Corps of Engineers has built 10,500 miles of levees and flood walls
alone), inflation-adjusted flood damages per capita were almost 2.5 times as
great in the period from 1951 to 1985 as from 1916 through 1950.

Part of this may be attributed to a growing ratio of construction to population,
but levees themselves evidently contribute to the escalation. They are the most
common type of flood-control measure, and when they fail, as they have many
times in the Mississippi basin in recent weeks, they make the damage worse. The
Federal task force noted that a breached levee, like a breaking dam, can
realease a large wave at high velocity on communities that believe they are
protected. Images from the Mississippi basin this past week have grimly borne
this out. The remaining levee system may subsequently prevent water from
draining back into the river, prolonging the flood. The task force reported that
levee or flood-wall failure is involved in one-third of all flood disasters.

When a river's flow is constricted, its sediments are no longer deposited to
fertilize the flood plain but instead may be dropped within the narrow river
channel just outside the levee. This in time raises the height of the river, and
the levee must be heightened in turn. "In general, a river wants to recreate
itself as a river with a flood plain; it's rising in response to these rising
levees," said James T. B. Tripp, an expert on floods with the Environmental
Defense Fund. "River systems have a way of adjusting themselves in response to
human manipulation of the flood plain in ways that can never be entirely
foreseen."

A better approach, according to the emerging new wisdom, is to get the river to
work for you rather than against you. The new approaches may be best suited to
smaller rivers, but these spawn most of the flash floods, and flash floods are
responsible for three-fourths of all Presidentially declared disasters.

After a 1984 flash flood killed 13 people and caused $180 million in property
damage in Tulsa, Okla., for instance, the city and the Corps of Engineers
collaborated to create a more natural flood-control system.  They scooped out a
series of permanent lakes in a greenway corridor set aside in Tulsa's Mingo
Creek flood plain. Most of the lakes are dry, and when there is no flood the
lake bottoms are occupied by soccer and baseball fields and tennis courts.  When
there is a flood, the lakes store and slow down the water. They are connected by
a network of "trickle trails" that serve as jogging paths in dry times and
low-flow flood channels in wet ones.

At the same time, development in the flood plain is strictly regulated.
Developers must build their own detention ponds to make up for the increased
flow that paving causes. Buildings in harm's way must be flood-proofed, usually
with raised piers. One result is that developers have been discouraged from
building in the flood plain -- a counterforce, possibly, to whatever incentive
to development may be provided by Federal disaster relief and flood insurance.

Only 15 to 30 percent of the nation's flood-prone structures are actually
insured by the supposedly self-financing National Flood Insurance Program,
according to the flood plain task force. Disaster relief is available to an
uninsured property only once: If the property is flooded a second time and is
still uninsured, owners are on their own.

Natural Flood Control a Success

The Tulsa system has been tested by storms that would have been expected to
cause serious flooding in earlier years and has passed with flying colors, said
Jack Page, who oversees development for the city. He sees "more acceptance of
'soft' engineering; we're getting away from the concrete and the pipes and are
leaving the channel in a natural state." The Corps of Engineers says it
considers the Tulsa project a model.

Other localities have moved in this direction as well, often with corps
involvement. As a pioneering alternative to dams and levees in the Charles River
basin of metropolitan Boston, for example, the corps purchased or secured
easements on 8,500 acres of wetlands to contain floods while also providing
wildlife habitat and promoting recreation. The system was tested by major floods
in 1979 and 1982 and each time performed effectively.

The city of Littleton, Colo., established a 625-acre park in its flood plain to
attenuate floods rather than allow the South Platte River to be channeled. And
in the San Francisco Bay area community of North Richmond, citizens successfully
brought about the creation of a naturally meandering flood channel and restored
the stream-side ecosystem in a way that would maintain ecological health while
accommodating once-in-a-century floods.

In the end, if Mr. Larson and Mr. Tripp are right, there simply may be no way to
protect against the very worst floods, no matter what strategy is employed.
"We've got to figure out some way to help people understand that Mother Nature
will reclaim what's hers from time to time," said Mr. Larson. "We must keep that
in mind when we go to build our communities and cities and try to find a way to
live in harmony with nature."

To which Mr. Tripp adds: "We can try and manage these river systems to some
degree, but we've got to be prepared to accommodate ourselves to the river. If
we think we can do things to rivers so they will never flood, we're naive."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Diagrams: "The natural ways of the river"
Flooded river under natural conditions spreads beyond normal channel and into
floodway, where water slows down. Flood fringe, within which there is at least a
1 percent chance of flooding in a given year, marks limit of 100-year flood
plain. When water is squeezed into a narrow channel by levees or floodwalls, its
height and velocity increase. When pent-up flood tops or breaches a levee, the
effect can be like that of a bursting dam.

"The overflow wetlands"
Wetlands, the most prominent and familiar of flood-plain features, harbor an
especially rich assembly of plants, animals and microbes. Wetlands and the
narrow strips of green habitat along streams depend on occasional flooding and
are destroyed or degraded when water is cut off by levees or diversion channels.


Rivers deprived of wetlands
About 54 percent of the original 215 million acres of wetlands in the 48
contiguous states have been lost since European settlement. Most of the loss
resulted from drainage to create farms.
(Source: The Natural Hazards Research and Applications Information Center,
University of Colorado at Boulder)(pg. C1)

Map: "Proposed Detour For Flood Waters"
A proposed project would shunt the Passaic River's flood waters underneath
developed areas of New Jersey through a $2 billion, 20-mile-long tunnel with its
outlet in Newark Bay.
(Source: Passaic River Flood Protection Project)(pg. C8)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                          FOCUS - 371 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 2, 2017 Thursday

North Carolina: Flood Safety Reminder

LENGTH: 452  words

DATELINE: New York



 Raleigh: The City of Brevard, North Carolina has issued the following news
release:


 Here are three helpful safety tips that could save your life or prevent injury:


 1. Do not walk through flowing water. Drowning is the number one cause of flood
deaths, mostly during flash floods. Currents can be deceptive; six inches of
moving water can knock you off your feet.
 2. Do not drive through a flooded area. More people drown in their cars than
anywhere else.
 3. Do not drive around road barriers; the road or bridge may be washed out and
stay away from power lines and electrical wires. The number two flood killer
after drowning is electrocution. Electrical current can travel through water.
Report downed power lines to the Power Company or City emergency management
office.
 Land areas that are at high risk for flooding are called Special Flood Hazard
Areas, or "floodplains," and they are indicated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
("FIRMs").  These maps show base flood elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries for our community. As a property owner or resident, you can use
FIRM's to determine what flood zone you're in. Structures located in high-risk
flood areas have a 26 percent chance of suffering flood damage during the term
of a 30-year mortgage.  To determine if your home is located within the Special
Flood Hazard Area, you can visit www.cityofbrevard.com /floodrisk.
 The City of Brevard participates in the Community Rating System (CRS), which
enables lower insurance rates through the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).  Flood insurance policy holders in the City pay lower rates than policy
holders in non-CRS communities.  Additionally, the City is an "Increased Cost of
Compliance" ("ICC") community. ICC funds allow an additional payment of up to
$30,000 to NFIP insurance policy holders towards elevation, relocation,
demolition, or flood-proofing of their structure. Visit FloodSmart.gov to find
an NFIP flood insurance agent in your area.
 The City has regulations that minimize the impact of new development in Special
Flood Hazard Areas.  These regulations require special permitting through the
Planning Department. For example, new residential structures, including small
projects like decks, gazebos or even HVAC platforms located in the Special Flood
Hazard Area must be elevated two feet above base flood elevation. Commercial
buildings and accessory structures must also be elevated or flood-proofed.  The
City regulates the placement of fill in floodplains and requires storm water
control in order to protect property owners from flooding.






 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 372 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 2, 2017 Thursday

North Carolina: Flood Safety Reminder

LENGTH: 452  words

DATELINE: New York



 Raleigh: The City of Brevard, North Carolina has issued the following news
release:


 Here are three helpful safety tips that could save your life or prevent injury:


 1. Do not walk through flowing water. Drowning is the number one cause of flood
deaths, mostly during flash floods. Currents can be deceptive; six inches of
moving water can knock you off your feet.
 2. Do not drive through a flooded area. More people drown in their cars than
anywhere else.
 3. Do not drive around road barriers; the road or bridge may be washed out and
stay away from power lines and electrical wires. The number two flood killer
after drowning is electrocution. Electrical current can travel through water.
Report downed power lines to the Power Company or City emergency management
office.
 Land areas that are at high risk for flooding are called Special Flood Hazard
Areas, or "floodplains," and they are indicated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
("FIRMs").  These maps show base flood elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries for our community. As a property owner or resident, you can use
FIRM's to determine what flood zone you're in. Structures located in high-risk
flood areas have a 26 percent chance of suffering flood damage during the term
of a 30-year mortgage.  To determine if your home is located within the Special
Flood Hazard Area, you can visit www.cityofbrevard.com /floodrisk.
 The City of Brevard participates in the Community Rating System (CRS), which
enables lower insurance rates through the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).  Flood insurance policy holders in the City pay lower rates than policy
holders in non-CRS communities.  Additionally, the City is an "Increased Cost of
Compliance" ("ICC") community. ICC funds allow an additional payment of up to
$30,000 to NFIP insurance policy holders towards elevation, relocation,
demolition, or flood-proofing of their structure. Visit FloodSmart.gov to find
an NFIP flood insurance agent in your area.
 The City has regulations that minimize the impact of new development in Special
Flood Hazard Areas.  These regulations require special permitting through the
Planning Department. For example, new residential structures, including small
projects like decks, gazebos or even HVAC platforms located in the Special Flood
Hazard Area must be elevated two feet above base flood elevation. Commercial
buildings and accessory structures must also be elevated or flood-proofed.  The
City regulates the placement of fill in floodplains and requires storm water
control in order to protect property owners from flooding.






 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 373 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 3, 2017 Friday

North Carolina: Flood Safety Reminder

LENGTH: 452  words

DATELINE: New York



 Raleigh: The City of Brevard, North Carolina has issued the following news
release:


 Here are three helpful safety tips that could save your life or prevent injury:


 1. Do not walk through flowing water. Drowning is the number one cause of flood
deaths, mostly during flash floods. Currents can be deceptive; six inches of
moving water can knock you off your feet.
 2. Do not drive through a flooded area. More people drown in their cars than
anywhere else.
 3. Do not drive around road barriers; the road or bridge may be washed out and
stay away from power lines and electrical wires. The number two flood killer
after drowning is electrocution. Electrical current can travel through water.
Report downed power lines to the Power Company or City emergency management
office.
 Land areas that are at high risk for flooding are called Special Flood Hazard
Areas, or "floodplains," and they are indicated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
("FIRMs").  These maps show base flood elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries for our community. As a property owner or resident, you can use
FIRM's to determine what flood zone you're in. Structures located in high-risk
flood areas have a 26 percent chance of suffering flood damage during the term
of a 30-year mortgage.  To determine if your home is located within the Special
Flood Hazard Area, you can visit www.cityofbrevard.com /floodrisk.
 The City of Brevard participates in the Community Rating System (CRS), which
enables lower insurance rates through the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).  Flood insurance policy holders in the City pay lower rates than policy
holders in non-CRS communities.  Additionally, the City is an "Increased Cost of
Compliance" ("ICC") community. ICC funds allow an additional payment of up to
$30,000 to NFIP insurance policy holders towards elevation, relocation,
demolition, or flood-proofing of their structure. Visit FloodSmart.gov to find
an NFIP flood insurance agent in your area.
 The City has regulations that minimize the impact of new development in Special
Flood Hazard Areas.  These regulations require special permitting through the
Planning Department. For example, new residential structures, including small
projects like decks, gazebos or even HVAC platforms located in the Special Flood
Hazard Area must be elevated two feet above base flood elevation. Commercial
buildings and accessory structures must also be elevated or flood-proofed.  The
City regulates the placement of fill in floodplains and requires storm water
control in order to protect property owners from flooding.






 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 374 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 3, 2017 Friday

North Carolina: Flood Safety Reminder

LENGTH: 452  words

DATELINE: New York



 Raleigh: The City of Brevard, North Carolina has issued the following news
release:


 Here are three helpful safety tips that could save your life or prevent injury:


 1. Do not walk through flowing water. Drowning is the number one cause of flood
deaths, mostly during flash floods. Currents can be deceptive; six inches of
moving water can knock you off your feet.
 2. Do not drive through a flooded area. More people drown in their cars than
anywhere else.
 3. Do not drive around road barriers; the road or bridge may be washed out and
stay away from power lines and electrical wires. The number two flood killer
after drowning is electrocution. Electrical current can travel through water.
Report downed power lines to the Power Company or City emergency management
office.
 Land areas that are at high risk for flooding are called Special Flood Hazard
Areas, or "floodplains," and they are indicated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
("FIRMs").  These maps show base flood elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries for our community. As a property owner or resident, you can use
FIRM's to determine what flood zone you're in. Structures located in high-risk
flood areas have a 26 percent chance of suffering flood damage during the term
of a 30-year mortgage.  To determine if your home is located within the Special
Flood Hazard Area, you can visit www.cityofbrevard.com /floodrisk.
 The City of Brevard participates in the Community Rating System (CRS), which
enables lower insurance rates through the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).  Flood insurance policy holders in the City pay lower rates than policy
holders in non-CRS communities.  Additionally, the City is an "Increased Cost of
Compliance" ("ICC") community. ICC funds allow an additional payment of up to
$30,000 to NFIP insurance policy holders towards elevation, relocation,
demolition, or flood-proofing of their structure. Visit FloodSmart.gov to find
an NFIP flood insurance agent in your area.
 The City has regulations that minimize the impact of new development in Special
Flood Hazard Areas.  These regulations require special permitting through the
Planning Department. For example, new residential structures, including small
projects like decks, gazebos or even HVAC platforms located in the Special Flood
Hazard Area must be elevated two feet above base flood elevation. Commercial
buildings and accessory structures must also be elevated or flood-proofed.  The
City regulates the placement of fill in floodplains and requires storm water
control in order to protect property owners from flooding.






 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 375 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 4, 2017 Saturday

North Carolina: Flood Safety Reminder

LENGTH: 439  words

DATELINE: New York



 Raleigh: The City of Brevard, North Carolina has issued the following news
release:


 1. Do not walk through flowing water. Drowning is the number one cause of flood
deaths, mostly during flash floods. Currents can be deceptive; six inches of
moving water can knock you off your feet.


 2. Do not drive through a flooded area. More people drown in their cars than
anywhere else.
 3. Do not drive around road barriers; the road or bridge may be washed out and
stay away from power lines and electrical wires. The number two flood killer
after drowning is electrocution. Electrical current can travel through water.
Report downed power lines to the Power Company or City emergency management
office.
 Land areas that are at high risk for flooding are called Special Flood Hazard
Areas, or "floodplains," and they are indicated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
("FIRMs").  These maps show base flood elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries for our community. As a property owner or resident, you can use
FIRM's to determine what flood zone you're in. Structures located in high-risk
flood areas have a 26 percent chance of suffering flood damage during the term
of a 30-year mortgage.  To determine if your home is located within the Special
Flood Hazard Area, you can visit www.cityofbrevard.com /floodrisk.
 The City of Brevard participates in the Community Rating System (CRS), which
enables lower insurance rates through the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).  Flood insurance policy holders in the City pay lower rates than policy
holders in non-CRS communities.  Additionally, the City is an "Increased Cost of
Compliance" ("ICC") community. ICC funds allow an additional payment of up to
$30,000 to NFIP insurance policy holders towards elevation, relocation,
demolition, or flood-proofing of their structure. Visit FloodSmart.gov to find
an NFIP flood insurance agent in your area.
 The City has regulations that minimize the impact of new development in Special
Flood Hazard Areas.  These regulations require special permitting through the
Planning Department. For example, new residential structures, including small
projects like decks, gazebos or even HVAC platforms located in the Special Flood
Hazard Area must be elevated two feet above base flood elevation. Commercial
buildings and accessory structures must also be elevated or flood-proofed.  The
City regulates the placement of fill in floodplains and requires storm water
control in order to protect property owners from flooding.






 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 376 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 4, 2017 Saturday

North Carolina: Flood Safety Reminder

LENGTH: 439  words

DATELINE: New York



 Raleigh: The City of Brevard, North Carolina has issued the following news
release:


 1. Do not walk through flowing water. Drowning is the number one cause of flood
deaths, mostly during flash floods. Currents can be deceptive; six inches of
moving water can knock you off your feet.


 2. Do not drive through a flooded area. More people drown in their cars than
anywhere else.
 3. Do not drive around road barriers; the road or bridge may be washed out and
stay away from power lines and electrical wires. The number two flood killer
after drowning is electrocution. Electrical current can travel through water.
Report downed power lines to the Power Company or City emergency management
office.
 Land areas that are at high risk for flooding are called Special Flood Hazard
Areas, or "floodplains," and they are indicated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
("FIRMs").  These maps show base flood elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries for our community. As a property owner or resident, you can use
FIRM's to determine what flood zone you're in. Structures located in high-risk
flood areas have a 26 percent chance of suffering flood damage during the term
of a 30-year mortgage.  To determine if your home is located within the Special
Flood Hazard Area, you can visit www.cityofbrevard.com /floodrisk.
 The City of Brevard participates in the Community Rating System (CRS), which
enables lower insurance rates through the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).  Flood insurance policy holders in the City pay lower rates than policy
holders in non-CRS communities.  Additionally, the City is an "Increased Cost of
Compliance" ("ICC") community. ICC funds allow an additional payment of up to
$30,000 to NFIP insurance policy holders towards elevation, relocation,
demolition, or flood-proofing of their structure. Visit FloodSmart.gov to find
an NFIP flood insurance agent in your area.
 The City has regulations that minimize the impact of new development in Special
Flood Hazard Areas.  These regulations require special permitting through the
Planning Department. For example, new residential structures, including small
projects like decks, gazebos or even HVAC platforms located in the Special Flood
Hazard Area must be elevated two feet above base flood elevation. Commercial
buildings and accessory structures must also be elevated or flood-proofed.  The
City regulates the placement of fill in floodplains and requires storm water
control in order to protect property owners from flooding.






 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 377 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 6, 2017 Monday

North Carolina: Flood Safety Reminder

LENGTH: 452  words

DATELINE: New York



 Raleigh: The City of Brevard, North Carolina has issued the following news
release:


 Here are three helpful safety tips that could save your life or prevent injury:


 1. Do not walk through flowing water. Drowning is the number one cause of flood
deaths, mostly during flash floods. Currents can be deceptive; six inches of
moving water can knock you off your feet.
 2. Do not drive through a flooded area. More people drown in their cars than
anywhere else.
 3. Do not drive around road barriers; the road or bridge may be washed out and
stay away from power lines and electrical wires. The number two flood killer
after drowning is electrocution. Electrical current can travel through water.
Report downed power lines to the Power Company or City emergency management
office.
 Land areas that are at high risk for flooding are called Special Flood Hazard
Areas, or "floodplains," and they are indicated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
("FIRMs").  These maps show base flood elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries for our community. As a property owner or resident, you can use
FIRM's to determine what flood zone you're in. Structures located in high-risk
flood areas have a 26 percent chance of suffering flood damage during the term
of a 30-year mortgage.  To determine if your home is located within the Special
Flood Hazard Area, you can visit www.cityofbrevard.com /floodrisk.
 The City of Brevard participates in the Community Rating System (CRS), which
enables lower insurance rates through the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).  Flood insurance policy holders in the City pay lower rates than policy
holders in non-CRS communities.  Additionally, the City is an "Increased Cost of
Compliance" ("ICC") community. ICC funds allow an additional payment of up to
$30,000 to NFIP insurance policy holders towards elevation, relocation,
demolition, or flood-proofing of their structure. Visit FloodSmart.gov to find
an NFIP flood insurance agent in your area.
 The City has regulations that minimize the impact of new development in Special
Flood Hazard Areas.  These regulations require special permitting through the
Planning Department. For example, new residential structures, including small
projects like decks, gazebos or even HVAC platforms located in the Special Flood
Hazard Area must be elevated two feet above base flood elevation. Commercial
buildings and accessory structures must also be elevated or flood-proofed.  The
City regulates the placement of fill in floodplains and requires storm water
control in order to protect property owners from flooding.






 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 378 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 7, 2017 Tuesday

North Carolina: Flood Safety Reminder

LENGTH: 452  words

DATELINE: New York



 Raleigh: The City of Brevard, North Carolina has issued the following news
release:


 Here are three helpful safety tips that could save your life or prevent injury:


 1. Do not walk through flowing water. Drowning is the number one cause of flood
deaths, mostly during flash floods. Currents can be deceptive; six inches of
moving water can knock you off your feet.
 2. Do not drive through a flooded area. More people drown in their cars than
anywhere else.
 3. Do not drive around road barriers; the road or bridge may be washed out and
stay away from power lines and electrical wires. The number two flood killer
after drowning is electrocution. Electrical current can travel through water.
Report downed power lines to the Power Company or City emergency management
office.
 Land areas that are at high risk for flooding are called Special Flood Hazard
Areas, or "floodplains," and they are indicated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
("FIRMs").  These maps show base flood elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries for our community. As a property owner or resident, you can use
FIRM's to determine what flood zone you're in. Structures located in high-risk
flood areas have a 26 percent chance of suffering flood damage during the term
of a 30-year mortgage.  To determine if your home is located within the Special
Flood Hazard Area, you can visit www.cityofbrevard.com /floodrisk.
 The City of Brevard participates in the Community Rating System (CRS), which
enables lower insurance rates through the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).  Flood insurance policy holders in the City pay lower rates than policy
holders in non-CRS communities.  Additionally, the City is an "Increased Cost of
Compliance" ("ICC") community. ICC funds allow an additional payment of up to
$30,000 to NFIP insurance policy holders towards elevation, relocation,
demolition, or flood-proofing of their structure. Visit FloodSmart.gov to find
an NFIP flood insurance agent in your area.
 The City has regulations that minimize the impact of new development in Special
Flood Hazard Areas.  These regulations require special permitting through the
Planning Department. For example, new residential structures, including small
projects like decks, gazebos or even HVAC platforms located in the Special Flood
Hazard Area must be elevated two feet above base flood elevation. Commercial
buildings and accessory structures must also be elevated or flood-proofed.  The
City regulates the placement of fill in floodplains and requires storm water
control in order to protect property owners from flooding.






 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 379 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 7, 2017 Tuesday

North Carolina: Flood Safety Reminder

LENGTH: 452  words

DATELINE: New York



 Raleigh: The City of Brevard, North Carolina has issued the following news
release:


 Here are three helpful safety tips that could save your life or prevent injury:


 1. Do not walk through flowing water. Drowning is the number one cause of flood
deaths, mostly during flash floods. Currents can be deceptive; six inches of
moving water can knock you off your feet.
 2. Do not drive through a flooded area. More people drown in their cars than
anywhere else.
 3. Do not drive around road barriers; the road or bridge may be washed out and
stay away from power lines and electrical wires. The number two flood killer
after drowning is electrocution. Electrical current can travel through water.
Report downed power lines to the Power Company or City emergency management
office.
 Land areas that are at high risk for flooding are called Special Flood Hazard
Areas, or "floodplains," and they are indicated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
("FIRMs").  These maps show base flood elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries for our community. As a property owner or resident, you can use
FIRM's to determine what flood zone you're in. Structures located in high-risk
flood areas have a 26 percent chance of suffering flood damage during the term
of a 30-year mortgage.  To determine if your home is located within the Special
Flood Hazard Area, you can visit www.cityofbrevard.com /floodrisk.
 The City of Brevard participates in the Community Rating System (CRS), which
enables lower insurance rates through the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).  Flood insurance policy holders in the City pay lower rates than policy
holders in non-CRS communities.  Additionally, the City is an "Increased Cost of
Compliance" ("ICC") community. ICC funds allow an additional payment of up to
$30,000 to NFIP insurance policy holders towards elevation, relocation,
demolition, or flood-proofing of their structure. Visit FloodSmart.gov to find
an NFIP flood insurance agent in your area.
 The City has regulations that minimize the impact of new development in Special
Flood Hazard Areas.  These regulations require special permitting through the
Planning Department. For example, new residential structures, including small
projects like decks, gazebos or even HVAC platforms located in the Special Flood
Hazard Area must be elevated two feet above base flood elevation. Commercial
buildings and accessory structures must also be elevated or flood-proofed.  The
City regulates the placement of fill in floodplains and requires storm water
control in order to protect property owners from flooding.






 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                          FOCUS - 380 of 380 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 8, 2017 Wednesday

North Carolina: Flood Safety Reminder

LENGTH: 452  words

DATELINE: New York



 Raleigh: The City of Brevard, North Carolina has issued the following news
release:


 Here are three helpful safety tips that could save your life or prevent injury:


 1. Do not walk through flowing water. Drowning is the number one cause of flood
deaths, mostly during flash floods. Currents can be deceptive; six inches of
moving water can knock you off your feet.
 2. Do not drive through a flooded area. More people drown in their cars than
anywhere else.
 3. Do not drive around road barriers; the road or bridge may be washed out and
stay away from power lines and electrical wires. The number two flood killer
after drowning is electrocution. Electrical current can travel through water.
Report downed power lines to the Power Company or City emergency management
office.
 Land areas that are at high risk for flooding are called Special Flood Hazard
Areas, or "floodplains," and they are indicated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
("FIRMs").  These maps show base flood elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries for our community. As a property owner or resident, you can use
FIRM's to determine what flood zone you're in. Structures located in high-risk
flood areas have a 26 percent chance of suffering flood damage during the term
of a 30-year mortgage.  To determine if your home is located within the Special
Flood Hazard Area, you can visit www.cityofbrevard.com /floodrisk.
 The City of Brevard participates in the Community Rating System (CRS), which
enables lower insurance rates through the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).  Flood insurance policy holders in the City pay lower rates than policy
holders in non-CRS communities.  Additionally, the City is an "Increased Cost of
Compliance" ("ICC") community. ICC funds allow an additional payment of up to
$30,000 to NFIP insurance policy holders towards elevation, relocation,
demolition, or flood-proofing of their structure. Visit FloodSmart.gov to find
an NFIP flood insurance agent in your area.
 The City has regulations that minimize the impact of new development in Special
Flood Hazard Areas.  These regulations require special permitting through the
Planning Department. For example, new residential structures, including small
projects like decks, gazebos or even HVAC platforms located in the Special Flood
Hazard Area must be elevated two feet above base flood elevation. Commercial
buildings and accessory structures must also be elevated or flood-proofed.  The
City regulates the placement of fill in floodplains and requires storm water
control in order to protect property owners from flooding.






 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
